## (unknown project)

# The boke of wisdome otherwise called the flower of vertue. Folowing the
auctorities of auncient doctours [and] philosophers, deuiding and speaking of
vices [and] vertues, wyth many goodly examples wherby a man may be praysed or
dyspraysed, wyth the maner to speake well and wyselie to al folkes, of what
estate so euer they bee. Translated first out of Italion into French, [and]
out of french into English, by Iohn Larke. 1565. — Fiore di virtù. English.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=1)

❧ THE☟ boke of wiſdome otherwiſe called the Flower of Vertue. Folowing the
Auctorities of auncient Doctours & Philoſophers, deuiding and ſpeaking of
Vices & Ver­tues, wyth many goodly examples wherby a man may be prayſed or
dyſprayſed, wyth the maner to ſpeake well and wyſe­lie to al ſolles, of what
eſtate ſo euer they bee: Tranſlated firſt out of Italion into French, & out of
french into Engliſh, by Iohn Larke. 1565.

_[figure]_

Lerne my godly chyldren to eſchew vyce.

And lo­ke you tolerne wiſdōe of your fore fa­thers.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=2)

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=2)

## ¶Theſe be the Auctoures of thys Booke.

  * IEſus Chriſt.
  * Saint Paule
  * Saint Peter
  * Saint Iames,
  * S, Iohn Euangeliſt
  * Saint Thomas,
  * S, Mathew,
  * S. Bernarde,
  * S. Gregorye,
  * S, Silueſtre,
  * S, Auſtyn,
  * Iohn Chriſoſtome
  * The Maſter of the
  * Sentences,
  * Salamon.
  * Eſaye.
  * Eccleſiaſti.
  * Iheſus Sirac,
  * Sapienti
  * The wyſe man,
  * Tuly.
  * Sydrac.
  * Alexandre,
  * Senec,
  * Aryſtotyle,
  * Socrates,
  * Pithagoras,
  * Bracco,
  * Iuuenall,
  * Plato,
  * Boecius,
  * Hermes,
  * Cato,
  * Orace,
  * Varro,
  * Ouide,
  * Diogenes,
  * Priſcian,
  * Macrobius,
  * Homer,
  * Caſſidore,
  * Epheſi,
  * Lucan.
  * Ipocras,
  * Terence
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=3)Lungyn,
  * Orygen,
  * Ptholomeus.
  * Plato.
  * Auicen
  * Galicus,
  * Sotorauus,
  * Barbalicus,
  * Argelycus,
  * Druſyane,
  * Bernicus,
  * Innocent,
  * Sedechyas,
  * Ciuill,
  * Exodi,
  * Bede,
  * Galyen.

¶Theſe putteth in ma­nye goodlye Ex­amples.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=3)

## ¶The Prologue.

IT was of Apryll the ſeuen tene day,

In that freſhe tyme when the Roſe ſo gay.

Hys Flower begynneth to ſpred and ſpryng

And al other herbes & trees take liking

The Byrdes do ſynge ſo mery ſonge,

In the floriſhing wodes, thē ſelues amōg

For the ſwetenes of yt time ſo cōfortable

In the which al thinges be delectable,

I ſaye for me, whyche the ſayde daye

In my bed al alone as I laye,

I thought in my ſlepe that I dyd ſee

A gooly Medowe, not farre from me,

wherein of goodly ladies a great cōpanye

Me thought in my dreame there ſhuld be.

The fyrſte of al was Ladye Prudence

Whyche is ſo ful of greate Scyence,

And then Foly, which doth not her reſēble

After that Temperaunce I dyd eſpye,

wyth dyſtemperaunce, that her went by,

Alſo I dyd behold Amours

Whyche was clothed in foure colours,

Then dyd I ſee Enuy that cruel maiſtres

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=4) Whyche wente
nexte vnto Gladnes,

Then folowed Heauynes full of Robery

Making great argumēt with Mellācolly,

Then noble Peace apered wt great ſolace

which boldly chaſed Ire out of that place

Then Chaſtytye me thought was in ſight

Which againſt Lecherie ſtifly dyd fyght,

Then Strength apered, & alſo Pacience

Which betwene them had ſome difference

Then dyd I ſee Suertye and alſo Feare,

In greate dyfference, as they were,

Then the Eunemye ful of Defame,

After them Glotonye and Abſtynence

Amongeſt whom was no dyfference,

I ſawe then Conſtance that noble dame

with Inconſtāce that is worthy of blame

Then noble Courage with Vainglorye,

Then dyd I ſee, I haue it in memorye,

Alſo ther was Iuſtyce and Iniuſtyce,

Thē ſelues beholding with great malice,

And I did ſe Loyaltie and Falſhed,

With lyeng and trueth in the laſt ſtede.

¶All that great companie I dyd ſe,

In that ſame medowe as ſemyd me,

Euerye one of them after ther nature

Therfore I drewe me nere at auenture,

For the better to vnderſtand their reaſon

And vnder a buſhe, in that ſeaſon,

preuelie me hyd, all thynges to marke,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=4) whiche
incontynent was in my hearte,

Imprynted, and with that I did wake

And pen and Inke then I did take,

The ſayd vycyon trewly to wryte.

And in ordre euery thyng to indyte,

which in this booke ye may rede

And it receiue if ye take hede,

The ground therof is founde in Scyence,

Therfore I pray you of pacyence

And myne ignoraunce herein pardon,

For I commyt al to iuſt correctyon

Nowe no more in Ryme I wyll vſe

Take thys wyth the faultes, & me excuſe.

At the be gynnyng, and fyrſt of all

Shalbe treated of prudēce the principall.

Thus endeth the Prologue.

## Table of contents

  * ¶Theſe be the Auctoures of thys Booke.
  * ¶The Prologue.
  * 1\. 1
  * 2\. ¶How Prudence, is cheefe buckler, & defence of all Vertues. And of the great goodnes, that may come of the ſame to all perſons, after the auncyente Phyloſophers. ¶The Second Chapter.
  * 3\. ¶Exſample of the Vertue of Prudence. ¶The thyrde Chapter.
  * 4\. a;Howe Follye is contrarie to Prudence. And how Follye is deuided into manye partes of the man. Alſo the maner to know the Folie by his dedes, and the wyſe man, by hys workes. ¶The .iiii. Chapter.
  * 5\. ¶How temperaunce is one of the flowers of Prudence, And how he that hath it in hym maye reſiſte and withſtande many euils after the ſaienges of the wiſe men, in ye chapter going before. ¶The .v. Chapter.
  * 6\. ¶Howe diſtemperaunce is contrarie to temperaunce: And how it is the pryncypall cauſe of all euyll. ¶The .vi. Chapter.
  * 7\. ¶Example of Dyſtemperaunce, ¶The .vii. Chapter.
  * 8\. ¶How the auctour ſpeaketh of Loue of Beneuolence, & of deliberacion And how of Loue he maketh foure Chapters, ¶The .viii. Chapter.
  * 9\. ¶Howe the Loue of God, is the Loue aboue all Loues that durethe the longeſt. And that withoute the whyche the creatures can not be ſatyſfyed nor contented. ¶The .ix. Chapter.
  * 10\. ¶Howe the Loue of Father and Mother with other Parentes commeth, And what reuerence and honoure we oughte to geue to oure Father and Mother. And the maner to loue his wife & Children. And to correct and leade them in thys world. ¶The .x. Chapter.
  * 11\. ¶Of the Loue of Compaginons and Fryendes, and how to entertaine it, ¶The .xi. Chapter.
  * 12\. ¶Howe the Loue of Concupyſcece, commeth to Men and Women And of the daunger that doe chaunce and come of the ſame. ¶The .xii. Chapter.
  * 13\. ¶Example of the Vertue of Loue ¶The, xiii. Chapter.
  * 14\. ¶Howe Enuye is contrarye to the Vertue of Loue. And what Euuye is, And alſo of the paine, that the enuyous man beareth in him ſelfe. ¶The .xiiii. Chapter.
  * 15\. ¶Example of Enuy. ¶The .xv. Chapter.
  * 16\. ¶Howe a man oughte to take Gladneſſe and Ioye. And of what thynge. And what Gladneſſe or Ioye is. ¶The .xvi. Chapter.
  * 17\. ¶Howe Heuyneſſe is coutrarye to Gladneſſe, And howe the Wyſe Man oughte neuer to put any in his hearte, wherof Heuynes and Mellancolly may be engendred. ¶The .xvii. Chapter.
  * 18\. ¶Howe Mellancholly is daungerous And what is Mellanchollye, And howe is cauſeth manye to fall in greate trauayle, paynes and miſeryes, and conſeqently, in greate peuertie. ¶The .xviii. Chapter.
  * 19\. ¶Example of Heauyneſſe, or Penſyueneſſe. ¶The .xix. Chapter.
  * 20\. ¶Howe the Vertue of Peace oughte to be mayntayned and keepte. And of the greate goodneſſe that commeth of the ſame, And what peace is. ¶The .xx. Chapter.
  * 21\. ¶Howe Ire is contrarye to Peace, and what Ire is, And howe it dothe deſtroye and waſte the Vertues and bodyes of them that he entangled wyth the ſame. And of the euyll that dothe come of it. ¶The .xxi. Chapter.
  * 22\. ¶Example of Ire. ¶The .xxii. Chapter.
  * 23\. ¶Of Chaſtytie, and howe ſhe oughte to be wyth holden, obſerued and kepte, and the perylles that the wyſe ſhoulde flye, for feare to leaſe ſuch Vertue. ¶The .xxiii. Chapter.
  * 24\. ¶Example of the Vertue of Chaſtytye, ¶The .xxiiii. Chapter.
  * 25\. ¶Howe Lecherye is contrarye to Chaſtytie. And in howe many ſortes it is deuyded, then is ſhewed the daungers that come therof, as wel to the bodyes of men, as to theyr Soules. ¶The .xxv. Chapter.
  * 26\. ¶Of Force or Strengthe. And what it is. The maners and comparyſons of the ſame, And who maye be called Stronge. And of thoſe alſo which be alwaies Stronge. ¶The .xxvi. Chapter.
  * 27\. ¶Howe Pacience cauſeth a man to beare eaſelye the Paines and Trauayles of this worlde, And howe many ſortes there be of Pacience. ¶The .xxvii. Chapter.
  * 28\. ¶Howe that Feare and Dread, be contrary to Strengthe and Vallyantneſſe, And what Feare is and who thoſe be that be Fearefull. And for what cauſe. ¶The .xxviii. Chapter.
  * 29\. ¶Of Suertye, and howe manye maners there is therof. And howe Feare and Suertie do ſtriue togyther by dyuers Languages. ¶The .xxix. Chapter.
  * 30\. ¶Howe the Wyſe man oughte to doubte, And howe by doubt and Feare many times the men become Vertuous. ¶The .xxx. Chapter.
  * 31\. ¶Howe good Fame oughte to go afore men, And of the goodneſſe that commeth of the ſame. ¶The .xxxi. Chapter.
  * 32\. ¶Howe Glotony is a daūgerous vice And of the greate euyll that commeth therof to the bodyes of men, And howe the Vertues of men be diſtroyed and corrupte by the ſame. ¶The .xxxii. Chapter.
  * 33\. ¶Howe Abſtynence is that wherof Glotonye is conſumed. And by the goodneſſe that is therin, And that maye come therof, ¶The, xxxiii. Chapter.
  * 34\. ¶Howe Conſtancye and Inconſtaū cye, be dyfferent, And howe Conſtaunce is a Noble Vertue. And what Inconſtauncye is, ¶The .xxxiiii. Chapter.
  * 35\. ¶Of the Vertue of Nobleneſſe of courage of men, And how the men be ofte tymes prayſed by reaſon of the ſame. ¶The .xxxv. Chapter.
  * 36\. ¶Example of Nobleneſſe of Courage. ¶The .xxxvi. Chapter.
  * 37\. ¶Of Vain glorye, And howe manye maners there is therof, And howe Vaynglorye is to be diſpraiſed, ¶The .xxxvii. Chapter.
  * 38\. ¶Example of Vainglorye, ¶The .xxxviii. Chapter.
  * 39\. ¶Howe Iuſtyce ought to be done And howe it is, that thynge that dothe meaſure all thynges vpon Earthe. ¶The .xxxix. Chapter.
  * 40\. ¶Example of Iuſtyce. ¶The .xl. Chapter.
  * 41\. Howe Iniuſtyce or wrong, is contrary to Iuſtyce, and howe manye maners there be of Iniuſtyce, And how Iniuſtice demaūdeth Vengeaunce afore god. ¶The .xli. Chapter.
  * 42\. ¶Example of Iniuſtyce. ¶The .xlii. Chapter.
  * 43\. ¶Of Loyaltys, And by Loyaltye, the perſon is greatlye, prayſed, ¶The .xliii. Chapter.
  * 44\. ¶Of Falſehed, what it is, And of the dyfference that is betweene Suſpycyon and Ielouſy. And Treaſon and Malyce. ¶The .xliiii. Cpapter.
  * 45\. ¶Example of Falſehed, ¶The .xlv. Chapter.
  * 46\. ¶Howe Trueth is to be compared, by Reaſon to the Perdryche. And how Trueth is that thynge which iuſty fyeth the man afore all perſons ¶The .xlvi. Chapter.
  * 47\. ¶Example of the Vertue of Verytye, ¶The .xlvii. Chapter.
  * 48\. ¶Howe Lyenge is an euell vyce, the maners to eſchew it, And in what ſort, and which is euyl Lyenge. ¶The .xlviii. Chapter.
  * 49\. ¶What Mercy is, and of the operacyon of the ſame. And howe Mercye is that wherby a man obteyneth the Loue of God. ¶The .xlix. Chapter.
  * 50\. ¶Example of Mercye. ¶The .l. Chapter.
  * 51\. ¶Of Crualtye, And howe manye ſortes be therof. And of the greate euylles and inconuenients, that bee done by Crualtie. ¶The .li. Chapter.
  * 52\. ¶Of Lyberalytye, howe it is contrarye to Coueytouſneſſe, And how a man ought to be Liberall, & in what maner. ¶The .lii. Chapter.
  * 53\. ¶Howe Coueytouſneſſe is a greuous Vyce, Of the euylles that doe come therof. and of the Inſaſiatnes of the ſame. ¶The .liii. Chapter.
  * 54\. ¶Of Humylytye, And in howe manye maners it is deuided. And of thoſe thynges whiche dyſcend of it. ¶The .liiii. Chapter.
  * 55\. ¶Example of Humylytye, ¶The .lv. Chapter.
  * 56\. ¶Of Pryde, and of the vices that deſcende aud come of the ſame, And how Pryde dyſpleaſeth god and the world, and how the proude perſon dothe torment hym ſelfe in thys world. ¶Thy. lvi. Chapter.
  * 57\. ¶Howe a manne oughte to gouerne hym ſelfe, as well of the tongue, as of wyt and vnderſtanding, for to ſpeake well and wiſelie to all folkes, and how by wordes a man is prayſed or diſprayſed. ¶The .lvii. Chapter.
  * Appendix A Here begynneth the Table of thys Booke.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=5)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=5)

## 1\. ¶Here the Auctour ſheweth, howe a Man, (or a Woman) oughte to be
adorned with vertues. And how that Prudence ought chiefly and fyrſte of all:
Rule and goue [...] the Creatures. ¶The fyrſte Chapter.  
Dame Prudence ſpeaketh. ¶Sapyence,or Wyſdome.

_[figure]_

AS by the Soueraine Sapyence, or Wyſ­dome. And hyghe power of god,Geni­ſis. 1.
c. al thinges [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=6)
reaſonable be create, all the ſāe oughte to god to theyr good and happy ende.
And becauſe that the ſprites, or ſoules of reaſonable creatures be create by
god, to his owne ſemblaunce and lykenes, it is ne­ceſſarye, that he be adorned
wyth vertues, by the whyche they maye come to the ende, for the whyche they
were made and create. Pru­dence is mother and leader of al o­ther vertues,
without the whyche none of the other Vertues can be well gouerned. And it is
verye ne­ſeſſarye and conuenient, to the ſpy­rytes of reaſonable creatures to
haue Prudence, and be adorned of the ſame. For Salamon ſaythe in makynge
mencyon of the ſame in hys Prouerbes.

¶Si intrauerit ſapſentia cortuum:

Sala­mon, prouerli. capi.

et ſcentia anime tue placuerit conſiliū cuſtodiet te, et Prudentia ſeruabit
te.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=6)

## 2\. ¶How Prudence, is cheefe buckler, & defence of all Vertues. And of the
great goodnes, that may come of the ſame to all perſons, after the auncyente
Phyloſophers. ¶The Second Chapter.

PRudence called good Wyſ­dome, diſcrecion, and ſaige­nes, be in. iii. maners &
ſor­tes, after the ſayenge of Tulle,Tulle. the firſt is memory that is to ſay,
remē ­braūce of things paſſed. The ſecōd is, to know that thing that a man
hath to do, the good from the euyl, & the truth from the falſehed. The thirde
is prouydence or prouyſion, that is to ſay, for the time to come, of that
thinge that a man hath to do. And theſe iii. vertues be formed and ruled, by
two other, that is to ſay, Counſayle and dylidence.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=7) ¶Ariſtotyle
ſaythe that counſayle,Ariſtotyle. is a certayn inquyſicyon proceding from one
thynge to another, dyly­gence, is for to haue care and re­garde vnto the
thynge that a man hath to doe. And theſe two Ver­tues that is to ſay Dylygence
and Prudence may be compared to the Ante, the whyche is a lytle Beaſte hauing
great ſolycytude and care, to gatherin Sommer that thyng whearevpon he maye
lyue in Win­ter, remembrynge hym ſelfe of the time paſſed, knowing the time
pre­ſente. And prouydynge for the time to come.

¶Salamon ſaythe that the Ante hath ſuche maner in him ſelfe,Sala­mon. that all
the grayn and corne that he ga­thereth to gyther in the Sōmer, for hys
lyuinge in the Wynter, he dothe cleaue it by the myddes, to the intente that
it doe not burgen [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=7) and ſprynge.

¶Dauyd ſaythe that the begyn­nyngeDauid. of Wyſdome is to feare and dreade
God.

¶Salamon ſayth that Wyſdome is better and more worth,Sala­mon. then the ryches
of the worlde, for no ryches maie be compared to ſaygenes and Wyſdome.

¶Tulle ſaythe that the wyſe manTulle. oughte neuer to ſaye I wolde not haue
thought it that ſuche a thing ſhoulde haue chaunced ſo, for the wyſe man dothe
not doubte, but hath alwaies a ſure truſt, and doth prouyde for daungers to
come.

¶Sydrac ſayth that good wynesSidrac. and meates comforts and reioyces the body
of man, but aboue al thinges ſaygenes and wyſdome dothe reioyce it.

¶Senec dothe ſaye,Senec. if I had one foote in my graue, yet wolde I be
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=8) glad to
learne Wyſdome.

¶Tulle ſaythe that he whiche is wyſe,Tulle. can neuer lacke nor haue gre­ate
nede, nor ſhall not ſuffre in any maner. And ſaithe moreouer that he is wyſe
that knoweth him ſelfe.

¶Ariſtotyle ſaythe,Ariſto­tyle. that the wyſe man goeth alwayes armed in hys
thought & remēbraunce againſte e­uery man. And ſaith alſo, yt he is a fole
that thinketh that fortune and chaūce doth giue ether good or euil but that
wyſdome giue it.

¶Bracco ſaythe that the key of Seuerytie is the thoughte.Bracco And therfore
the olde mynde and tho­ughte cauſeth oft tymes to erre.

¶Alexandre ſayth,Alexandre. a yt man ought to haue in his minde and
remem­braunce in the nyghte, that thinge that he muſte do in the daye.

¶Salamon ſayth,Sala­mon. do all thinges by counſaile, and thou ſhalt not
re­pente [[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=8)
thee therof.

¶Pythagoras ſayth that there is no counſayle ſo good and
faithfull,Pitha­goras. as is the counſaile whych is giuen in the Sea, whyles a
manne is in daunger and perylll.

¶Socrates ſayth that a man go­uerned by the counſayle of yonge
folkes,Socra­tes. hath for the moſte part, euil chaunce and fortune. And ſaith
al­ſo that there be iii. thinges contra­ry to good counſayle, thai is to ſay,
haſtines, Ire, and couetouſnes.

¶Iuuenall ſaith,Iuue­nall. do not ſhewe thy mind and wil, but to him of whom
thou wilte aſke counſayle, for gene­rallye euery man doth counſayle yt thing
which he ſeith doth pleaſe.

¶Senec ſaythe,Senec when thou wylte go to demaunde counſayle of anye man, ſee
fyrſte howe he dothe go­uerne hym ſelfe.

¶Plato ſaithe,Plato. that ſcyence with­out
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=9) regard and
ſolycytude of expe­ryence is lytie worthe, of whom it was demaunded howe and
wher­by a wyſe man myght be knowen. And he aunſwered that the wit of man
ſheweth it whē he hath great & dyuers trybulacyons, and dothe ouerpaſſe them
mekely and in good pacience. The good Maryner kno­weth hym ſelfe in fortūes,
for euery Maryner in a meeke and peaſable tyme can ſaile & gouerne the ſhyp.

¶Alſo Plato ſaythe that the wyſePlato. man doth know hym ſelfe when he is not
angry nor moued for no ma­ner of iniuryes done vnto hym, nor when he dothe not
gloryfye hym ſelfe, to here and vnderſtande hym lauded and prayſed, moreouer
he ſaythe that there be three thyn­ges, that maketh a man to bewiſe.

¶The Fyrſte is to reade manye good Bookes. The Second, to go [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=9) into diuers
Countreys, to heare muche of the dedes of other men.

¶Iuuenall ſaythe,Iuue­nall. thou haſte got­ten great dygnytie, if Prudence be
in thee, for he is verye happie that can know the ende of cauſes.

¶Boecius ſayth,Boeci­us. that it is not ſuf­fyciente to knowe the thynges as a
man dothe ſee them before hym, but Prudence is that whych doth meaſure the
ende of all thynges, it was demaunded of a wyſe man, howe a man ſhoulde behaue
hym ſelfe, and what he ſhould doe, that he ſhoulde not haue neede of anye man.
And he aunſwered that if a man be ryche, let hym lyue meaſu­rablye, and
temperatelye. And if he be pore, let him labour diligent­lye. And ſo he ſhall
lyue withoute daunger, for dyligence is the mo­ther of Rycheſſe. And ſaythe
that he oughte not to be called Ryche,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=10) whych
gathereth muche Rycheſſe and gooddes togither, but he whi­che doth ſpende them
with reaſon. And ſaythe alſo that there is no greatter Treaſoure in the worlde
then wyt and diſcrecyon.

¶Socrates ſaythe that Scyence is gotten by dilygence of man,Socra­tes. but
Prudence and Wyſdome, is the gyfte of God, and amongeſt all o­ther gyftes the
moſte excellente.

¶Hermes ſaithe alſo that there is no greater treaſure in this world,Her­mes.
then wyt and diſcrecyon, nor grea­ter pouertye then ignoraunce, nor better
friendes then to haue good cuſtome and maners. And ſaythe alſo that when a man
is olde, eue­rye manne can dyſprayſe hys Ver­tues, and note and marke hys
Vy­ces. And ſaythe moreouer that he that wyll flye dyſhonour & ſhame let hym
flye and anoyde the occa­ſyons.Note. [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=10) Alſo he ſayth
that the wyſe man oughte not to remembre that thing that he hath loſt, but
ought to thynke and remembre howe too keepe ſurelye that thynge that he hathe.
There camme once a wyſe man, (a kynſman of hys) and pray­ed hym that it woulde
pleaſe hym to lende hym a certayne ſumme of money: the which (wyſe man)
aunſ­wered, truelye my friende I ſhall not be ſo euyll contente wyth thee, if
I doe not lende thee, as I ſhall be if I lende thee, for afterward I woulde
recouer it of thee, and par­aduenter I can not.

¶Plato ſayth that Prudence and wyſdome,Plato. dothe decorate and ad­orne the
rycheſſe of man. And ſaith alſo that the Prudente and Wyſe man, dothe not
feare deathe, for Prudence gouerneth hys vnder­ſtandynge, hys tonge is the
voyce [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=11) of
trueth, hys hearte is good wyll, pytie and mercye be hys armures. And alſo to
ſeeke the wyſe men, is Wyſdome and Prudence, his pow­er and auctoryte is
Iuſtyce, hys reygne is meaſure, hys laude and prayſe is peace, hys workes be
ſal­uacyon, hys chyualrye or Knyghte­head is the counſayle of wyſe men, hys
apparell is pacyence, hys trea­ſoure is dyſcyplyne or doctrine, the cōpany of
good perſons is his loue. And al his deſire is to flie from ſin, and to ſerue
God, and to haue hys Faythe and truſte in him, for with­oute that, no man can
pleaſe God. As ſaythe Saynte Paule.

Sine fine impoſſile eſt placere Deo.

Hebre xi. c.

## 3\. ¶Exſample of the Vertue of Prudence. ¶The thyrde Chapter.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=11) OF the
Vertue of Prudence,Example. it is redde in the Hyſtories of Rome, that on
acertaine daye the Emperoure of Rome dyd ryde by a woode.Philo­ſopher And
there dyd fynde a Phyloſopher: the whyche Phyloſopher the Emperoure cau­ſed to
be called, but no maner of aunſwere he wold make. Then the Emperoure him ſelfe
did call him, and yet for all that, nothynge wold he aunſwere.Example. And
themperoure ſe­inge that the wolde gyue no maner of aunſwere, came to hym, and
aſ­ked hym what he did. And the philoſopher aunſwered, I learne wyſ­dome, I
praye thee (ſayde thempe­roure, that thou wylte teache mee ſome thynge therof.
And then the Phyloſopher did take pen, ink, and paper, and wrote a litle Rolle
con­teyning this ſentence.Sentē ce. When thou ſhalt enterpriſe to do any
thinge: con­ſyder
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=12) and thynk in
thy mind the ende, that maye come of it.

The Emperoure tooke thys wry­tynge and retourned againe to hys palayſe at
Rome. And cau­ſed the ſayde wrytyng to be ſet vp­pon the doore of hys preuye
cham­bre. So it chaūced afterward that on a daye: certayne of the Barons and
Knyghtes of his Courte tooke theyr counſayle togyther amongeſt them,Example.
that they wolde kyll the ſaid Emperoure, (for a certaine occaſy­on, the whyche
ſhoulde be to longe to rehearſe.) And they were at a  [...] wyth the Barber of
the ſaid Emperoure, and promyſed hym a certaine ſūme of money, that when he
ſhoulde ſhaue the ſayde Empe­rour, that he ſholde cut his throte. And the
ſaide Barons and Knigh­tes, promyſed alſo to conueye the ſayde Emperour out of
the Palice,. And within ſhort ſpace after that [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=12) the ſayd Barber
came to ſhaue the Emperoure, and to doe that thing that he had promyſed, (that
is to ſaye, to kyll hym. And dyd beholde the wrytyng,Example. which was ſet
aboue the doore of the Preuye Chambre, in the whyche was conteyned.

When thou ſhalt enterpryſe to doe a­ny thynge:Sentē ce. conſyore well in thy
mynd the ende that maye come of it.

Whearewyth he me ruaylouſlye a­ſtoyned, and began to waxe pale in the
vyſage.Example. And dyd tremble for feare: the Emperoure ſeinge thys meruayled
greatlye what: ſhoulde be the cauſe therof. And commaun­ded his ſayd Barber to
ſhewe him the cauſe of hys feare. The ſaide Barber was ſo troubled and
abaſ­ſhed in hys mynde, that he coulde geue no maner of aunſwere. Then the
Emperoure conſyderyng that he cold not haue ſuch a great feare
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=13) without ſome
maner of cauſe, dyd examyne hym. And promyſed hym that if he wolde tell the
trueth, he ſhulde haue no harme, but ſhulde haue pardon, what cauſe ſoeuer if
were. And then the ſayde Barber diſcouered all the matter, and de­clared the
maner of the ſayde trea­ſon. And howe that he had promy­ſed to cutte the
throte of the ſayde Emperoure in ſhauinge hys berde. Then the Emperour
incontinente dyd ſende for the ſaid Barons and Knyghtes. And dyd cauſe them in
lyke caſe to be examyned, and foūd the trueth therof, and fynally cau­ſed
them to ſuffre cruellye Iuſtyce,Example. accordynge to theyr deſeruynges. Then
he ſent for the Phyloſopher, whyche had geuen hym the wry­tynge. And after
that tyme wolde neuer ſuffre hym to departe from hym.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=13)

## 4\. a;Howe Follye is contrarie to Pru­dence. And how Follye is deuided into
manye partes of the man. Alſo the maner to know the Folie by his dedes, and
the wyſe man, by hys workes. ¶The .iiii. Chapter.

FOlye is a Vice contrarye to the Vertue of Pru­dence. As Pla­to ſaythe,Plato.
of the whyche Folye, there is dyuers and manye ſor­tes and maners. There is
Folie accuſtomed, as thoſe perſons whiche be Foles from theyr natyuitie and
byrthe. And other there be whyche be lūatike or frantike for a certaine
ſpace. And yet there is another maner
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=14) of Folye
whyche is leſſe then the other aforeſaid, as of thoſe per­ſons whiche haue
loſte theyre wyt,The deuicion, of folie And thys Folye maye be deuyded in
foure maners. The fyrſte is of thoſe perſons which do not regard not thinke
buſelye vpon thoſe mat­ters that they haue to do, but do al thinges at
auenture withoute any maner of conſyderacyon and rea­ſon. The Seconde maner of
Folie is of them that doe not conſydre norre gard the ende that mai come of
the matter, that they haue en­terpryſed, but do al thyngs ſodein­ly, as it
commeth in theyre mynde and wyll. The thyrd maner of Fo­lye, is to be to
haſtye to doe that thyng that a man hath to do. The fourthe maner of Folie, is
to be neclygent and ſlothfull in that thinge that a man hathe to doe, & to
haue no thoughte nor care for the ſame [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=14) but rather
necligently to let it pas. And can not find the maner to be­gin any thing, And
if another man begin, yet can not be folowe, And if a man doe purſue and
folowe, yet can not he find the maner to make and ende, knowe ye that
neclygence is mother & nouriſhe of pouertye, And ſo the man whiche is
necly­gent may be reputed for a foole.

¶Salamon ſayth,Sala­mon. meddle not but as lytle as thou may with a foole, for
he will not regard thy wordes, except they be after his pleaſure.

¶Senec ſaith that a foole may be compared to the Moldwarpe,Senec whiche
heareth but vnderſtādeth not. And ſayth that the fole lightly by­leueth the
good yt a man ſpeketh of hym. And heareth verye gladlye the euyll ſpoken of
another man. And ſay the alſo that the wyſe man doth folow ye domages &
harmes, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=15) And
goeth not about to fynd them but that fole taketh great paine to fynde them.
And ſaith if thou wyll haue ye loue of a fole fulfill his wil & pleaſure, in
all thynges. And ſayth that the loue of a fole ſhalbe great­ter domage vnto
thee, then his euil will. And if it chaunce that he be Ryche, he ſhalbe proud
and preſūp­teous, and if he be pore, he will diſ­peare of the goodneſſe of
God. And And if a man geue him anie thinge he wyll neuer thanke him for it if
a man tell him any ſecrete matter, he will ſhowe it incontinente to ano­ther,
if he ſpeake he wyll be hard & wyll haiſe audyence aboue all men.

And if other men ſpeake he wyl, not heare nor geue audyence vn­to them, he is
ſodeynlye merye and full of Ioye withoute anye meaſure and reaſon. And
ſodeynlye alſo he is full of Ire, Melancholly and an­grye [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=15) wythoute Reaſon,
if a man pray him to pardon and forgeue a­nie man, he wyll aunſwere that in no
maner of wyſe he wyll ſo doe, he loueth better warre and decencion then peace.
And falſhed & lyeng thē trueth, no man can bryng him out of his oppinion. And
cōmonly he is coueitous in all his buſyneſſe, if he talke wyth a wyſe man; he
will ne­uer humyſate hymſelfe, nor ſkarſly gyue hym he arynge, of thou be rich
he will ſaye thou arte an vſurer, if thou be poore, he wyll ſpeake to thee
vyſe woordes, if thou do well and vſe to doe manye good dedes, he wyll ſay
that thou arte an Ipo­cryte, if thou doe euyll, he wyll de­fame thee, if
peraduenture he do accord hym ſelfe, to trueth in any ma­ner of thyng that
doth pleaſe him, he wyll prayſe it greatlye, but if it be contrarye to hys
pleaſure & will,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=16) he will
diſprayſe it. But the wyſe man is of a contrarie oppinion, for he hathe
counteraunce in Iuſtyce, Humylytie & pardon: he can ſpeake well, and alſo hold
his peace when place and tyme is, he hath meaſure in hys power, he is lyberall
to the demaunders: and alſo he is a faire ſpeaker, and a fayre geuer of
aunſ­were, he that ſheweth hym his coū ſaile he dothe keepe it ſecrete, if he
geue anye thynge, he geueth it me­relye and wyth a good hearte, and without
any reproch he doth none otherwyſe to anye man, but as he wolde were done vnto
him.

If he be rich he wil neuer be ye prouder therfore. If he be pore yet ther­fore
wil not he leaue and forſake to ſerue god, he is not angrye nor diſ­pleaſed to
ſee an other man better then he, nor he wil not diſpraiſe no manne worſe then
him ſelfe, he demaundeth [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=16) nor claimeth
nothinge there where he hath no right, he is agrable & pleaſaunte in all his
aunſ­weres. And faith nothing but that he knoweth wel, he doth not hyde his
ſcience, he conſtraineth & accordeth his wil by force, to trueth and right, &
he cauſeth him ſelfe to be loued of euerye man, if he beare wyt­nes, it ſhall
be true, if he Iudge, it ſhalbe right, & ſhall neuer prolonge the cauſes of
any man, he doth re­pute him ſelfe a ſtraunger in thys world, and thynketh
alwaies to departe from it, he doth well, and ge­ueth good example to other to
doe wel, for he forbideth ye euyll, & doth kepe him from it to his power, all
his dedes & his ſayengs be concor­dable, and very pacyently doth ſuf­fre
endure the iniuries and oppro­bryus wordes ſpoken againſt him, without takinge
any venegeaunce
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=17) the wyſe
manne is alwayes in one minde and courage he is not in di­uers opynions, he
wil not be letted for no maner of thynge to tell the trueth. And he is verye
Charyta­ble. And of thys ſpeaketh the ho­lye Scrypture ſayenge.

Homo ſanctus et ſapience manet ſi­cut Solſtultus ſicut luna.

## 5\. ¶How temperaunce is one of the flo­wers of Prudence, And how he that
hath it in hym maye reſiſte and withſtande many euils after the ſaienges of
the wiſe men, in ye chapter going before. ¶The .v. Chapter.

I Emperaunce is a flower of Prudence, for of Pru­dence, deſcendeth & com­meth
temperaunce. Tem­peraunce [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=17) dothe moderate
the Vy­ces, & maketh the vertues perfecte, Temperaunce is a fyrme and a
ſta­ble auctoritie and power the which doth moderate & refraine the will of
the heart and courage. And this noble vertue of temperaunce maye be compared
to the Camell, for the Camell is a Beaſte of ſuche nature that he wold go two
hundreth mi­les, to haue the naturall companie of the femall. And then after
that, he hath ſuche temperaunce in him that he (being with his mother, or
Syſters) wyll neuer touche them for no maner of thynge.Tulle.

¶Tulie ſayth, if thou haue tempe­raunce, thou wilt vſe meaſure in al thyng,
and wyll forſake vaine plea­ſures and volupteouſnes.

¶Senec ſaith,Senec. that a man cannot haue a better nor a greater power &
auctorytie, then to haue the pow­er
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=18) of hym
ſelfe.

¶Senec ſaith,Senec. that a man can not haue a better nor a greater power and
auctorytie, then to haue the power of hym ſelfe.

¶Socrates ſaith,Socra­tes. that it is a greater and a more vertuous thyng for
a man, to vanquyſhe and ouercome his wyll then to vanquyſhe hys e­nemye.

¶Plato ſaythe that he ſhall euyll ouercome his enemie,Plato. that can not
ouercome him ſelfe. And ſaith that he is to be praiſed and honoured, whych
hath temperaunce in his li­uing, moreouer he ſayth that there is fyue maner of
temperaunce.

The fyſtre is to be chaſte in yong age, Merye in olde age, Mea­ſure in
haboundaunce of Ryches, gentle and humble in proſperitie, pacyent in
aduerſity. Temperaūce is power of reaſon agaynſt Leche­rye, and agaynſte all
other vyces and ſynnes.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=18) ¶Tulle
ſayth that this vertue of temperaunce,Tulle. is the apparell and adournemente
of life, and abuſing of all tribulacions.

¶Orace ſaith,Orace. eſchewe the delite & pleaſure of the fleſhe, for ye
pleaſure is very euyll, wherof the ende is ful of ſorowe. Of this vertue of
tempe­raunce, decende and come manye vertues, that is to ſaye. Meaſure, ſhame,
abſtynēce, honeſtie, & chaſti­tie, Temperaunce is a vertue whi­che refrayneth
the proude men.

¶Saint Auſtin ſaith that the vertue of temperaūce refraineth
concupiſcence,Saints Auſtin. which is contrary to vs & doth trouble vs in the
faith of oure lord: & of this ſpeaketh the Apoſtle S. Peter in his firſt
epiſtle, ſaieng.Saints Peter.

¶Obſeord vos tanquam aduenas & [...] regrinas abſtinere vos a carnalibus
deſideriis que melitant aduerſus ani­mam.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=19)

## 6\. ¶Howe diſtemperaunce is contrarie to temperaunce: And how it is the
pryncypall cauſe of all euyll. ¶The .vi. Chapter.

DYſtemperaunce foloweth the wyll as it commeth.

¶Plato ſaythe that there is no worſe vyce in the world then
dyſtemperaunce,Plato. for of it commeth and deſendeth all maner of euyll.

¶Varro ſayth that he whyche fo­loweth and pleaſeth hys wyll,Varro can­not be
without vyce and ſynne.

¶Senec ſaythe,Senec that it is a mer­uayle if ryches do come to any per­ſon
and dure with hym, if he be wilfull.

¶Socrates ſaithe,Socra­tes. he that wyl fo­lowe hys wyll, hys ende cannot be
but ſhame and rebuke.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=19)

## 7\. ¶Example of Dyſtemperaunce, ¶The .vii. Chapter.

OF Dyſtemperaunce it is rede in the lyfe of Fathers, that there was a mayden
called Ianſelme, which alwaies had ben chaſte and of honeſt conuerſaſion. And
ſhe being one day amongeſt o­ther women whyche did ſpeake of the pleaſures of
Lecherye, did pur­poſe in her mynd to proue if ye plea­ſures were ſo greate,
as ſhe had harde them ſay. And thervpon ſhe dyd ſende for a yonge man whyche
aforetimes had deſired to haue his pleaſure of her. And he came to her & in
cōcluſion medled bodely with her. And ſocontinued a great ſpace in taking
theyr pleaſures togither. And afterwarde on a certayne day this yonge woman
dyd remembre the great ordre and vylenes of this
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=20) ſinne of
Lecherye. And the offence that ſhe had made vnto oure lorde God. And did
remembre & ſee alſo by yt reaſon of a litle diſtemperaūce ſhe had loſt her
virginitie, the whi­che ſhe could neuer recouer againe, for ye which thing ſhe
was ſo trou­bled and vexed in her minde. And had ſuch diſtemperaūce in her
ſelfe that ſhe did hange her ſelfe by the necke, And ſo ye maye ſee that
dyſ­temperaunce is an euyll & a daun­rous vyce.

## 8\. ¶How the auctour ſpeaketh of Loue of Beneuolence, & of deliberacion And
how of Loue he maketh foure Chapters, ¶The .viii. Chapter.

LOue Beniuolence and Delibe­racion,Saint Tho­mas, be as one thinge, after the
ſayeng of Sainte Thomas in [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=20) his ſūme. And
that the fyrſte mo­uynge of all maner of Loue is the knowledge.Saint Auſtin
For Saynte Anguſtin ſaith, that a man can not loue anie thing, if he firſt
haue not the knowledge of the ſame.

And thys knowledge deſcendeth and commeth of the fyue corporall ſences and
wyttes of the perſons, as the eyes, vnderſtandynge, and hearynge of the Eares,
ſmell of the Noſe, taſte of the Mouthe, and touchynge of the Handes, or of the
Sence and Wytte whyche hathe vnderſtandinge by Imaginacyon. And this knowledg
is the firſt mouinge and felinge of Loue, but the moſte parte commeth of the
Eies,Ariſtotyle. after the ſayenge of Ariſtotyle for firſt ye wil of perſons,
by this knowledge of the memorie, dothe tourne into pleaſure & into
Imaginacion. And by this pleaſure is moued the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=21) deſyre of
hearte, in deſyrynge that thynge that dothe pleaſe it.

And this pleaſure gyuethe hope & truſt to the hearte, to haue the ſaid thynge.

¶Ariſtotle ſaythe that of this pro­cedeth the ſouerine vertue of
loue,Ariſto­tyle. the which is foundacyon and gide of all other vertues.

¶Saynte Thomas ſayth that no vertue maye be without loue.Saint Tho­mas, And
ſayth that in loue ther muſte be or­dre, fyrſte a man ought to loue God aboue
all thynges. And then hym ſelfe, then his Father and mother. And then hys
wife, or the wyfe her huſbande, then to loue euerye man after hys eſtate and
degre. And to loue better good perſons then euil.

¶Saynte Auguſtyne ſaythe that thou ought to loue thy ſelfe,Saint Auſtin but
not thy vyces. Fyrſte I wyll ſpeake of the loue of God, whych oughte to [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=21) be aboute all
thynges, then after­warde I will ſpeake of the Loue of the Fathers and
Mothers, then of the loue of Compaignons, neighboures and Fryendes. And at the
laſte I wyll ſpeake of the Loue of Women.

## 9\. ¶Howe the Loue of God, is the Loue aboue all Loues that durethe the
longeſt. And that withoute the whyche the creatures can not be ſatyſfyed nor
contented. ¶The .ix. Chapter.

THe Loue of God whi­che is called Charitie commeth and decen­deth by two
vertues, that is o tſaye, by fai­the, and hope. For a man can not loue God: if
fyrſte he [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=22)
haue not trewe faythe in hymſelfe, in beleuinge ſtedfaſtlye, that there is one
verye god in Trynitie. And then he oughte to haue hope and and truſt, to come
to the glorie and Ioye, whyche is euerlaſtinge lyfe. And of theſe two vertues,
is cre­ate and engendred in the hearte of the perſon a dyſpoſycyon to incline
hym to loue God. And all thys cō ­meth by the vertue & grace of the holy
ghoſte.

¶Salomon Kynge of Hieruſalem ſpeakynge of the loue of God,Sala­mon. ſaide I
haue buylded Howſes, planted Vynes, and trees bearynge all ma­ner of fruytes,
I haue had greate pleaſure in all maner of garmentes and appapell, I haue had
greate quantytie of golde and ſyluer, and precyous ſtones, I haue had many
fayre chyldren. And manye noble ſeruauntes. And of all other maner of people
in my Court: I haue had [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=22) Mynſtrelles,
Players, and Syng­ers of all nacyons. I haue had gre­ate domynyon, power, and
aucto­rytie vpon the people. And greate ſcyence in dyuers maners. And ſo I
haue had the greateſt honoures that anye man myghte haue. And there was neuer
thynge that I de­ſyred, but my deſyre was fullfilled: but when I haue Imagined
and well conſydered all theſe thin­ges that I haue done in vayne, I haue ſeene
clearelye that all is va­nitie and falſhed, and deceyuynge of the ſpyrite. And
alſo I haue knowen that there is nothyng in this worlde, but vanitie & pryde.
And yt ther is no man perfite, but he why­ch is in the loue of god. Then I did
pray wt al my heart, yt he wold ſend me death.Saint Paule. ¶Saint Paule ſaith
that the wyſdome of the worlde is but Folie. And he yt can the moſte,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=23) can the
leaſte.Ariſto­tyle. ¶Ariſtotile ſaithe I came into this world naked, and as a
fole I haue lyued: and at the ende I know that I can nothinge. ¶Sainte Auſtyne
ſaythe,Saint Auſtin O thou man that demaundeth peace, wylt thou that I do
reache it thee, haue ſtedfaſtnes, then in all thy hearte to loue God, for the
myſerye of this worlde is ſo euydente, and cleare, and eaſye to know, that
euery man maye perceyue it. For no man can be honoured, but another ſhall be
vituperat and reputed vyle, nor the one can not be great but the other lytle:
nor the one Ryche, but the o­ther poore. And alſo thys worlde maie be compared
to a great and a large table, whereupon there is a lytle and a narowe towell,
the which the one plucketh on the one ſide and diſcouereth the table on the
o­ther ſyde, and ſo taketh al from his [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=23) compaignon. He
that putteth hys loue in thys worlde, he endurethe muche ſorowe, for truly all
is vani­tie, but he that dothe ſet hys loue in God, is all hys tyme merye and
Ioyeous. The Loue of god, dothe maintayne it ſelfe, by the perſeue­raunce, as
he hym ſelfe witnes ſay­enge.

Mathe. x chap.

Qui autem perſeuerit vſque in finem hic ſaluus erit.

## 10\. ¶Howe the Loue of Father and Mo­ther with other Parentes commeth, And
what reuerence and honoure we oughte to geue to oure Father and Mother. And
the maner to loue his wife & Chil­dren. And to correct and leade them in thys
world. ¶The .x. Chapter.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=24)

[...]

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=24)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=25) THe Seconde
Loue proce­deth of naturall and car­nall mouing of the courage whyche
conſtrayneth the perſon to loue hys Parentes, that is to ſaye his Father and
Mother, and other hys kynſfolkes, as nature dothe moue vs. A certayne
Philo­ſopher ſaythe, doe not put thy truſt in hym, whyche loueth not his
fa­ther and his Mother or hys Kynſ­folkes. For if he doe not loue them, it is
in maner impoſſyble that he ſhoulde loue thee.

¶Salamon ſaythe in the Eccleſi­aſtike,Sala­mon. In all thy wordes, in al thy
dedes and workes, honoure thy fa­ther and thy mother. And thou ſhalte haue the
euerlaſtynge bene­dyctyon of God. The benedictyon of the Father mayntaineth
and vp holdeth the houſe of the Sonne. And the malediction or curſe of [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=25) the father,
dothe vndermyne the foundacyon therof. God commaū ­deth ye in the lawe,
honour thy Fa­ther and thy mother, to the intent that thou may lyue longe vpon
the earthe.Sainte Mathe. ¶Saunt Mathewe ſaith that he neuer ſe chylde whych
dyd euyll intreate his Father, and hys mother: but god did take vēgeaūce on
him in this worlde.

¶Plato ſayth,Plato, know well the man afore that thou loue hym. And whē thou
ſhalte knowe hym well, then loue hym well, wyth al thy hearte, it is ſayde in
degree, that the loue whyche a man hathe wyth a vyle and vnhoneſte perſon, can
not be but by ſome vyle occaſyon. And ſaythe, that the good man is cor­rupte,
by the companye of the euyl. And the euyll man dothe loſe hys euill name, by
keping companye wt more honeſt & better men then he.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=26) And ſaith
that thou ought to loue perfectlye thy wyfe, for ſeinge that thou arte her
huſbande, ſhe is one of thy membres, and ye be both one hearte and fleſſhe.
God doth name the woman, the ayde and helpe of the manne, for when he had made
man he ſayde let vs make ayde vn­to him, & did take one of the ribbes of Adam,
and made therof the wo­man, in ſayeng, for this womā the man ſhall forſake
his Father and his Mother, and ſhall Ioyne hym onely wyth hys wyfe, and they
ſhal be two fleſſhes in one.

¶Saynte Paule ſayth.Sainte Paule, Men loue youre Wyues, in lyke caſe as Ihe­ſu
Chryſte loueth hys: whyche is the Churche. And in another place ſaythe loue
youre Wyues, as youre owne bodye, for it is the gyfte of God.

¶Sydrac ſaythe,Sidrac. that the poſſeſ­ſions [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=26) and Rycheſſe
commeth and be giuen by the Father of any man, but hys wyfe is the gyfte of
God.

¶Saynte Paule ſaythe,Saint Paule the Huſ­bande hathe not the power of hym
ſelfe, but the Wyfe, nor the Wyfe of her ſelfe, but her Huſbande. And ſaythe
moreouer, thou oughte not to beleeue that it is ſynne to medle in all honoure
wyth thy Wyfe: For the Apoſtelles ſaye, let euerye man haue hys owne, to
auoyde furnica­cyon.

¶Salamon ſaythe,Sala­mon, that a good Wyfe, is aboue all the goodes and
rycheſſe of thys worlde, for ſhe is the crowne of the man, and the ke­per of
the howſe. If thy Wyfe be euyll, thou oughte to ſupporte and not to blame her,
if by no meanes thou canſte amende her, howe be it, gyue her not to muche
power of thee.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=27) ¶For as
Sidrac ſaythe,Sidrac beware that thou doe not moue thy wyfe, ſo that thou
ſhall cauſe her to come to more Ire, and wrathe.

¶Salamon ſaythe,Sala­mon. that there is no heade in the worlde ſo full of
ve­nyme, as the heade of a Serpent, nor no Ire ſo greate, as the Ire of a
Womon.

¶Tulle ſaythe that,Tulle, that perſon whyche is a ſhamed of the compa­nye of
hys Father and hys Mo­ther, is not worthy to be amongeſt the Cytezens.

¶Sidrac ſaith,Sidrac that he was borne in an vnhappy howre, whych doth forſake
his Father, and he is cur­ſed of God, whych is ſtoburne vnto his Mother.

¶Saynte Auſtyne ſaythe,Sainte Auſtin, that a man ought to honoure his Father
and Mother in two maners, that is to ſaye, to beare them reuerence [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=27) And to myniſter
that thynge vnto them wherof they haue nede.

¶For Salamon ſaithe.Sala­mon, Honora patrem tuū & gemitus matris rue non
obliuiſcaris, And ſayth if y• haue ſonnes chaſtiſe them, and they ſhal be
comfort vnto thy ſoule, if y• haue doughters teche them to kepe their bodies.
And giue them not tafaire countenaunce, mary thy doughter, for thou doeſt a
good dede, it thou marye her to a wyſe man.

¶Senec ſaythe,Senec. chaſtyſe thy chil­dren and cauſe them to feare and drede
god, for it is better for a man to ſee hys chyldren dye, then to ſee them lvue
euyll and to be ingrate.

¶Sainte Bernarde ſaythe in his cantikes,S ber­nard, that ingratitude is
ene­mye of the ſoule, and dyminyſheth the vertues, and is perdycyon of merytes
and benefytes. The ſinne
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=28) of
Ingratitude is lyke the wynde, whyche dryeth vp the water of the Fountaines of
pytie, the dewe and water of grace, and goodneſſe of mercye, as the wyſe manne
ſaythe.

Ingrati enim ſpes tanquem hiberna­lis

Pro­uerb, xviii,

glacies tabeſcet diſpariet tamqui aqua ſuper flua.

## 11\. ¶Of the Loue of Compaginons and Fryendes, and how to entertaine it,
¶The .xi. Chapter.

THe Thyrd Loue, whi­che is called amytie of Compaignons it is to wyll one
thynge togy­ther laufullye and ho­neſtlye. And thys loue dyſcendeth by three
occaſyons, whych moueth the perſone to the ſame. The fyrſte is for ſome
goodneſſe that the per­ſon [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=28) hath or truſteth
to haue of him that he loueth. The Second is for the good wyll and mynde that
the perſon hath vnto hys fryend in de­ſyryng & wyſſhyng him good. The Thyrde.
is that he woulde be all­wayes as one wyth hys fryende, & partaker wyth hym in
al thynges, for loue that he oweth vnto him. And theſe three maners of loue be
verye good and vertuous.

¶Saynte Thomas ſaythe,Saint Tho­mas, that thou maye keepe thy fryende three
maner of waye. The fyrſt is to loue hym wyth all thy hearte, and that he may
knowe it. The ſecond is to do all thynge to thy power, whych thou knoweſt doth
pleaſe him. And the thyrde is to beware that thou do no thynge that ſhall
diſpleaſe hym. And ſaythe alſo that by other three meanes, thou maye kepe him
thy friende, that is to ſaye, to laude
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=29) and prayſe
hym in his abſence: and to helpe him at hys nede.

¶Salamon ſaythe,Sala­mon. that there is nothyng to be compared to a faith full
friende.

¶Ouid ſaythe,Ouid, that when thou ſhalbe in proſperyty, thou ſhal find and
haue many fryendes. And in thine aduerſytie, thou ſhalt be lefte all alone
without anye fryendes.

¶Aryſtotyle ſaythe,Ariſto­tyle, that the more dygnytie and honoure, or
rycheſſe, that a man hath, the more nede he hathe of fryendes, for one good
thynge can not be alone, and with out another.

¶And Salomon ſaythe,Sala­mon, there be three thynges that be verye plea­ſant &
acceptable bothe to god and man that is to ſay, concorde & ami­tie of
bretherē, loue of neighbours. and the loue of the man and his wyfe, when they
loue the on the o­ther: [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=29) & ſaith that it
is a ſoueraigne goodneſſe & gyfte of God to haue a good wife, he that
chaūſeth to find a good wife, he findeth great good & welth. And he that
forſaketh and chaſeth from hym a good wyfe, he chaſeth from him his welth &
pro­fyte. And ſaith alſo yt a good wyfe doth honoure the howſe & riches: & an
euil wife is diſtruction of al together & the diſhonour of her huſbād.

¶Salamon wyllyng to blame the women,Sala­mon, ſaythe manye thynges of them, of
the whych at this time, I will not ſpeake, for there is manye good reaſons,
wherfore a man ought to honoure the women: and accordynge to hys ſayenge, a
man ſhall not fynde one good woman amongeſt a Thouſande. But I beleue that he
ſpeaketh thys, as a man angrye and moued for one woman whyche dyd deceyue hym.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=30) For it is
redde in the olde Teſta­mente, that the ſame Woman dyd ſo muche to
Salamon,Sala­mon. that for the great loue that he had vnto her, ſhe cauſed hym
to forſake God, and to worſhyppe Idolles. And ſhe dyd leade hym ſo muche after
her wyll, that ſhe cauſed hym to be clothed, and to weare Womans appa­rell,
ſhe cauſed hym to ſpynne, and dyd ordre and leade hym after her owne wyl, as
if he had ben a chyld. And theſe thynges whyth the wo­man dyd vnto hym, he
ſpeaketh e­uyl of al other, ſayenge yt amongeſt a thouſande women, a man ſhall
not fynde one good. And that the iniquitie of the man is better, then the
goodnes of the woman, but as I haue ſayd afore, he ſpeaketh ther of as it
dothe pleaſe hym, for it we wyll conſydre and beholde the euil dedes of the
men, we ſhall fynde [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=30) them muche
greater then thoſe of Women.

## 12\. ¶Howe the Loue of Concupyſcece, commeth to Men and Women And of the
daunger that doe chaunce and come of the ſame. ¶The .xii. Chapter.

OF the Fourthe Loue whiche is commonlye cal­led to be ena­moured, is the loue
of Concupi­ſence, whyche is when the man loueth the woman, for the pleaſure
that he truſteth to haue of her, As thoſe do cōmenly, which ſay I am enamored
of ſuch a woman: The delectacion of this loue is all in the corporall and
bo­delye [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=31)
delectacyon.

¶Saynte Thomas the ApoſtleSainte Tho­mas, ſayth that a man wold neuer loue
anye thynge if he had not truſte to haue ſome pleaſure and goodneſſe of the
ſame. How be it a man ſome tymes ſuppoſeth that thynge to be full of great
goodnes, of the which commeth euyl. Yet it ſemeth to him that loueth ſuch a
thing, that ther can none euyll come therof. And as it is ſo that euery loue
commeth by ſome delectacion corporall or intel­lectuall. The loue corporall
cōmeth & deſcendeth by the tyue corporall ſenſes, or wyttes, as is
aforeſayde. The intellectuall loue cōmeth by ye imaginacion of the
vnderſtanding. And the delecracion intelectuall is much greater, then the
corporall, ſo that all the delyte of the loue of Concupiſence is in
delectacion in­tellectuall. And therfore the loue of [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=31) Concupiſence may
not nor oughte not to be called loue.

¶Plato maketh mencyon therof ſayeng,Plato. loue of Concupiſence is not vertue
of loue, but rather vyce of lechery, when the man leueth his wyfe onely to
haue his pleaſure of her, or the woman her huſbande, for to haue profyt, this
loue is very euyll.

¶Tulle ſayth,Tulle. that perfecte loue is that whiche is not by force, nor by
feare and dread, nor for profite that a man truſteth to haue.

¶Dyogenes ſaythe that the loue of Concupiſence commeth by being Idle.Diogenes.
And that it is a greate Vyce and ſinne, the loue of Concupiſence, And agaynſte
the commaunde­mente of God, whyche ſaythe, Co­uyte not the Wyfe of thy
neygh­boure.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=32) ¶Saynte
Auſtyne ſayth,Sainte Auſtin. that the ſinne of fornycacyon is perdicion and
cleare dampnacion of the ſoule of the whyche thynge oure Lorde Ieſu chryſt
ſpeaketh in the Goſpel.Ieſu Chriſt

Qui viderit mulierem ad concupicen­dum eam iam meatus eſt in corde ſuo.

## 13\. ¶Example of the Ver­tue of Loue ¶The, xiii. Chapter.

OF the Vertue of Loue,Exam­ple, it is redde in Hiſtoryes of Rome, that the
kynge Diomebes wolde haue cauſed to cut the head from the bodye of a woman
called Fizolie, for a certaine offence, wherof ſhe was accuſed: this woman
came before the king and required him yt he wolde geue her pardon & ſpace for.
viii. daies, that ſhe might ſet all thynges in ordre, and to pro­uide [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=32) the better for
the healthe of her ſoule. And the kynge anſwered that he was contente, ſo that
ſhe wold gyue a pledge for her, that in caſe that ſhe dyd not come at the day
appoynted, that he wold cauſe to cutte of the heade of the ſayde pledge. And
the woman aunſwe­red, that ſhe was verye well con­tente.Exam­ple. And that
incontynente ſhe wolde fynde a pledge, wherof the kyng meruailed greatly, for
he had thought, that there had ben neuer a perſon in the worlde that wolde
haue pledged her. And then ſhe did ſende for a yonge man, which was of an
honeſt ſtocke, the whiche had loued her perfytlye a longe tyme, & ſhe hym, to
whom ſhe told the hole matter. And incontinēt this yong man named Arion did
rendre him ſelfe pryſoner for her, and bind him vnder the paine aforeſayde,
that in [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=33) caſe
that ſhe did not come agayne, that he was contente to loaſe hys
heade.Exam­ple. And then the ſayde woman wente home to her howſe, & made her
Teſtamente, and did bequethe her goodes, & when ye terme drewe neare, euery
mā mocked this yong man reputyng greate Folie in him: but for all that anye
man colde ſay vnto hym, he wolde not forget the loue of her. And was contente
to ſuffre deathe, for to alengthen her lyfe, he loued her ſo feruentlye. So
the daye of the terme came, in the whyche ſhe ſeinge the great loue of thys
yonge man, dyd rendre her ſelfe afore the Kynge and requyred that Arion mighte
be delyuered: & then that the Kynge ſhoulde take his pleaſure of her. The Kyng
then ſeinge the perfyte loue that was betwene them, dyd geue her pardon,
ſayenge that it weare great ſynne [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=33) to departe ſo
good and perfite loue as they had betwene them, the one to the other.

## 14\. ¶Howe Enuye is contrarye to the Vertue of Loue. And what Euuye is, And
alſo of the paine, that the enuyous man beareth in him ſelfe. ¶The .xiiii.
Chapter.

ENuye whyche is a Vyce contrary to the Vertue of Loue, is in two maners, the
Fyrſte is to be ſory for thewelthe and proſ­perytye of another Man. The
Seconde is to be Gladde for the euyll and Aduerſytye of another Man.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=34) ¶Salomon
ſaythe,Sala­mon. be not glad of the euyll that happeneth to ano­ther man, for
it doth dyſpleaſe god. And knowe ye that he that is glad of the euyll of hys
neyghboure ſhal not be vnpuneſhed.

¶Saynte Gregorye ſaythe,Saynt Gregorye, that in the world is not a greater
tour­mente and paine, then Enuye, for whe are Enuie is, there can be no loue.
And ſaythe that the greateſte vengeaunce, that thou canſte take of hym whych
beareth thee Enuie, is to do hym all the good that thou canſte.

¶Plato ſaythe,Plato, that the enuyous man, is neuer wythout ſorowe and payne,
nor the I poeryte wythoute feare and dreade.

¶Saynte Auſtyne ſaythe,Sainte Auſtin, he that hath enuy in him can loue no
man. And ſaythe, that it is berter for a man to keepe hym from the Enuye
[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=34) of hys
Kynſfolkes and Fryendes, then from the Enuye of hys Ene­myes.

¶Saynte Auſtyn ſaythe,Saint Auſtin that en­uye is to be ſorye of the felyſyete
of another man. And ſaythe that the enuyous perſon hath not onely en­uye at
greater then be but at them whyche be egali wyth hym, or worſe then he. He
hath Enuye at thoſe whyche be greater or better then he, becauſe that he is
not ſo good or ſo great as they be, he bea­reth enuye at thoſe whyche be egal
wyth hym, becauſe that he is not better or greater thē they, he hath enuye
alſo at thoſe which be worſe then he for feare that they become not ſo good as
he, wherefore he hath Enuye at all maner of folkes.

¶Orace ſaythe that the Enuyous man brenneth wythin and wyth­out,Orace.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=35) And ſaythe
that the Enuyous perſon is contente to leſe money, to do domage to and her
man.

¶Socrates ſayth that he whicheSocra­tes. beareth the veſſel of enuy ſhal haue
euerlaſting paine, the holy ſcripture maketh mencyon thereof ſayenge.

Nequam eſt oculus aduerteus faciem ſuam.

## 15\. ¶Example of Enuy. ¶The .xv. Chapter.

OF the Vyce of Enuye it is red in the olde Teſtamente,Exam­ple. that Caim
ſeing that all thynges of hys brother Abell dyd multyplie, and brynge forthe
much fruyte, he had ſo greate Enuye therat, that he kil­led the ſaid Abell his
brother, whi­che were the two fyrſt brethren vp­on the earthe, And it was the
fyrſt [[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=35)
bloud that euer was ſhedde vpon the earthe, And all was by Enuie.

## 16\. ¶Howe a man oughte to take Gladneſſe and Ioye. And of what thynge. And
what Gladneſſe or Ioye is. ¶The .xvi. Chapter.

GLadneſſe or Ioye is the effecte of Loue,Pryſ­cyan. As Priſ­cyan ſaythe, and
it is a contenting and reſte of the hearte.

¶Sidrac ſayth that the lyfe of mā is Gladnesor Ioye of hearte.Sidrac And
ſaith that for a man to reioyce hym ſelfe to much of thinges not conue­nient
is not vertue, but rather vice.

¶Saynt Auſtine ſaythe, doe not reioyce to muche in the loue of the
worlde,Sainte Auſtine for he that to muche re [...] ­ſech
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=36) hym therin,
oft times hath he uynes therof. And ſayth that there is no ryches to be
compared to the healthe of the bodye.

¶Senec ſaythe,Senec. be not proude in thy proſperytie, nor be not angrye nor
oute of pacyence, in thyne ad­uerſytie, for in thys worlde is not ſo Ryche a
man, as he that hathe ſuffyeyente. And is contente wyth that thynge that he
hathe. And ſaythe, he that wolde demaunde of me, who is a ryche man, I wolde
aunſwere that it is he that hathe ſuffycyente and is contente. And that he
whyche deſyreth alwayes more rycheſſe is poore.

¶Boece ſayth that nature is con­tente wyth a lytle thynge,Boece, if a man wyll
not do it outragious.

¶And Aryſtotyle ſaythe (to hys Dyſcyple Alexaundre,Ariſto­tyle,) what An­gre,
Rancoure, or Malyce ſoeuer [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=36) that thou haſte
in thy heate, thou ought alwayes to ſhowe mery and Ioyefull countenaunce, and
there afore all folkes.

## 17\. ¶Howe Heuyneſſe is coutrarye to Gladneſſe, And howe the Wyſe Man
oughte neuer to put any in his hearte, wherof He­uynes and Mellancolly may be
en­gendred. ¶The .xvii. Chapter.

HEuyneſſe or Pen­ſyfeneſſe, is contra­rye to Gladneſſe, after the ſayenge of
Macrobyus, wher­of there is thre ma­ners and ſortes.Macro bius The fyrſt is
when the perſon gyueth hymſelfe more thought and ſorowe for anye thing
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=37) then he
ought to do, and this may be called penſyfenes. The ſeconde is, when the
perſon nother dothe, nor ſaith, nor thinketh any thinge, whych is ferme and
ſtedfaſt, but is lyke a dead bodye. And therby fal­leth in Idlenes whych is a
greate vyce. The thyrd is for certaine imagynacyous, when the perſon mo­ueth
hym ſelfe, with greate and ex­ceſſyfe angre, wrathe & Ire, which is called
Mellanchollie, wherof cō ­meth diſpeayre, which is the grea­teſt vyce that
can be, as the Phylo­ſopher dothe ſaye, In penſyfenes or heuines, be engendred
many vi­ces. And amongeſt all other, is en­gendred ſlothe and Idleneſſe, for
when the perſon is penſiſe and ſtill of Idleneſſe, it ſemeth that he ca­reth
for nothynge.

¶Salomon ſaith,Sala­mon. that in like caſe as golde is aſſayed and proued in
[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=37) the
fournaſſe, ſo the man is aſtay­ed and proued in aduerſytits that come vnto
hym.

¶Plato ſaith that the man which hath his health,Plato. oughthe neuer to be
penſyfe and heauie in his heart. for anye maner of aduerſytie, that may
chaunce vnto hym but ought alwayes to be of good comfort and arme him ſelfe
with pacyence.

¶Socrates ſaythe that he whichSocrates. is not angrie nor vexed for any
ad­uerfytye that maye chaunce vnto hym, he gyueth hym ſelfe muche reſte, and
doth illuminate his ſeen­ces or wyttes. And ſaythe that he is penſyfe &
ſorowfull whiche hath nothynge, but more penſife and ſorowefull is he, whyche
was wonte to haue, and hathe nothinge. And that he is happy, tha is not wonte
to haue proſperytye, for he hath no penſyfeneſſe in hym.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=38)

## 18\. ¶Howe Mellancholly is daungerous And what is Mellanchollye, And howe
is cauſeth manye to fall in greate trauayle, pay­nes and miſeryes, and
conſeqently, in greate peuertie. ¶The .xviii. Chapter.

MEllanchollye is a thynge great­lye to be hated of that perſon which is
entangled and wrap­ped therin, for of Mellanchol­lye commeth pouertye,
afflyctyon and deſperacyon, wherof ſpeaketh Saynte Bernarde ſayenge,S,
bernard, I had leuer dye, then to ſuffre my ſelfe to [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=38) fall in
Mellanchollye.

¶Senec ſaythe Mellanchollye is death,Senec and the Sepulchre or graue of the
lyfe of man, And ſaythe for anye thynge that maye happen or chaunce vnto thee,
be not Mellan­chollye nor penſyfe. And if thou can not keepe thee from it, yet
doe not ſhewe in dede nor in worde, for it belongeth not to a vertuous man, to
ſhowe it him ſelfe Melancholly, for no maner of aduerſytie that maye happen
vnto hym, for he that is Mellanchollye and penſyfe for his aduerſities he
dowbleth them, but a man oughte to conſydre that after aduerſytie commeth
conſola­cyon and proſperytie. And he that dothe the contrary is
Mellanchol­lye, and then Idlenes dothe entre into hym, And ſo by the euyll
thou­ghtes that he hathe beinge Idle,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=39) he falleth
ſo farre in Sloth, that he careth for nothynge nor nothynge wold do but ſtepe.
And thou ought to knowe, that the perſon beynge Idle, may fall verye ſoone
into ma­ny vyces, that is to ſay, to dyſtroye hys bodye, and dampue hys ſoule,
by euil cogytacions and thoughtes that may come therof.

Senec ſaythe,Senec, that Idlenes is confuſyon of the vnderſtandynge and wytte
of the perſon, the gate of penſyueneſſe, and mother of pouertye.

¶Salamon ſaythe,Sala­mon, do not loue to ſleepe to muche, for feare that
pouertie do not reygne ouer thee.

¶Aryſtotyle ſaythe,Ariſto­tyle, that ſlepe bringeth much inconuenyence.

¶And Hermes ſayth,Her­mes, bleſſed is he that vſeth good occupacyons in al hys
tyme, And ſayth that the Idle and ſlouthfull perſon, putteth al [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=39) his buſines at
aduenture, & ſaithe that Fortune and aduenture hel­peth that man whyche wyll
helpe hym ſelfe, And the Idle and ſlouth full perſone, is contrarye to hym
ſelfe.

¶Socrates ſaythe,Socra­tes, that there be Syxe maner of folkes, whyche
all­wayes is in Penſyfenes and Mel­lanchollye. The Fyrſte maner is of hym that
can not forget iniuryes done or ſayde vnto hym. The Se­conde is of the Enuyous
perſons whyche dwelleth and is conuer­ſante wyth folkes newly come to Ryches.
The Thyrde is of hym, which hath ben in the place where other haue gotten
muche profyte, and cold not profite ther hym ſelfe. The Fourth maner is of him
whi­the ſomtyme was Ryche and now is Poore.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=40) The Fyfthe
is of hym whyche de­ſyreth and enforſeth hym ſelfe to come to hygher eſtate
and honour then is mete and conuenyente for hym. The Syxte is of hym, whych
hathe dwelled longe tyme wyth a wyſe man & hath nothynge lerned

¶Homer ſaythe that by greate dy­lygence,Homer a man commeth to perfec­cyon.
And that dylygence is mo­ther of Rycheſſe, and health of bo­dye, and ſaluacyon
of ſoule. And Mellancholly and Idlenes is con­trarye.

¶Salomon makethe mencyon therof in the Byble,Sala­mon, ſayenge.

Robuſti ſemper in abundatia, omnis autem piger in egeſtate erit.

## 19\. ¶Example of Heauyneſſe, or Penſyueneſſe. ¶The .xix. Chapter.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=40) OF
Heauyneſſe or Pen­ſyteneſſe,Exam­ple. it is redde in the Booke of Kynge
A­lexandre, that whē the ſayde Kynge Alexandre was deade: hys Barons dyd
beare hym in a Chaſe of golde to the Se­puiture or buryeng. And there was
manye Philoſophers, whych went after the bodye wepynge, and ha­uynge greate
Heauyneſſe. And a­mongeſt all other there was one that weoed verye fore
ſayenge. O good Lorde, thoſe that neuer dyd ſee our Kyng Alexandre did doubt
and feare him.Exam­ple And now thoſe that doe ſee hym dothe nothing regard
him. And another cried with great Heauyneſſe. O cruell death whych doubteth
nothyng, nor ſpareth no­thyng, and which hath taken from vs that man whych
gouerned and [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=41)
ruled all the worlde,Excla­maciōs and the other Phyloſophers dyd crye, O
iuſtyce ſet aparte. O faythfulneſſe loſte. O courtoſye chaſed awaye. O
gladneſſe and ioye exyled. O valilante­neſſe fledde awaye. O gentleneſſe
deſtroyed. And in thys maner they dyd beare hym to the Sepul­ture, or buryenge
wyth greate ſo­rowe, Heauyneſſe, or Penſyfeneſſe, and Mellancholye.

## 20\. ¶Howe the Vertue of Peace oughte to be mayntayned and keepte. And of
the greate good­neſſe that commeth of the ſame, And what peace is. ¶The .xx.
Chapter.

PEace (as ſaythe Saynt Bernarde) is pureneſſe of vnderſtanding,S. ber­narde.
ſym­plenes [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=41) of hearte
quietnes and reſte of courage, Peace of loue. And company or felowſhyp of
charytie.

¶Senec ſaythe,Senec, that Peace is a­boue all the goodneſſe and richeſſe of
thys worlde. And ſaythe that he that hath not Peace with him. ought to bye it.

The prophete Eſaie ſaith,E [...] that the euyll man doth not eare for Peace.

¶Plato ſaythe, [...] haue Peace  [...] the Vertues, and warre agaynſte the
Vyces.

¶Saynte Auſtyne ſaythe,Say [...] Auſten that in lyke caſe as Pride, Diſcencion
and Angre diſtroyeth a houſe, ſo Peace and Loue doth nouryſhe it.a wiſe man, A
wiſe man ſayth thus, if thou wylt haue Peace with thee, ſubmitte thy ſelfe
alwaies to Reaſon.

¶The Mayſter of the Sentence ſaithe,Maſter of the ſentēce that he is madde,
that is [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=42) in
Peace and dothe ſeeke Warre. And ſaythe that Peace cauſethe good to come. And
Warre dyſtroy­eth it.

¶Orace ſaythe,Orace, that hee whyche dothe gouerne hys wyll in Peace,
gouerneth a greater Realme, then he did gouerne from the Eaſte vn­to the
Weſte.

¶Sidrac ſaythe,Sidrac that they be ve­rye happye, whiche dothe loue and ſeke
Peace. And ſaythe flye and eſ­chewe thoſe places, wheare thou thynkeſt that
there ſhalbe debate and decencyon, for to ſtryue wyth hym that is egall and as
good as thou, it is. Folye to ſtryue againſte thy better, it is greate
madneſſe. And to ſtryue agaynſte one worſe then thou arte, it is ſhame.

¶Saynte Paule maketh mency on of thys, [...]aul  [...]ma, ſayenge.

Non in contētione et emulatione. &c.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=42)

## 21\. ¶Howe Ire is contrarye to Peace, and what Ire is, And howe it dothe
deſtroye and waſte the Vertues and bodyes of them that he entangled wyth the
ſame. And of the euyll that dothe come of it. ¶The .xxi. Chapter.

IRe is a Vice contrary to the ver­tue of Peace, whereof the Phyloſopher
Aryſtotyle dothe ſpeake ſayenge,Ariſto­tyle, that Ire or Wrathe is a troublyng
of the corage, aleaſyng and dyſtroy enge of bloud, whyche flyeth to the hearte
to thyntente to venge hym of Ire. And when the bloud fynd­eth the hearte,
there it dothe reſte
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=43) all
troubeled. And afterwarde is conuerted into malice and hatred. And of theſe
three Vyces, that is to ſaye, Iudygnacyon, Ire, and Hatred, do diſcend and
come Diſ­corde and Warre.

¶Salomon ſaythe,Sala­mon, that when a Fole is moued and troubled, dothe
incontynent ſhewe hys Ire: but he that doth couer and kepe cloſe Ire is a wyfe
man Sand & lead is ve­rye weyghtye and heauye, but the Ire of a Fole is muche
more heauie and weyghtye.

¶Caſiodore ſaythe,Caſio­dore, that Ire is mother of all other Vyces.

¶Priſcian ſayth that the greateſt enemye that thou haſte,Pri [...]ci­a [...]
or canſte haue in thys woulde, is Ire when thou haſte it in thee.

¶Cato ſaythe,Cato. that a man is na­turally inclyned to be moued with Ire, but
to perſeuer and abyde in [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=43) the ſame doth
paſſe nature, and cō meth of the deuill, & therfore euerie man ought to
eſchewe it as muche as he can.

¶Ariſtotyle ſayth that Ire is theAriſto­tyle, corruptynge and dyſtroyenge of
all vertues.

¶Tulle ſaith that a man ought to be very ſlowe,Tulle, and lothe to be mo­ued
with Ire, and verye redye to mercye, ferme and ſtedfaſte in ad­uerſites, And
wyſe and moderate in his proſperities.

¶Senec ſayth,Senec that Ire is incontinente quenched and deade in a Wyſe man.

¶Saynte Iames ſaythe,S. Ia­mes, that a man oughte to be prompte and redye to
heare, ſlowe to aunſwere, & ought not lyghtlie to be angred and moued with
Ire.

¶Saynte Auſtyne ſaithe,S, Au­ſtyn, if thou
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=44) be moued
wyth Ire and wrathe a­gaynſte anie man, And wyll therof take vengeaunce,
remytte all vnto God.

¶Saynte Gregorye ſaythe that there is three remedyes agaynſte the vice of
Ire,Saynt Gregorye, that is to ſay, meke & gentle aunſwere, Alſo for a mā to
hold hys peace or to geue fewe wordes and the thyrde is, to de­parte oute of
the preſence of hym that is moued wyth Ire.

¶Varro ſaythe that Rycheſſe can not abyde and indure wyth hym whyche in full
of Ire and wrathe, And ſayth kepe thee wel from Ire, for it dyſtroyeth reaſon,
and trou­bleth the vnderſtandyng.

¶Tulle ſaithe,Tulle, eſchwe Ire aſmuch as thou canſte, for it wyll not ſuffre
thee to ſee the ende of thynges, & ſaythe that he is in greate reſte, that
neuer or verye ſeldome, dothe [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=44) moue hym ſelfe
wyth Ire and wra­the, And ſaythe, when thou ſhalte ſee anye thynge, imagined
againſt thee, buſie thy ſelfe to tourne it to thy will and pleaſure, more by
gen­tle wordes fayre meanes, and equitie then by vengeaunce, for venge­aunce
is damnable to both parties & equytie is profytable to bothe.

¶Plato ſaithe,Plato. that when a man is inflamed wyth Ire, he is like to a
houſe ſet on fyre, for by the greate violence of the fire, a man can no, ther
heare nor ſee. And in like caſe as a Shippe hauynge a contrarie winde, can not
well be gouerned, ſo is the corage of man, whan he is inflamed wyth Ire, and
can not be well gouerned, And withoute doubte, Ire is a thynge ſo verye e­uill
and daungerous, that a lytle flame or ſparke, maketh a greate fire, yt is to
ſaie, of a litle Ire doth
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=45) there come
muche euill. And as we do ſe cōmonly, the women be more angry & Irefull then
the men. And the ſicke ſooner then the hole. And the yong people ſoner then
the old, by this it may be thought yt Ire cō ­meth of a peruerſe & an euil
corage.

¶Saint Auguſtine ſaithe,S. Au­ſtyn. that in lyke caſe as the euyll wine doth
corrupte the veſſell wherein it is putte, ſo Ire dothe corrupte the bodye of
the man, if it doe tarye there from one daye to another.

And therfore Saynt Paule ſaith.Paule Ephe, iiii, c.

Sol non occidat ſuper iracundiam veſtram.

## 22\. ¶Example of Ire. ¶The .xxii. Chapter.

OF the vice of Ire,Exam­ple it is redde in the old Teſtament, that Dauid the
prophete beinge in greate loue wyth Barſabe, wife [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=45) of Vrye, dyd
beget a chylde of the ſayde Barſave. And when he dyd ſee that ſhe was with
chyld, he did ſende for her huſbande Vrye, the whyche was at the beſegynge of
a certayne towne, whyche the ſaid king Dauid cauſed to be beſyeged. And when
the ſayde Vrye came, he was informed of the ſayde kyng Dauid, yt the child
wherwyth hys wyfe Barſabe was greate, was of hys begettynge. And ſo the ſayde
Vrye dyd thynke and beleue none other, but that it was hys owne, but when Vrye
came amon­geſt his frendes, they ſhewed hym how y• king Dauyd had gouerned hys
wyfe, wherwyth he was ſore dyſpleaſed bothe agaynſte Kynge Dauyd, and alſo
agaynſte Barſa­be hyswyfe.Exam­ple, And after that tyme wolde company no more
with her. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=46)
And when Dauid vnderſtode that the ſayde Vrye had forſaken hys wyfe, he was ſo
ful of Ire and wra­the in his hearte, that he did write a Letter to the
Conſtable of the Hoſte, wherein Vrye was, whyche Letter dyd contayne, that he
ſhold put Vrye ſo farre forthe in the bat­taile, that he ſhoulde be ſlaine.
And ſo it was done.

## 23\. ¶Of Chaſtytie, and howe ſhe oughte to be wyth holden, obſerued and
kepte, and the perylles that the wyſe ſhoulde flye, for feare to leaſe ſuch
Vertue. ¶The .xxiii. Chapter.

CHaſtytie.Tulle. (As Tulle ſaythe,) is a Vertue by the whych the wil & deſyre
of the fleſſhe [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=46) and of Lecherye
is refrayned and ſubdued. And the perſon that is chaſte, maye be compared to
the Turtyll Doue, the whyche for no maner of thynge, wyll make a faute or
offence to her felowe, but wyll kepe her onely vnto hym.

¶Saynte Hierome ſaythe,S, Hic rome, that is ſoone loſte and deſtroyed in him
which wil not refraine his tongue, hys eyes, and hys harte. In the Summe of
Vyces, it is redde, that he whyche wyll haue perfyte Cha­ſtytye in hym, he
muſte keepe hym ſelfe pryncypallye from ſyxe thyn­ges, that is to ſaye, from
to muche and exceſſyfe Eatynge, and Prince­kynge, wherof is redde, in the lyfe
of Holye Fathers,Exam­ple that in lyke caſe as it is impoſſyble, to wythholde
the fire, that it do make no flambe, after that it is well lyghted, ſo it is
impoſſyble to refrayne the wil and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=47) the deſyre
of Lecherye, after that the bodye is replete and full of de­lycious meates and
drynckes. The Seconde thynge whyche is neceſ­ſary, to kepe Chaſtytie is, that
the perſon be not Idle.

¶For Ouide ſayth,Ouide that Lecherye dyeth in hym whyche is not Idle, the
thyrde thynge is that the man and the woman be not conuerſant togyther.

¶For Saynte Bernarde ſaethe,S, ber­narde, that the man and the woman to be
famylyer togyther, and to kepe them from ſynne, is a greater and a harder
thynge, then to cauſe the dead bodyes to ryſe agayne to life. The fourthe
thynge is, not to be conuerſante wyth Harlottes and perſons of vycyous
lyuinge. The fyfte is, not to haunte or to goo to thoſe places where commonly
the ſynne of Lecherye is vſed.

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=47) ¶For
Saynte Sylueſtre ſaythe,S, ſil­ueſtre, that the ſynne of Lecherye hathe the
maner of the Ape-whych doth all thynges that he ſeeth done a­fore hym. The
ſyxte is, to kepe hym that he doe not haunte to much create feſtes and
bankets, for there is moſte commonlye muche daun­ſynge and ſyngynge, manye
euyl­and vayne wordes ſpoken, and manye wanton counte naunces, whyche dothe
engendre the Vyce of Lecherye, by the pleaſure and delyght that the perſon
doth take therein, I ſaye that the delyght and pleaſure whyche is in good
maner, and in honeſtye, is much to be prai­ſed, but the delyghte and pleaſure,
that the perſō doth take therein, for an euill intente is to be hated and
abhorred.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=48)

## 24\. ¶Example of the Vertue of Chaſtytye, ¶The .xxiiii. Chapter.

IN the lyfe of Holye Fa­thers it is redde, tou, chynge the Vertue of
Chaſtytye, that there was a certayne Nunne, whyche was yong and very fayre, of
whom a Noble man dwellynge therby, was meruaylous ſore Enamoured of. Aud
deſyred her manye diuerſe tymes, that ſhe wolde conſent that he might haue hys
pleaſure of her, but thys ſayde Nunne wold neuer conſente vnto hym. And
refuſed hym wyth greate abhomynacyon, then thys Noble man ſeinge that by no
maner of fayre meanes be cold obtaine his purpoſe, by reaſon whereof he was
full hf Heauyneſſe, and Mellanchollye, dyd purpoſe in hys mynde, to take her
by force.Exam­ple, And therupon he came to the Ab­bey [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=48) where this Nunne
was. And there dyd take her by Force and Vyolence, intendynge to leade her
home wyth hym vnto hys Place. And when this Nūne dyd ſe that ſhe coulde not
obtayne mercye and grace of hym. And that there was no remedye nor no help,
and reſiſt­enge to be had, ſhe demaunded of hym, what was the cauſe that he
had ſuch fauoure and loue vnto her more then to other? For there is (ſayde
ſhe,) manye better and fay­rer in thys Abbey then I am. And thys Noble man
aunſwered her ſayeng, I am ſo enamoured of you, that it ſemeth me, that there
is ne­uer a Woman in thys world, that hath ſo fayre Eyes as ye haue. And that
is the cauſe, that I haue ſuch Loue vnto you. Wherfore purpoſe youre ſelfe to
come wyth me. And then ſhe ſeinge, that there was no
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=49) remedye but
that ſhe ſhoulde goo wyth hym, ſhe deſyred hym that it wolde pleaſe hym to
lette her go in to her Chambre to fetch certayne ſtuffe that ſhe had
there.Exam­ple, And that ſhe wolde come to hym agayne in­contynente, thys
noble man ſayde go youre wayes and tarye not, for here I wyl tarye for you.
And then ſhe wente into her Chambre and wyth a knyfe dyd take bothe her eyes
oute of her heade. And thys done, ſhe came out of her Chambre all bloudye, and
dyd preſente her ſelfe as well as ſhe could afore this Lorde, as ſhe had
promyſed hym. And when thys Lorde dyd ſee her thus dyffygured, and that the
eyes were oute of her heade. He depar­ted from her, as a man out of hys wytte.
And the ſayde Nunne dyd cōtinue ſtil in the Abbey, and was better contente
that ſhe had loſte [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=49) her Eyes, then
to haue had loſte her Vergynytye.

## 25\. ¶Howe Lecherye is contrarye to Chaſtytie. And in howe many ſor­tes it
is deuyded, then is ſhew­ed the daungers that come therof, as wel to the
bo­dyes of men, as to theyr Soules. ¶The .xxv. Chapter.

LEchery is a Vice contrarye to the Vertue of Chaſtitye. And as it is red in
the ſumme of Vices there be foure maners & ſortes of the ſame. The Fyrſte is
fornicaſyon, and that is when the man and the woman beynge not maryed, do
medle fleſhly togither.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=50) The Seconde
is Adulterye, and it is when as wel the one as the o­ther be Maryed. The
Thyrde is when a man dothe meddle fleſſh­lye wyth anye of hys kynſwomen. The
Fourthe maner is ſuche, that it oughte not to be named, for it is ſo vyle, ſo
abhomynable and great a ſynne.

¶Saynte Gregorye ſaythe,S, gre, gory, that Lecherye conſumeth and deſtroy­eth
the bodye, and cauſeth a man to leaſe hys good name, dampneth hys Soule,
offendeth the perſon, and offendeth God. And nowe a daies the world is greatly
inclined to the ſinne of Lecherye,

¶Senec ſaythe,Senec that he woulde that all Lecherous perſons ſhould be ſtoned
to deathe, as they were in the olde tyme, to the entent that a man myghte
beware and keepe hym ſelfe the better from it. And [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=50) ſaith yt ableit
yt the greateſt delight & pleaſure of this worlde is Lechery. Yet
neuertheleſſe if thou dowel conſydre the ende and the begyn, nynge of the ſame
ſynne, thou ſhall fynd nothynge therein but all myſ­chyefe and wretchedneſſe.

¶Salomon ſaythe,Sala­mon, ſo lytle tyme and ſpace as a man myghte beare fyre
in hys Boſome wythout bren­nynge of hym ſelfe. So lytle ſpace myght not a man
be amongeſt wo­men wythout ſynne. And ſaythe that ofte tymes Lecherous
Per­ſons do commyt Lecherie by theyr ſyghte.

¶Orace ſaythe,Orace, that Rycheſſe doe bryng Warre, & Women doe bryng
Lecherye.

¶Aryſtotyle ſaithe, beleue ſtedfaſt­lye that Lecherye dyſtroyeth the body,
ſhortneth the lyfe, corrupteth the Vertues, breaketh Gods ſawe,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=51) onſumeth the
Rycheſſe, taketh a­way the ſtrength, killeth the ſoule, dyſtroyeth, the ſyght,
bryngeth the perſon to olde age. And ſometyme doth make hym paralytike.

¶Ouyde ſaythe,Ouide, that the Leche­rous perſon beinge yonge dothe ſynne, but
the olde Lechoure doth dote,. For an olde Lecherous per­ſon when he can not
doe the dede, yet dothe he take pleaſure in diſhoneſt touchynges. And ſath
that in battaile and warre be men ſtroken wyth ſperes and ſwerdes. And in
peace they be ſtroke wyth euyl wor­des, and thoughtes.

¶Hermes ſaithe,Her­mes, that the Vyce of Lechery doth quen ſhe al Vertues. And
that there is nothynge more mortall to mankind then Lechery, except it be
amongeſt thoſe perſons where it is lawful, as betwene the man and his wyfe, in
truſt to haue [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=51) Chyldren.S,
gr­gory,

¶Saynt Gregorye ſayth, ſpeking of Lecherye in a certayne hyſtorye. O Fyre of
Lecherye, wherof the mouthe is Glotonye, the flame is Pryde, the ſperkles be
corrupt wor­des, the Smoke is euyll name, the Aſſhes be pouerty, the Ende is
the tormente and payne of Hell.

¶Wherof Saynt Peter ſpeaketh ſayenge.ii, Pe­ter, iii,

¶Voluptatem exiſtimantes diei deliciam coinquinationes et macu le delicis
affluentes in cōniis ſuis lux vriantes vobiſcom.

## 26\. ¶Of Force or Strengthe. And what it is. The maners and comparyſons of
the ſame, And who maye be cal­led Stronge. And of thoſe alſo which be alwaies
Stronge. ¶The .xxvi. Chapter.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=52) FOrce or
Strengthe, after the ſayenge of Macrobyus,Macrobius, is in three maners and
ſortes. The Fyrſte is to be Stronge by Nature, the whyche thynge is no Vertue.
The Second is not to Fere and Dread peryllous, and daūgerous things. And the
Third is Pacience, theſe two maners be good,

¶Tulle ſaythe,Tulle, thou oughte to be ſtrong in Battaile, And to ſuſtaine and
ſuffre pacyentlye the aduerſy­ties, and euyle that come vnto the.

¶Senec ſaythe, that the man is loued and praiſed for hys Loyaltie or
Faythfulneſſe,Senec and for his Val­liauntneſſe.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=52) ¶Socrates
ſaythe,Socrates, that ſometime it is better to  [...]tye, then to dye,
not­wythſtandynge thee, that Hermes ſayth,Her­mes, that he dyd ſee a Knyghte,
whyche was reputed verye hardy, thou doeſte flye from Honorable deathe, to
lyue with ſhame and re­buke.

And Socrates ſaith,Socrates, that there is Valliantneſſe in dyuers and ma­nye
ſortes and maners, that is to ſaye of thoſe whyche be hardie and Vallyante,
when they be conſtray­ned other to fight or to dy, as thoſe whyche doe fyghte
vpon the Sea in theyr Shyppes. And this Valliantneſſe is by force and
conſtraint Another maner there is, that ſom­tyme a man is hardye and Vally
ante, as when that he knoweth that he hath the ayde and compa­nye of other. Of
other therbe, whi­che he hardye and Vallyant when
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=53) they knowe,
yt thoſe agaynſte whō they doe ſtryue, be Cowardes and ferefull, of other
there be, whych be ſtourdye and hardy in all thynges, and feareth nothynge.
And thys is a beaſtlye hardyneſſe. And alſo all the other be not perfyte. The
Fyrſte maner is perfyte and Ver­tuous, as when a man is Hardye and Vallyaunte
to flye ſhame and dyſhonoure. And to do no domage nor outrage to anye perſon,
nother in body nor goodes. And alſo to de­fende hys Countrey.

¶Socrates ſaythe,Socrates, that the Ver­tue of Force or Strength, maketh the
man pardurable when he doth put hys ſtrengthe to reſyſte Vyces, to mayntayne
reaſon and Iuſtice, And not to be proude in his proſperytyes. And alſo to
Fyghte againſt the deſyres of the fleſſhe.

¶Saynte Iohn Euangelyſt ſaith [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=53) in hys fyrſte
Epyſtle.

¶Scribo vobis inuenes quoneam

Iohn euāge lyſte.

fortes eſtis verbum dei manet et in lyſte. vobis et viciſtis malignum.

## 27\. ¶Howe Pacience cauſeth a man to beare eaſelye the Paines and Trauayles
of this worlde, And howe many ſortes there be of Pacience. ¶The .xxvii.
Chapter.

PAcyence is a Vertue by the whiche we ſuf­fre in our heartes the aduerſytyes
and euil­les, that be done and ſaide vnto vs, wher­of the Maiſter of Sentence
dothe ſpeake ſaieng,maſter of ſen­tenet. the vertu of pacience is remedye
agaynſt al aduerſyties.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=54) And ſayth,
that all the euylles  [...] aduerſytyes, that thou ſhalt haue ſhall be more
lyghte and eaſye to beare and ſuffre if thou haue pacy­ence, thou ſhalte not
be Pacyente ſo longe as thou arte Couetous.

¶Aryſtotyle ſaythe,Ariſto­tyle, that the man maye be prayſed, and maye be
kno­wen in three maners and ſortes.

The Pacyente is knowen in hys aduerſytyes & trybulacyons. The Hardye and
Vallyante manne is knowen in the Warres, and Bat­taylies. And the Frende is
knowen at nede.

¶Socrates ſaythe,Socra­tes, lette vs ſuffre and take in Pacyence that thynge
whyche Fortune dothe geue vs, for it is great Folye to ſtriue again­ſte it.

¶Salomon ſaythe,Salo­men, that it is bet­ter to be pacyent, then to be ſtrong,
for he that is Pacyente, gouerneth [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=54) hym ſelfe by
greate wyſdome, as Iob dyd, whyche had greate Pa­cyence in all hys
aduerſytyes. And ſaythe that the ſtrongeſt man that is, is he whych can couer
and kepe ſecrete hys pouertye.

¶Senec ſaythe,Senec that there is two maner of Pacyence in this worlde, the
one is to ſuffre and endure Pa­cyentlye the aduerſytyes and try­bulacyons that
a man hath. The other is, to refrayne, & to abſtayne from hys deſyres and
wyll. And ſaythe alſo that the Vertue of Pa­cience dothe ordre and keepe the
tongue.

## 28\. ¶Howe that Feare and Dread, be contrary to Strengthe and
Vally­antneſſe, And what Feare is and who thoſe be that be Fearefull. And for
what cauſe. ¶The .xxviii. Chapter.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=55) FEare and
Dread be Vyces, contrarye to Strength and Valliauntnes. And they be three
maners, af­ter the ſayeng of Ptholome.Ptho­lome, The Fyrſte is to be fearful
in hys corage wythoute anye occaſyon, but onely by Imagynacion. And thys is
properlye called Feare. The Seconde is to Feare and Dreade a thynge more then
nede is. And that is a greate vilenes and ſhame. And the Thyrde is, not to be
able by Rea­ſon of Febleneſſe of Corage, to ſuf­fre aduerſytyes. And thys is
called Febleneſſe, whan the manne is vile of hearte, which is to great a vyce.
Thys manne whyche is ſo vyle of hearte, and ſo Fearefull, maye be [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=55) compared to the
Hare, whyche is the moſte Fearefull Beaſte of all o­ther, for the Hare hath
the condicyon, that when ſhe is layde in the wode at her eaſe, if ſhe do but
heare the leaues of the trees ſhake, ſhe dothe ronne awaye for Feare, ma­nye
ther be that doe reſemble the Hare in this maner, which hath ſo vile and feble
hearte, that for a ly­tle or nothynge they be abaſſhed & afrayde.

¶Salomon ſaythe that the one of the cauſes whych cauſeth the man to be
feareful,Salomon, is the knowledg that he hathe to be reproued of his euyll
workes.

¶Tulle ſaithe,Tulle, wilt thou be wyth­out feare, do wel, and ſpeake but
ly­tle. And ſaithe that it is a more cruel thing to feare death, then to die.
And that the remedy of a feble and vyle hearte, is not to feare Death.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=56) ¶Cato
ſaythe,Cato, doe not feare the laſte ende of the Lyfe, for he that dothe not
regarde, but dyſpraiſeth the ende of the lyfe, he feareth not deathe.

¶Pythagoras ſaythe that deathe can not be boughte,Pitha­goras, nor no manne
oughte to feare it, but ſuch as haue done muche iniquytye, and feareth to be
dampned for theyr Vyces af­ter theyr deathe. And ſaythe that the doubte and
feare of deathe, is verye well manyfeſte, for by it is made tranſmutacyon of
the tran­ſytorye and fynall worlde, to the e­uerlaſtynge and perpetuall world.
Alſo of the worlde of Folye and vanytye, to the world of Wiſdome Truethe, and
of Reaſon, of the world of payne and loboure, to the world of conſolacyon and
of felycy­tie. And ſaythe, that it is greate meruayle of thoſe whych feare and
[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=56) doubte
death. And do alwaies contrarye to theyr ſaluacyon. And ſai­th, that he whych
lyueth well and vertuouſlye in thys worlde, ought to truſte to make his ende
well.

And ſaithe alſo that death is good bothe to good and euyll men. To the good
men, to the intente that they maye haue the rewarde of theyr goodneſſe. And to
the euyll, that they maye commytte no more ſynne, nor doe no more euxll to the
people, And ſaythe that it is better dye, then lyue wyth ſhame. And therfore
he ſayd vnto a man which dyd flye from the Battayle. Thou doeſt euyll to flye
from honorable deathe, for to liue wyth rebuke and ſhame.

¶Socrates ſayth,Socrates, that he dyd ſee hys wyfe weepe, when he was ta­ken
oute of Pryſon to be led to his death. And he ſayd vnto her, wher
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=57) fore doeſte
thou weepe myne owne wyfe. And ſhe aunſwered, haue not I a good cauſe to
weepe, when I ſee you ledde to deathe with great wronge, and wythoute cauſe.
And then he aunſwered that the man ought not to feare deathe, for there is no
maner of payne or bitterneſſe in it, but the feare that a man hath therof. A
wyſe man beinge ſycke in his bedde, cauſed hys Sonne to come afore hym, that
hee myghte talke wyth hym of Deathe. And ſayde vnto hym, my Sonne haue
abſtynence wyth thee, and refraine thy wyll, for if thou dyſprayſe the worlde,
and the dyuers chaunces therof that euery day doth ronne & happen in
abſtraynge from thoſe thynges which God hath prohibi­ted, thou ſhalte deſyre
none other thynge but death, Sone ſpeke all­wayes of God, and he ſhall put in
[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=57) thy mouth
good wordes. Sonne doe not put thy loue in thys world, for it is tranſytorye,
and deceyueth all thoſe whyche do put theyr truſt in it. Sonne ſuffiſe thy
ſelfe, and be content with that thyng that god hath geuen thee, And do not
coueit the goodes of other men. Sonne vſe temperaūce in thy lyuyng. And be
conuerſaunte with wyſe folkes, And ſo thou ſhalte gette wyſdome, be meke
humble, and be no mocker, diſpraiſe no man, and do not ſpeake to much, for I
haue repent me more for my large and to much ſpeaking, then I haue for holdyng
my peace, or for lytle ſpeaking. Sonne I pray the beware the cock do not wake
erlier in ye morning then thou, doubt & feare god, & beware of vainglory, if
thou haue any ſcience, & do not beſtowe it in good vſes, it ſhall do the more
domage & hurte then profyte.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=58) Beware that
thou ſpeake no vaine and vnprofytable wordes, be not prowde for anye maner of
Ryches, And doe not dyſpayre for any ma­ner of aduerſities that may chaūce
vnto thee.

¶Socrates ſaythe that deathe flyeth alwayes from hym,Socra­tes, whyche doe not
feare it. And is alwayes nere to hym, whyche dothe feare and doubte it. And
ſaythe in ano­ther place, that thyng whych thou can not eſchew, ſuſtaine and
ſuffre it Pacyentlye.

¶Saynte Auſtyne ſaythe,Saynt A [...] that there is nothyng ſo ſure as death,
for Deathe hathe no mercye of the Poore, nor beareth no honoure to the Ryche,
And ſo ſpareth no ma­ner of folkes.

¶Hermes ſayth,Her­mes, that deathe is as the ſtroake of an Arrowe, And the
lyfe of a man is in lyke caſe as the [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=58) ſtroke, whych
tarieth a good ſpace or it come. Againſt the feare to die, ſyxe thynges doe
aſſure vs. The fyrſte is the death of the bodye, by the whyche euerye man is
ryghte ſure to paſſe. The ſeconde is that deathe maketh ende in all thinges of
thys worlde. The Thyrde is, the neceſſytye to dye. The fourthe is, that we ſee
other dye afore vs. The fyfthe is, that God hym ſelfe dyd dye. The ſyxte is,
euerlaſtinge lyfe that commeth after thys.

¶Salomon maketh mencion ther of ſayenge.Salomon,

¶Memor eſto quoniam non tardabit mors.

## 29\. ¶Of Suertye, and howe manye ma­ners there is therof. And howe Feare
and Suertie do ſtriue togyther by dyuers Languages. ¶The .xxix. Chapter.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=59) SVertye is
not to doubte the doma­ges & hurtes, that maye come in the ende of thinges
be­gon. And there is two maner of Suerties. The one is of Folye, as he whyche
goeth to fyghte agaynſte hys Enemyes na­ked wythout harneſſe, or he which
feareth not to ſleepe by venymous beaſtes, the other is of wyt and of vertues.
The offyce of Suertie is to giue comforte, and reſyſte euyll fortunes, which
come vnto the mā, for a man ought to truſt, that goodnes and proſperitie ſhal
come after the aduerſyties.

¶Orace ſaith,Orace that he which doth fyxe hys hearte in goodneſſe in his
[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=59)
proſperytyes, ſhalbe ſure in his ad­uerſytyes. Againſte thys Vertue of
Suertye, dothe ſtryue oft tymes, Feare in thys maner. Feare ſaythe to the man:
thou ſhalte dye. Suer­tye aunſwerethe, it is a naturall thynge and no payne, I
dyd come into thys worlde vndre ſuche coue­naunt, that I ſhould go out of it
a­gain, the lyfe of the man is but a pilgrimage, when he hath gone farre
inoughe, he muſte retourne, it is a greate Folie and madneſſe to feare that
thynge, whyche can not be eſ­chewed.

¶Lucan ſaithe,Lucan that Death is the laſte payne, & therfore a man ought not
to feare it, and ſaith that death is the laſt terme and ende of al thinges.

¶Senec ſayth,Senec, that he which pro­longeth his lyfe, yet for all that he
can not eſcape from deathe. Feare
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=60) ſayth thou
ſhal die. Suertie aunſ­wereth, I am not the fyrſte nor the laſte. For there be
manye gone a­fore me. And all the other ſhal fo­lowe me, it is the ende of
mankind. There is nothynge that greueth, which cōmeth but once, for deathe is
common and egall to all. Feare ſaythe, thou ſhall haue in thy lyfe muche
payne, ſorowe and trybula­cyon. Suertye aunſwereth, to de­lyuer me from all
theſe euylles, I muſte dye. Feare ſaythe, thou ſhall dye in a ſtraunge
Countrey, Suer­tye ſaythe, Death is not more gre­uous without the houſe then
with in. Feare ſaythe, thou ſhall dye in thy yonge age. Suertye aunſwe­reth.
Deathe is common as well to the yong, as to the olde, and maketh there no
maner of dyfference. But I wyll that thou knowe, that it is the beſte dyenge,
when a man [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=60) hathe the
greateſt pleaſure to lyue, it is a verye good thyng to dye, a­fore that a man
deſyre deathe. If deathe take me when I am yonge, it ſhall not take me in olde
age.

¶Iuuenall ſaythe,Iuue­nall, that deathe oughte to be ſo muche doubted, as
oughte to be olde age. Feare ſayth thou ſhalt not be buryed. Suertye
aunſwereth, I doe not care, for it ſhalbe very ſmall domage vnto me, when the
perſon is dead, he careth not what becommeth of the body, whether it be brente
or eaten with wylde Beaſtes. I wyll that thou knowe that the Sepulture or
Bu­ryeng, was not founde to the vſage ond profyte of the deade bodyes, but to
the intente that the Caryon of the deade bodyes ſhoulde be ta­ken oute of the
ſyghte of the liuing perſons. Feare ſaythe, thou ſhall be Poore. Seurtye
aunſwereth [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=61)
there is no man poore, but ſuch as thynketh that he is poore. Feare ſaythe.
Alas what ſhall I doe, I haue loſte my fryendes, my wyfe, my chyldren, and all
be deade. Su­erty aunſwereth, he is a Foole that wepeth, or maketh any ſorowe
and lamētacyon for thoſe yt be dead, ſe­inge that all muſte dye, the wyſe man
oughte neuer to take dyſcom­forte for the death of anye perſon, nor of hys
chyldren, but he oughte to ſuffre it as pacyently as he doth loke for hys owne
deathe, and to take comforte in hym ſelfe. And more to doubt and feare that
whiche fortune ought to ſend hym.

¶Lucan ſayth,Lucan that feare of euyll chaunce, or fortune, dothe put the
perſon in many great perylles. But he is verye ſtronge that can ſuffre
fearefull and doubtfull things. For the man is knowen in his aduer­ſyties.

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=61) ¶Senec
ſaythe,Senec that there be mothynges whyche doe feare vs, then that do hurte
vs. And we haue oft tymes more feare in the minde and thought of the courage,
then of the worke or dede. And therfore a man of good courage ought not to
haue feare afore the tyme, for peraduenture that whereof he hathe feare ſhall
neuer come.

Feare ſaythe, thou ſhalbe exyled & caſte oute of thy countrey. Suertye
aunſwereth, the countrey is not for bydde me, but the place, for all that
which is vndre heauen, is my countrey, as ſoone ſhal I find and haue my
neceſſities in other countreies as in myne owne, euery land is the countrey of
a good man: as the ſea is the coūtrey of al fyſſhes. In this maner feare
dothe alwaies ſtriue with Suertie, & neuer giueth good counſayle.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=62) ¶But Orace
ſaythe,Orace the man that hath a free and good courage doth not doubte Feare,
for as it is afore ſayd, feare cōmeth of a feble heart. And yet manye wyſe
men ſaye that there be manye thynges whyche a man oughte to Feare and doubte,
as is conteyned in the Chapter folowynge.

## 30\. ¶Howe the Wyſe man oughte to doubte, And howe by doubt and Feare many
times the men become Vertuous. ¶The .xxx. Chapter.

THe Enemie of Hell ought to be doubted of euerye wyſe man.

¶For Salomon ſaythe,Salomon, that happye is he whyche doubt­teth and feareth
the Enemye of [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=62) Hell. And that
the manne oughte to beware of hym, for if he doe, he ſhall not nede to doubte
any perill. And thou oughte not to beware & kepe the onelye from thy greate
enemies, but alſo from the leaſte in the world.

¶Yet neuertheleſſe,Ouid, Ouid ſaythe, that a man ought not to be ſo
dou­btefull and fearefull that he make doubte of that thynge, wherof no doubte
is to be had.

¶Salomon ſaythe,Salomon, that a manne ought not to doubte hys enemy for hys
ſubtyllytye aud crafte. And if he be a Foole, for his miſchiefe and
ſhrewdneſſe. And ſayth, that when thou ſhalt haue a fryende, it is
ne­ceſſarye, that thou be a fryende to hys fryendes. And ſayth, keepe thy
fryend aboue all thynges, and con­ſidre the loſſe that thou ſhuld haue if thou
dyd leſe him. For in leſinge
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=63) thy fryend,
thou ſhal purchaſe and get manye enemyes. And thou oughte to conſydre and
thynke, that the leaſt of thy enemyes is greater and of more power then thou
arte.

¶Socrates ſaythe,Socra­tes, that the man whyche goeth about to get his
enemyes, dothe trauayle for his owne dyſtrucyon, for he whych hath many
enemyes, ought to lyue alwaies in greate doubte and feare of hys lyfe. And
ſaythe, that one of the greateſt wyttes that a man maye haue, is to knowe howe
to make of hys enymye hys fryend, And ſaith that thou ought not to repute
thine enemy as a ſmale & a lyght thinge, for he maye hurte thee more then thou
do thynke be he neuer ſo ſmal of power.

¶And Senec ſaythe,Senec that thyne enemyes be ſomtyme more profyta­ble [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=63) to thee, then
thy fryendes, for thou doeſt keepe thee from fallynge into manye daungers and
Folyes, for feare of them, and taketh paine to keepe thine owne, for it is
better to reſyſte and wythſtand theyr wil and malyce. And ſaythe that if it
chaunce thee to ſpeake wyth thyne aduerſarye, beware that thou doe not ſhowe
hym thy ſecrete, for then thou ſhould teache hym thy diſtruccyon.

¶Pythagoras ſaythe,Pythagoras, that if thou wylte dyſprayſe thine enemy, ſhew
alwayes countenaunce, as thou woldeſte him no maner of harme, nor that thou
art his enemye.

¶Salomon ſaithe,Salomon, beleeue neuer thyne enemye, and if he do humble him
ſelfe to thee, yet doe not truſte to him. For if he ſee his time to doe thee
diſpleaſure, he will neuer bee ſatiſefyed of thy bloud.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=64) ¶Saynte
Auſtyne ſaythe,S, Au­ſtyn, that as in warre the Soldiers be neuer no ther daye
nor nyghte oute of theyr harneſſe, but alwayes in redineſſe, and ſpecyallye
when they be neare to theyr enemies. So duryng thys lyfe, we ought not to be
voyd & vn­furnyſſhed of vertues, to the intent that we be not as he, whyche
hys enemye dothe fynd out of harneſſe, wherof the Goſpell maketh menci­on
ſayenge.

¶Dum fortis amatus cuſtodit atri­um ſuum in pace ſunt omnia que paſ­ſider.

## 31\. ¶Howe good Fame oughte to go afore men, And of the goodneſſe that
com­meth of the ſame. ¶The .xxxi. Chapter.

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=64) GOod
Fame, is a No­ble Vertue and mu­che ought to be prai­ſed and ought to be
preferred aboue all Rycheſſe, for it is aprobate by the Lawe and by cuſtome.
And knowe thou, that for anye profyte of the world, thou ought not to leaſe
thy good fame, for the profite that commeth of euyll renome and Fame, is loſſe
and not winninge.

¶Senec ſaithe,Senec, that no man can ſhowe in hym ſelfe, but that which is in
hym.

¶Saint Auſtin ſaithe,S, Au­ſtyn, that Ipo­cryſye is Treaſon.

¶Salomon ſaithe,Sal­amon, if thou wylte haue good renome and Fame, flye and
eſchew the delites of the fleſhe And in anothr place ſaithe, if thou will be
well renomed and Famed,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=65) be not
Lecherous.

¶Cato ſaythe,Cato that Lecherye and Coueytouſnes be contrary to good renome
and fame.

¶Aryſtotyle ſaythe,Ariſtotyle, that good Fame maketh the man to be verye clere
and bright in this world, and to bee acceptable in the preſence of Prynces.

¶Senec ſaythe,Senec, that the good Renome and Fame of the perſons is feare of
Synnes. And ſaythe, inforce thy ſelfe to haue good Fa­me, for it ſhall endure
longer wyth thee, then all the treaſures of the worlde.

¶Salomon maketh mencion ther of ſayenge.Sala­mon,

¶Curam habe de bono nomine, ma­gis enim per manebet tibi quam mille theſauri
precioſi.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=65)

## 32\. ¶Howe Glotony is a daūgerous vice And of the greate euyll that
com­meth therof to the bodyes of men, And howe the Ver­tues of men be
diſtroy­ed and corrupte by the ſame. ¶The .xxxii. Chapter.

GLotōy, is an inordynate deſyre and wyl to eate & drynke, and is all
contrarye to the Vertue of Ab­ſtynence. It is redde in the ſumme of Vyces,
that there commeth muche euyll to the per­ſones by the Vyce of Glotonie. For
that ſame Vice dothe take awaye the Memorye of the perſon, diſtroyeth the
Sences or Wyttes, conſu­meth the Vnderſtandynge, cor­rupteth the Bloud.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=66) Dyſtroyeth
the ſyghte of the eyes, maketh the ſpyrite feble, and doeth ſtop and let ye
tounge, dyſtroyeth the bodye, bryngeth Lecherye, ſhorteneth the lyfe of the
mā. And doth engendre many & great ſyckeneſſe, whyche doe cauſe the perſon
ſodenlye to dye, or doe cauſe hym to lyue in greate payne, and ſaythe that
there is mo folkes whyche dye by reaſon of exceſſyfe eatyng and drinkynge, and
by inordinate lyuynge, thē by other mortalytie. And ſaith that women and wyne
doe cauſe manye good men to erre.

¶Aryſtotyle ſayth,Ariſtotyle, that he is a ve­rye beaſte whych foloweth the
wil and appetyte of hys mouthe. And ſaythe that he whyche dothe fyll hym ſelfe
full of good meates and drynckes, that he dothe ſeeke hys deathe, more then
hys lyfe. And ſaythe that he whyche wyll lyue [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=66) cleane, and in
healthe, let hym be­ware of to muche and exceſſyue eatynge and drynkyng

¶Ipocras ſaythe,Ipo­cras, that haboun­daunce of wynes and meates diſt­royeth
the bodye, the ſoule, and the Vertues.

¶Saynte Gregorye ſaythe,Gregorye that when the Vyce of Glotonye hath the
domynacyon and power of the perſon, it ſhal cauſe him to leaſe all the
goodneſſe that euer he dyd. And that when the body of the perſon is not
gouerned by abſtynence, al the Vertues of the ſame perſon be drowned.

¶Wherof Saynte Paule maketh mencyon ſayenge.Paule,

¶Quibus finis interitus quorū deus venter eſt, et gloria in confuſione eo­rum
terena ſapiunt.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=67)

## 33\. ¶Howe Abſtynence is that wher­of Glotonye is conſumed. And by the
goodneſſe that is therin, And that maye come therof, ¶The, xxxiii. Chapter.

ABſtynence is a Vertue, by the whyche the de­ſyre of Glotonye is refrayned &
quenſhed.

Salomon ſaith that he whych lyueth by Abſtynence,Salomon, dothe aleng­then hys
lyfe.

¶Saint Auſtyn ſaith,S, Auſtyn, that in like caſe as a man doth ſtraine the
rain of the brydle to ſtop the horſe. So ought a man to conſtraine and
re­fraine him ſelfe from the ſinne of [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=67) Glotonye, by the
Vertue of Abſty­nence, a man doth get & purchaſe in this worlde the treaſoure,
whi­che is aboue all other treaſours, that is to ſaye helth of bodye.

¶Sidrac ſayth,Sidrac that ther is no ryches in this worde to be compa­red to
the helth of the bodye. And by abſtinence a man doth purchaſe helth, and
increaſynge of his lyfe, and doeth eſchewe glotonye, that is to ſay to
abſtayne from exceſſyue eatynge and drynkynge, for to fyll him ſelfe full of
meates, the ſto­macke is greued therwyth. And it doth nouryſhe (as is
aforeſaid) manye greuous dyſeaſes, and in eſ­pecyall the gowte. And doth cauſe
the breathe of the perſon to ſtynke. And many other euylles come ther of to
the perſon, of the whyche ofte tyme foloweth ſodaine deathe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=68)

## 34\. ¶Howe Conſtancye and Inconſtaū ­cye, be dyfferent, And howe
Con­ſtaunce is a Noble Vertue. And what Incon­ſtauncye is, ¶The .xxxiiii.
Chapter.

COnſtauncye, is to be Ferme and ſtable in one purpoſe, without varyenge.

¶Tulle ſaithe,Tulle, that it is a very great and a good thing for a man to be
ſtable in thoſe thin­ges whiche he wil ſay or doe.

¶Iſydore ſaythe,Iſi­dore, that he is not worthye of prayſe, whiche doth
be­gynne anye worke, but he whyche maketh an ende therof. Yet
not­wythſtandynge a man oughte not too bee ſo ſtyffe in thoſe thynges [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=68) which he hath to
do, that he do fal into the vyce of Obſtynacye. Obſti­nacye is, not to chaunge
his pur­poſe, for anye counſayle or for anye thing that may chaūre therof.
In­conſtauncye is a vyce contrarye to the vertue of Conſtauncye.

¶Senec ſaythe that Inconſtaun­cye is not to be ferme and ſtedfaſte.Senec And
it maye be compared to the Swalowe, whyche doth feede and nouryſhe hym ſelfe,
in flieng here & there, and ſo doth Inconſtauncye, which dothe put all thinges
at ad­uenture.

## 35\. ¶Of the Vertue of Nobleneſſe of courage of men, And how the men be
ofte tymes prayſed by reaſon of the ſame. ¶The .xxxv. Chapter.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=69) NObleneſſe
of Courage, is to hede and mynde Vally­aunte, Noble, and Vertu­ous thyngs. And
it may be compa­red to the Griffon, which is a beaſt of ſuch nature, that he
wold rather let hym ſelfe dye for hungre, then he wolde eate of Caryon and
ſtyn­kynge fleſſhe.

¶Saint Auſtin ſaith,S, Au­ſtyn, in ſpeaking of the highnes & nobelnes of hart,
that the Lion maketh neuer warre with the Antes, nor the Egle with the Flyes.

¶Tuile ſaith,Tulle, that the Courage of vertuous perſones is knowen by theyr
great workes. And ſaith that there is nothing ſo ſtrōg & ſo ſharp as the
heart & courage of the man.

## 36\. ¶Example of Nobleneſſe of Courage. ¶The .xxxvi. Chapter.

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=69) OF
Nobleneſſe and highnes of Courage, it is red in the Hiſtoryes of Rome, that
there was a Phiſicion that ſerued a Baron, the whiche Baron made great war
againſte the Romaines. This Phiſicion came on a daye to the Senatours of Rome,
and to the Counſalie, and ſaid vnto them. If ye wil geue me a good ſumme of
money, I wyl poyſon my Mayſter, which hath done you ſo much euyl. And they
aunſwered, we will not vanquyſhe hym by treaſon, but by force and ſtrength.
And then they dyd ſhewe the caſe to the Baron, to thintent that he myght
beware of the Phiſycyon.

## 37\. ¶Of Vain glorye, And howe manye maners there is therof, And howe
Vaynglorye is to be diſpraiſed, ¶The .xxxvii. Chapter.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=70) VAynglorye,
is a Vyce contrary to Nobleneſſe of Hearte. And there is three maners of
Vain­glory. The firſt is when a man dothe cauſe hym ſelfe to bee more eſtemed,
praiſed and honored then it appereth vnto him.

¶But as Saynt Thomas ſaithe,S, tho­mas, it is no Vyce, to haue the wyl to be
good or to be well named, and fa­med, when he ſayth that good nāe and fame is
better then greate Ri­cheſſe. The ſecond maner of Vayn­glorye is when a man
doth vaunt, boſte, and prayſe hym ſelfe for anye maner of thynge, for it is a
thynge not ſemelye nor conuenyente for a man to prayſe hym ſelfe. The third
maner of Vaynglorye is for a man [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=70) to ſhewe hym
ſelfe Rycher, then he is. And to ſhewe hymſelfe more vertuous then he is, for
it is Ipocryſe. The vyce of Vaynglorye, maye be compared to the Peycocke,
whiche is ſo full of Vaynglorye, that al his dyſyre and delyghte, is to ſhew
his fethers, in ſpreadynge hys tayle in maner of a whele, for to be praiſed.
In the Summe of Vyces it is red, that when the perſon ſhall haue o­uercome al
Vyces, yet Vayuglorye doth tary wyth hym.

¶Cato ſaythe,Cato if thou wylte pleaſe god, eſchewe Vainglorie.

¶Plato ſaythe doe not prayſe thy ſelfe,Plato. but lette another man prayſe
thee.

¶Saynte Gregorye greatlie do [...] blame the Vaynglorye of Ipocrytes. And
ſaythe that theyr Vayn­glorye, is not but a fantaſtyke vy­ſyon, whyche ſheweth
outward [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=71) lye,
that thyng whych is not with­in.

¶Ieſu Chriſt ſaith in his goſpell,Iheſu chriſt, ſpeaking of Ipocrytes.

¶Ve vobis hipocrite qui ſimiles eſtis ſepulchris de albatis qui foris
appa­rent hominibus ſpecioſa: intus vero fuit ſunt plena oſſibus mortuorum,

## 38\. ¶Example of Vainglorye, ¶The .xxxviii. Chapter.

OF Vainglorye,Exam­ple, it is red in the lyfe of Holy Fathers, that an
Aungell, on a certayne tyme kepte company with an Heremite. And as they wente
togyther, they paſſed by a place where there was a deade Horſe, whyche dyd
ſtynke verye ſore, wherfore the Heremyte dyd ſtoppe hys noſe: but the Aun­gell
[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=71) dyd not
ſo, nor dyd not regard it. And as they went a litle further they paſſed by a
fayre gardaine, in the which ther was afayre womā. And rychelye appareled, &
very full of vayneglorye,Exam­ple. And incontinent that the Aungell did ſe
her, he dyd ſtop his noſe, the Heremyte ſeynge this, dyd maruayle very much
ther of. And ſayd to the Aungell, I do meruayle greatly that ye haue ſtopped
your noſe for this fayre womā. And dyd paſſe by the ſtynkyng ca­ryon that we
dyd fynde, as ye dyd not care for it, nor dyd not fele no ſmell, which did
ſtynke ſo euyll, thē the. Aungell ſayd, I will that thou knowe, that the
perſon full of vayn glorye, ſtynketh more in the ſyght of God, of Aungels and
of the he­uenly company, then all the cary on in the worlde.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=72) And as ſoone
as he had ſayd this, he was ſodeynly banyſhed and de­parted out of the ſyght
of the Here myte. And then Iudged he that ſhould be an Aungell. And therfore
he knew wel that Vainglory, greatly dyſpleaſed God.

## 39\. ¶Howe Iuſtyce ought to be done And howe it is, that thynge that dothe
meaſure all thynges vpon Earthe. ¶The .xxxix. Chapter.

IUſtyce is a Ferme and a Stable wyll, to doe ryght vnto e­uerye man.

¶Salomon ſaythe,Sala­mon, deſyre not to be wyſe, if thou cannot fynde in thy
hearte to doe Iu­ſtyce. [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=72) And ſayth that
there is three thynges neceſſarye to a man whi­che wyll doe Iuſtyce. The
fyrſte is that he haue auctorytye to doe it. The ſeconde, is that he knowe wel
what he oughte to Iudge. The thyrde is that he Iudge according to reaſon.

¶Hermes ſaythe,Hermes. beware that thou doe punyſhe no man by Iu­ſtyce, afore
that thou gyue hym ter­me to make hys defence. And be­ware, that when thou
oughte to doe Iuſtyce, that thou doe not to muche deferre and prolong it
wherby there may come any occaſion to let the aforeſaid Iuſtyce.

¶Tulle ſaythe,Tulle, that Iuſtyce is the Mother and Lady of al other ver­tues,
For there myght nothing liue and dute in thys worlde, if Iuſtyce were not.

¶Aryſtotyle ſayth,Ariſtotyle, that Iuſtice is
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=73) a meaſure,
that god hath ſtabliſhed in earthe, for to lymyte all thynges. And ſaythe that
Iuſtyce is none o­ther thyng, but to gyue euery man his owne. Thou oughte to
gyue to three maner of folkes that which is their owne, that is to ſay, to thy
ſouerayne and ſuperyour, to thy fe­lowe and to thy ſubiecte. To thy ſoueraygne
and ſuperyoure, thou oughte to giue reuerence of hearte, and obedyence of
bodye, to thy fe­lowe, thou ought to giue counſayle in teachynge hym of hys
Ignora­unce, and to ayde and helpe hym to thy power. To thy ſubiect, thou
oughte to defende hym, and to in­ſtructe and punyſhe hym, if he doe euyll.

¶Salomon maketh mencion therof ſayenge.Salamon

¶Excogiatat iuſtus de domo impii, vt detrahat impios a malo Gaudium eſt iuſto,
facere iuſticiam,

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=73)

## 40\. ¶Example of Iuſtyce. ¶The .xl. Chapter.

OF Iuſtice it is red in the life of Holye fathers,Exam­ple. that there was an
Hermyte whyche long time had ſerued God and had done greate penaunce for hys
ſyn­nes, to whom god ſent afterwarde great ſickeneſſe. And bycauſe that he
could not recouer hys healthe a gayn he began to complaine of god and to
murmure in hym ſelfe. So it chaunced on a day, that the Aungell of god appered
vnto hym, in lykeneſſe of a yonge man, and ſayd vnto hym, come wyth me, for
God will that I doe ſhowe thee of hys ſecrete Iuſtyce. And dyd leade him into
the Towne, to a Marchaun­tes houſe, whyche had in a Coffre a greate numbre of
Florences.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=74) And the
Aungell in the ſyghte of the Hermyte did take the ſame Florence, and did beare
them into the houſe of another man, whych they founde in ſleepe, And the
Aungell dyd leue the ſayde Florence at hys Chambre dore, to the intente that
when he ſhould open the dore, that he ſhoulde fynde them. And thys doone, he
ledde hym to the houſe of another Marchaunte that had a chylde, the whyche
chylde, the Aungell dyd kyll, in the preſence of the ſayde Heremite. And the,
Here­myte ſeinge all theſe thynges, tho­ughte that the Aungell had ben a
Deuyll. And wolde fayne haue de­parted from hym.Exam­ple. The Aungell ſe­inge
that he woulde departe from hym, ſayde voto hym, tarye yet a li­tle, for I
wyll ſhowe thee the rea­ſon, wherfore I haue doone theſe thinges in thy
preſence, knowe firſt [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=74) wherfore that I
haue take the Florence from the burges, it is becauſe that he had ſolde his
Herytage, for the ſayde Florences, and was purpoſed to gyue them to certaine
Murtherers, whyche had promy­ſed hym to kyll a man for hys ſake, the whyche
had dyſpleaſed hym a­foretymes.Exam­ple And the man which he wolde haue cauſed
to be kylled, is a man of noble byrth, wherof ſhuld haue come greate
inconuenyence, And therfore to reſyſt the euyl that might haue cōe therof, &
alſo to let hym of hys euyll, and myſcheuous wyll and purpoſe, I haue taken
the ſayde Florence from hym. And when he ſhal ſee hym ſelfe pore & to haue
loſte hys Herytage and good­des, he wyll gyue hym ſelfe to the ſeruice of god,
and where he ſhulde haue ben dampned, nowe he ſhal­be ſaued. The Reaſon
wherfore I [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=75)
haue borne the Florence, to the Chambre doore of the other man, is becauſe
that he was a Ryche Marchaunte whyche came from beyonde the Sea, and had
beſtowed in marchaundyce all the good­des that he had, and putte it in a
Shyppe, the whyche Shyppe did peryſhe vpon the Sea, then he did remembre one
daye howe that he had loſte all hys gooddes, and had nothynge to lyue vppon,
began to fall in dyſpayre, and was purpoſed to hange hym ſelfe. And therfore
to the intente that he ſhoulde not de­ſtroye, bothe the bodye and the ſoule. I
dyd beare hym the foreſaid Florences. The Reaſon whereof I haue kylled the
Chylde, is becauſe that afore that the father had him he was a very good man,
and gaue much Almous, and did many good [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=75) dedes, for the
loue of god, and ſence that he had the Chylde, he cared for none other thynge,
but onelye to get Rycheſſe, were it by ryghte or wronge. And therfore I haue
kylled the Chylde, to the intente that the Father maye retourne to hys
purpoſe, doe not meruayle nor grudge therfore, for the ſyckeneſſe that thou
haſte, for if it hadde not bene, thou ſhoulde ofte tymes haue thy mynde and
Courage in Va­nytyes wherby thou ſhoulde greatlye haue dyſpleaſed God. And be
thou ſure, that god doth nothyng, but by Reaſon, but the perſones haue not
knowledge therof, for God hathe not promyſed it them, but of two
euylles,Exam­ple he dothe all­wayes take the leſſe. Ann this ſaid the Aungell
dyd departe from the Heremyte.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=76) And from
thenceforthe, the ſayde Heremyte, dyd neuer murmure a­gainſte God, for anye
maner ſycke­neſſe or aduerſyty that he did ſend him, but rather dyd thanke
God. And alwaies dyd reioyce hym ſelfe in his ſicknes and aduerſyties
con­ſyderynge alwayes, that it was of the goodneſſe of God.

## 41\. Howe Iniuſtyce or wrong, is contrary to Iuſtyce, and howe manye maners
there be of Iniuſtyce, And how Iniuſtice demaūdeth Ven­geaunce a­fore god.
¶The .xli. Chapter.

INiuſtyce is a Vyce, contra­ry to Iuſtice. And it is in dyuers maners and
ſortes, [[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=76)
The Fyrſte is to kyll any man, and it is caleld murtherynge. The Se­conde is
to ſpeake vyllanye, and opprobryous and ſlaunderous wor­des of anye man. And
it is called iniurye. The Thyrde is to do anie thynge by ſtrengthe, and it is
cal­led Vyolence. The Fourth is to do domage and preiudice to ani man. And it
is called outrage. The Fyft is to take another mannes good, and it is thefte.
The Syxte is to take a perſon by Force, and it is called Rapyne. Iniuſtyce,
otherwyſe called wronge, maye be compared to the Deuyll, the whych doth not
loue reaſon. For all hys pleaſure is to doe euyll to fryendes. And to tormente
them, whyche haue ſerued him.

¶Iheſu Chryſt ſpeakyng of Iniu­ſtyce ſaythe,Iheſu chriſt, wyth ſuch meaſure as
ye ſhall meaſure, ye ſhalbe meaſu­red.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=77) And as ye do
to your neighbo­ure, ſo ſhall be done to you.

¶Salomon ſaythe,Salomon, Iudge not the deede of anye man, wythoute Reaſon.

¶Senec ſaithe, that much ſorowe and trybulacyon,Senec is in the Lande, wherof
the Lorde and Gouernour is a yonge man, whyche is verye eaſye and lyghte to
giue pardon to myſdoers. And ſayth, that he whyche dothe not punyſhe the
euyll, is conſenting to the ſame. And ſaithe that there is foure thynges which
do call the man afore god. And the whyche do ſore dyſpleaſe god. The fyrſte is
the euyll, that a man dothe to an Innocente perſon. The Se­cond is to withhold
the hire & wa­ges of his ſeruaunte. The thirde is willingly to ſet fyre in a
houſe, or in a towne.Ariſtotyle. The fourthe is murdre.

¶Aryſtotyle ſaythe, do not ſhedde [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=77) mans bloud
wythoute a cauſe, for it demaundeth Iuſtice of god. And he that doth euyl to
another man, he hathe euyll, and dothe not kno­we howe and from whence it doth
come.

## 42\. ¶Example of Iniuſtyce. ¶The .xlii. Chapter.

OF Iniuſtice it is red in the life of holy fathers,Example, that ye deuil
bethought him one day, yt he wold be maried to thintent to haue dou­ghters to
marye, & that he myghte leade theyr huſbands to hel, he did marye with
Iniuſtyce, of whom he had ſeuen doughters. The fyrſt is Pride, which he maried
to Lordes and noble men. And to them why­che haue outeragyous heartes by
reaſon of Pryde.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=78) The Seconde
is Anaryce, whych he gaue to the Heades and chyefe of the people. The Thyrd is
Falſe­nes, which he maryed to Villains. The fourth is enuy, which he maried to
miniſtrelles & crafts men. The fift is Ipocryſye, whych he maried to Relygyous
perſones. The Sixt is Vaynglorye, whyche he wolde gyue to no man, for ſhe
dothe mary her ſelfe to all men of euerye degree and eſtate. The Seuenthe is
Le­cherye, whych alſo he dyd not ma­rye, but lefte her common. Some men ſaye,
that it is wryten in the boke of Examples, yt ye Deuyil had ten Doughters, of
the whyche he dyd marye but. viiii. that is to ſay. The Fyrſt is Pryde, whych
he ma­ryed to Lordes,Exam­ple, and other Noble men. The Seconde, Sacrylege to
Lobourers. The Thyrde Vſerye, to Cytezens. The Fourthe Ipocri­ſie, [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=78) which he maryed
to relygyous perſones. The fyfte Symonye which he maryed to Pryeſtes and
Clerkes. The ſyxte deceyte, whyche he maryed to Marchauntes. The ſe­uenthe
Enuye, whyche he maryed to Seruauntes. The eighte Coue­touſneſſe, whych he
maryed to olde folkes. The nynthe and the tenthe, that is to ſaye, Vaynglorye,
and Lecherye, he gaue no man.

## 43\. ¶Of Loyaltys, And by Loyal­tye, the perſon is great­lye, prayſed, ¶The
.xliii. Chapter.

LOyaltye,terence as Terence ſaythe, is to haue a perfyte Faythe. And too ſhewe
hym ſelfe none o­therwyſe, then he is.

¶Longyn ſaythe,Lon­gyn, that a manne is
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=79) prayſed for
three thynges, that is to ſaye, for Loyaltye in that thyng that he hath to
doe. The ſeconde is to keepe and fullfyll that thynge that he hath promyſed.
The thyrd is to thynke alwaies to do well.

¶Senec ſaith that he which doth leaſe his faith,Senec can not leaſe a grea­ter
thynge.

¶Ariſtotyle ſaith,Ariſto­tyle, do not breke thy faith to any perſon, except to
a woman, or to a chylde.

¶Senec ſaythe,Senec, be Loyall and Faythfull to all men. And ſpecyal­lye to
hymth at putteth hys truſte in thee.

## 44\. ¶Of Falſehed, what it is, And of the dyfference that is be­tweene
Suſpycyon and Ielouſy. And Treaſon and Malyce. ¶The .xliiii. Cpapter.

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=79) FAlſehed
is a Vice, contrary to Facultie, and it is to ſay or thinke a thing contrarie
to his wil, and to haue deſyre to do the contrarye of that thynge, that he
ſaythe.

¶Salomon ſaythe,Salamon be not conuer­ſante with a falſe perſon, for he cannot
loue that thynge that pleaſeth hym.

¶Senec ſaith,Senec that when any Iniurye, or wronge is done or ſaide to a
falſe man, he feyneth him ſelfe, as he dyd not care for it, to the in­tent
that he may the more craftelie and falſlie, venge him therof.

¶Saynt Thomas ſayth,S, tho­mas. that the ſuſpycyon of the manne is knowen in
foure maners. The Fyrſte is, the euyll perſon thynkethe, that
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=80) all other be
all euyll as he is. The Seconde is that a manne doth al­wayes ſuſpecte that
perſon, why­che hathe accuſtomed to doe euyll. The Thyrde is when a man
hea­reth euyll ſpoken of another, the whyche he wolde euill, he beleueth it
incontynente. The Fourthe is when a man hathe proued manye thynges.

¶Aryſtotyle ſaythe,Ariſto­tyle, the olde per­ſones for the moſte parte doe
verye lyghtlye ſuſpecte, becauſe that they haue proued many thyngs in their
tyme.

¶Salomon ſaith,Salamon the euil thoughtes doe cauſe the perſon to departe from
God.

¶Plato ſaythe,Plato, that the fyrſte mo­uinge of the thought, be not in our
power, the whych we ought wel to teſyſte.

¶The Decre ſaythe,Decre, that the [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=80) fleſſhe can not
be corrupte, if the thoughte be not corrupt afore. And ſayth, that the perſon
can not haue agreater euyll, then to be ſuſpec­tinge.

¶Alexandre ſaythe,Alexan­dre. when thou baſt conſyence, and truſte in anye
man, thou oughte not to ſuſpecte hym, except manyfeſtlye thou fynde that
thynge in hym, whereby thou maye haue ſuſpycon, for the ſuſpi­cyon that thou
ſhoulde haue there, ſhoulde cauſe thee to be moued to doe euyll. There is
dyfference be­twene Suſpectyon & Ielouſye. For Suſpectyon is to beleue euyll
of a­nother man, (as it is aforeſayde.) Ialouſye is to haue feare of that
thynge the whyche a man loueth, doe no otherwyſe then it ought to doe.
Ielouſie dyſcendeth of the vertue of Loue. For no perſon can bee Ielous, but
for two reaſons. The
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=81) one is for
the feare that a mā hath that the thing which a man loueth do not otherwyſe,
then ought to be done. And the other is that it be not the dyſhonoure of the
perſon which a man loueth.

¶Iuuenall ſaythe,Iuue­nall, that the Ialou ſye of a woman is verye greate, for
ſhe can not loue the perſon whyche ſhe knoweth doth loue her huſbād.

¶Plato ſayth,Plato, that perfyte loue is in three thynges, that is to ſaye, to
loue, to feare, and to honoure.

¶Socrates ſaith that perſon that loueth,Socra­tes, feareth. But al thoſe which
doe feare, doe not loue. And ſaithe, that the perſon which loueth, hath
alwayes feare of that thynge why­che he loueth. There is dyfference betweene
Treaſon and Malyce. Treaſon is properlie to betraye, by malyce, the perſon
which doth put his truſt in thee. Malice is to Imagyne [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=81) ſome thyng for
to deceiue and ther man.

¶Longin ſaith that in a Traiter,Lon­gyn, the loue is vice.

¶Saynte Auſtyne ſaithe that the Trayter doth neuer ſwage nor my tygate hym
ſelfe,S. Au­ſtine. for famylyarytye, nor for pouertie, nor for eatyng and
drinkinge, nor for ſeruyce, nor for giftes.

¶Sainte Paule maketh mencyon therof ſayenge.Paule,

¶Erunt hamines cupidi, elati, ſuper­vi, proditores, proterui tumidi.

## 45\. ¶Example of Falſehed, ¶The .xlv. Chapter.

OF Falſehed, it is redde in the olde Teſtament,Example. that by the wyll of
God, there was two
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=82) Aungelles
ſente into the Cyfye of Sodome,Exam­ple, for the abhomynable ſyn there vſed,
they lodged in the hou­ſe of a good man, the ſeruante of God, called Loth. And
they badde hym that he ſhoulde go forth of the towne, for they wolde brene it,
and all the inhabytantes therof. And as thys ſayde, Loth was vpon a mountayne,
hys two Doughters, dyd imagyne by falſehed to deceiue hym, to the intente,
that he ſhould meddle Fleſſhlye wyth them. They cauſed hym to drinke ſo much,
that he was bronken. And then the el­der of his ſayd two doughters, dyd ley
her ſelfe by hym. And ſo moued and ſteared hym with touchynges and other
tokens, that be medled fleſſhlye with her. And ſo dyd the yonger, in ſo much
that he did get them both with chylde.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=82)

## 46\. ¶Howe Trueth is to be compared, by Reaſon to the Perdryche. And how
Trueth is that thynge which iuſty fyeth the man afore all perſons ¶The .xlvi.
Chapter.

TRuethe, as Saynte Auſtyne ſaythe,S. Au­ſtine. is to vſe Verytye or Tru­eth,
wythoute anye ſhadowe or coloure of Lyenge. The Vertue of Truethe, maye be
compared to lytle yong Perdryches, for the Perdryche is of ſuche nature. The
one wyll robbe the egges of the other. And ſitte vpon them, as they were her
owne egges, but as ſone as the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=83) lyfle
Perdryches be brought forth. And that they here theyr owne propre mother crye
and ſing, they leue and forſake the olde Perdrych whiche broughte them forthe
of egges, and go to their owne very mother. And ſo it is of the vertue of
trueth, for the man dothe couer it ſo longe as the contrari is not knowen and
perceyued, but at the ende truethe doth alwayes abyde and contynue in hys
place.

¶Ariſtotile ſaith,Aryſto­tyle, trueth doth help him at the ende of all hys
workes, and dedes, which doth loue it.

¶Senec ſaythe,Senec, that the perſon oughte alwayes to inforce and conſtrayne
hym ſelfe, to be Verytable, or True, for it is the moſte worthy and honorable
thynge to a wyſe man, that his dedes, maye veryfye hys ſayenges. And he oughte
to be ware that he doe not leaſe the be­ing [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=83) veritable, for
if ones he do leaſe truethe, ſhalbe no more beleued by hym. There was a manne
that de­maunded of a Phyloſopher, howe he mighte be fayre ſpoken. And he
ſaide, ſaye nothinge but that thou knoweſt wel, without addyng ther to any
lye.

¶Salomon ſaythe,Salo­mon, makynge hys praier to almighty god, good lorde I
praye thee that all vanytyes and lyes, may abſent them, and be farre from me.

¶Saynte Paule ſaythe,Paule, God will dyſtroye the tongue that dothe lye. And
ſaythe, that wordes ſpoken iently and peaſably be ſweter then honye.

## 47\. ¶Example of the Vertue of Verytye, ¶The .xlvii. Chapter.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=84) OF the
vertue of Verytye or Truethe,Exam­ple. it is redde in the lyfe of Holye
Fathers, that there was a Ryche Kynghte, why­the dyd forſake hys Rycheſſe for
to ſerue God. And wente into an Ab­bey, where he made hym ſelfe a re­lygyous
man. And dyd renounce the worlde altogyther. It chaun­ced on a daye, that the
Abbot, for nede of money, purpoſed to ſell two olde Aſſes, that had ben long
time in the Abbey. He bethoughte hym that he wold ſend them to be ſolde by the
ſayd new religyous man, for he thoughte that he had the prac­tyſe therof. And
that afterward he wolde die other, that ſhulde be yonger, this knight did take
the charg of them, albeit parthe againſt hys will. And did not deny it, by
reaſon of obedience, he beinge in the mar­ket, [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=84) wyth one of the
lay brethren of the ſayd Abbey, whych led the ſaid Aſſes, when it was
demaunded of hym if the Aſſes were good, he aunſwered, think you that if they
were good, that our father Abbot wold ſell them. The other demaunded of hym,
wherfore theyr tayles were ſo pylled, he aunſwered, they be very olde, and doe
fall many tymes in the myre. And when a man wyl lift them vp, he muſte take
them by the tayles, and that is the cauſe that they haue theyre tayles ſoo
pylled wherfore they coulde not ſell theyr Aſſes, but broughte them home
a­gayne. The Abbot dyd demaunde of the laye brother, howe it chaun­ced that
they had not ſold theyr Aſſes.Exam­ple And he ſhowed hym the cauſe. Then the
Abbot cauſed thys rely­gyous man, to come afore, and dyd rebuke hym, he
aunſweryd the Ab­bot
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=85) and ſayde
that he was not be­come a relygyous man, to thintent to deceyue anye perſon,
nor to Lye, but that he had forſaken all hys ri­cheſſe, to ſerue hym whyche
was full of all trueth, wyth the whyche aunſwere the Abbot was very wel
content.

## 48\. ¶Howe Lyenge is an euell vyce, the maners to eſchew it, And in what
ſort, and which is euyl Lyenge. ¶The .xlviii. Chapter.

LYenge is a Vyce contrarye to Trueth. And it is to hyde and couer the Trueth
with colour of words to deceyue another man. There be diuers maners of Lieng,
that is to ſaye, Lyenge whyche is tolde in maner of newes, there is Lyenge,
whyche is tolde for to eſ­chewe [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=85) to ſpeake euyl.
wythout pre­iudice of any perſon. And theſe two be not prohybed in the
Scrypture. But there is lyenge with falſehed, whyche is tolde to the domage of
another, there is Lyenge, as not to holde and keepe promyſe, there is Lyenge
accuſtomed. Theſe three maners be prohybed, there be ſome whych lye wyllynglie
in ſwearing, and wyth theyr knowledge do for­ſweare them, which is a verye
euill Lyenge.

¶Salomon ſaith,Salo­mon that the mouth whiche doth lye, kylleth the ſoule &
that it were better to be a Theefe then a continuall Lyer.

¶Of the whyche Plato ſpeaketh,Plato, ſayenge that he whyche dothe af­ferme
that thynge whyche he doth not knowe of that thynge, whyche he ſhall know, he
ſhalbe holden for ſuſpecte.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=86) And ſaith,
that the perſon whyche hath ben accuſtomed to lie, ſhal not be beleued when he
ſhall ſhewe the trueth.

## 49\. ¶What Mercy is, and of the ope­racyon of the ſame. And howe Mercye is
that wherby a man obteyneth the Loue of God. ¶The .xlix. Chapter.

MErcye,S, Au­ſtyne, (as S. Auſtyne ſaithe) is to haue com­paſſyon of hys owne
ſoule, and of the myſerye and wretched­nes of another.

¶Saynte Thomas ſaythe,S, thomas. that the operacyon of Mercie, is to par­don
the offences done vnto thee. [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=86) And to chaſtyce
and correcte hym, whyche hath nede therof, to coun­ſaile him which ſtandeth in
doubt, to comforte them, whych be in dyſ­comforte. And to praye to god for
another.

¶Plato ſayth,Plato, that the perſon can not haue a more profytable thyng, then
the Vertue of Mercie, that is to ſaye, to vyſyte the ſycke, to feede them that
be hungry, to gyue them drynke, that be thryſtye, vyſyte the pryſoners, clothe
the naked, lodge them that doe lacke lodgynge. And to burye the deade perſons.

¶Alexandre ſaythe,Alex­andre, that the pow­er, and the myghte of the man,
en­creaſeth in two maners, that is to ſay, to get fryendes by mercye.

¶Longyn ſaythe,Lon­gyn, that he whyche ſhal haue mercy of another, he ſhal
ynde mercie for him ſelfe.

¶Oure Lorde Iheſue ſaythe,Iheſu chryſt, par­don
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=87) other
gladlye, if thou will haue pardon. One of the thynges yt the moſte pleaſeth
almyghtye God is, that yf a man haue offended thee, And that thou canſt take
venge­aunce of him for it, that thou do for gyue hym.

¶Salomon ſayth,Salo­mon, that he which gladlye dothe gyue to the poore, ſhall
neuer be in miſerie and pouer, tie. And ſayth that he which doth ſtoppe his
eares at the voyce of the poore, ſhall crye and not be harde, of the mercy of
god.

¶Saynte Gregorye ſaythe,S, gre­gorye, that he whyche gladlye fulfyllethe the
workes of mercie, ſhall not dye of euyll deathe. And that hys praier ſhalbe
herde.

## 50\. ¶Example of Mercye. ¶The .l. Chapter.

OF the vertue of Mercye,Exam­ple, it is red in the hiſtories of Rome, [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=87) that there was a
theefe brought a­fore kynge Alexandre. And he de­maunded him wherfore he did
rob, he aunſwered, I rob vpon the ſea, and thou vpon the earth. I am called a
theefe bicauſe that I am alōe, and becauſe thou goeſte honeſtly, & that thou
art alwaies accompani­ed with manye folkes, thou art cal­led king.Exam­ple,
But know thou king Alexandre, that pouertie conſtraineth me to be a theefe,
but thou art much worſe & a ſtronger thefe then I am, for thou doeſt rob for
coueitouſnes, and the more that thou haſte, the more thou deſireſt, and if
thou haue more, worſe thou wyl do. And I do not rob but for neceſſity of my
liuig. And when kinge Alexandre harde his freenes & plainnes, he had mercy of
him, and made him one of his Knyghtes, and one of the beſte and moſte
faithfull of his companye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=88)

## 51\. ¶Of Crualtye, And howe manye ſortes be therof. And of the greate
euylles and in­conuenients, that bee done by Crualtie. ¶The .li. Chapter.

CRualtye is a Vice, con­tratye to mercye.

¶Aryſtotile ſaith,Ariſto­tyle, that there is fyue maners of crualtie. The
firſt is neuer to haue pytye of anye man. The ſeconde is, to brynge another
man into myſe­tye. The thyrde is, not to wyll to pardon iniuryes done to him.
The fourth is, to ponyſhe another more then it doth appertayne. The fyfte is,
to be actyfe of courage. And to hurte and offend another without reaſon.
Crualtye maye be compa­red [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=88) to the Serpente
called Baſe­lyke, whyche is ſo venimous and ſo cruell, that he dothe kyll the
folkes wyth hys ſight. And if he find non other thinge to kylle, he wyll cauſe
the trees that be nyghe vnto hym to drye awaie, and to dye with his blowynge
on them, he hathe ſo ve­nomous a wind and breath with­in hym.

¶Sydrac ſaythe,Sidrac that he is not lyke to the Lyon in hys houſe, whiche
hathe no mercye of hys Sub­iectes.

¶Hermes ſayth,Her­mes. gyue perdon and mercye to the perſon in hys
aduer­ſytyes, to the intente that thou be not occaſyon to cauſe hym to
diſpayre.

¶Caſſydore ſaythe,Caſſi­dore, that the moſte outragious crualtye that can be,
is to deſire to be rych with the good­des of another man.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=89) ¶Senec
ſaythe,Senec, that Vertu is the moſte gracyous thynge in the wor­lde, for by
it a manne knoweth the euyll men, And the good thynges, for there is not ſo
euyll a manne in the worlde, but that he woulde haue that thynge that he hathe
of another mannes, to be ryght wyn­nynge.

## 52\. ¶Of Lyberalytye, howe it is con­trarye to Coueytouſneſſe, And how a
man ought to be Liberall, & in what maner. ¶The .lii. Chapter.

LYberalytye after Ariſtotile,Ariſto­tyle, is largneſſe, or it is to gyue
commyſſy­on to worthy per­ſons, for that whiche [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=89) is gyuen to
vnworthy perſons, is loſte. And to gyue to them why­che hathe inoughe, is to
caſte wa­ter in the Sea. And to gyue more then a man may beare, it is not
Li­berlytye, but it is Prodygalytye. It is redde in the Summe of Vy­ces, that
Prodygalytye is to ſpend hys owne wythout meaſure or reaſon. And therfore in
the Lawe, the Prodygall perſones, be called Foo­les. Yet notwythſtandyng,
Couey­touſneſſe is of leſſe profyte then prodygalytye after Saynte Thomas.S,
tho­mas. whych doth proue it by three rea­ſons. The fyrſte is that the offyce
of Prodygalytye, dothe accord bet­ter wyth Vertue of Lyberalytye, whyche is to
gyue, then dothe Co­ueytouſneſſe, which is to hold. The ſecond is, yt the
prodigall perſon is more profytable to other, then the Coueytous Perſon is.
The thyrde [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=90)
reaſon is, that the Prodygal per­ſon dothe ſooner amende and for­ſake his vice
of Prodigalitye, then the auaricious perſon his coueitouſnes, of Prodigalitie
diſcendeth po­uertye.

¶And Iob ſaythe,Iob, that pouertye is heauyneſſe of hearte, ſhame and
dyſprayſe, and roote of al euyl. The Vertue of Lyberlyty, may be cō ­pared to
ye Egle, which is the moſt lyberall Byrde that is, for if he be neuer ſo
hungrye yet wyll he leaue the halfe of hys praye, to them that come after hym.
A man lightly cannot ſee the Egle flye in ſekinge his praye, but there is
alwaies ſome o­ther fowle that dothfolow him, for to haue parte of that the
Egle ſhal leue.

¶Salomon ſpeakynge of Lybera­lytie ſaythe,Salo­mon, that if thou doe a good
dede, conſydre to whom thou doeſt [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=90) it, for almos
dothe quenche and kil ſyn, in lyke caſe as the fyre is quen­ched wyth water.

¶Alexandre ſaythe gyue,Alex­andre. and ano­ther ſhal gyue vnto thee. And that
that thou wylte gyue, gyue it incontynente, and wythoute anye dyf­ferrynge.
For as the wyſe manne ſaythe in the Prouerbes. The Al­mous whyche is longe
dyfferred and loked for, is not gyuen, but it is ſolde.

¶Cato ſaythe,Cato, conſydre to whom thou gyueſte. And take hede that when thou
wylte demaunde anye thynge, that it be iuſte and ryght­full, for it is a great
folie to demaūd a thyng vnreaſonable. And ſuch a thing wherof he ſhalbe
lyghtlye denyed.

¶Senec ſaithe,Senec, that a man ought more to conſydre and regarde the wyll of
hym that dothe gyue, then
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=91) that thinge
whiche is geuen. And he whych demaundeth anye thing with feare, gyueth
occaſyon to bee denyed.

¶Plato ſaythe,Plato. that there is no greater heauyneſſe in the worlde, then
to demaund that thyng wher with a man ought to liue. And ſay­the, that
pouertye is a verye euyll thinge. but it is a greater euyll for a man to doe
euyll by reaſon of the ſame.

¶Tulle ſaithe,Tulle, that there is not a more cōfortable & ſweter thyng in
the world, then for a man to lyue of hys owne, and to haue Lybertye. And
ſaythe, that he whiche is con­tente with that thinge he hathe, is not poore.

¶Sidrac ſaithe,Sidrac beware of pouer­tie, when thou ſhall haue haboun­daunce
of riches, for in a lytle ſpace, the tyme doth chaunge.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=91) ¶Innocent
ſaithe,Innocent, that it is great pytie of the miſery of the pore man, for if
he demaunde, he conſumeth him ſelfe in pouertie.

¶Salomon ſaythe,Sala­mon, that when a man is poore, his brethren do dyſa­lowe
and renounce him, and hys fryendes doth flye & goo from him.

¶Salomon prayeng to almightie God ſaith.Salo­mon, Good lord I pray thee,
graunt me two thinges, the one is that thou defend me from pouerty, the other
is, that thou giue me not ſo much riches, that I do diſknowledge and forget
thee, by reaſon of the ſame. He ſaith that Auaryce is contrary to pouertie,
for if the rych man doe ſpeake, euerye man dothe gyue hym audience, albeit
that he ſpeake much euil & many foliſh wordes. And the pore mā, do he ſpeake
neuer ſo well, yet ſhall he not be re­garded, but ſhalbe reproued, and ſhalbe
cōſtrained to hold his peace.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=92) ¶Plato
ſaythe,Plato, it is better for a man to leue his rycheſſe after hys death, to
hys ennemies, then to demaund in hys lyfe by reaſon of po­uertye helpe of hys
fryendes.

¶Verro ſaythe, that the Ryche man dothe not gette hys Rycheſſe wythoute
Trauayle.Verro. nor dothe kepe them without Feare, nor doth not leaue them
withoute, Sorowe and Greefe.

## 53\. ¶Howe Coueytouſneſſe is a gre­uous Vyce, Of the euylles that doe come
therof. and of the Inſaſiatnes of the ſame. ¶The .liii. Chapter.

COueytouſneſſe, is contrarye to Lybertye. And it is a dyſ­ordynate [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=92) deſyre to gette
temporall goodes, and to wyth hold that which a man ought to giue to the pore.
And to miſſpend, waſt and ſuffre anye to be dyſtroyed, rather then to gyue it
where it is nede.

¶Saint Gregory ſaith that in all thinges in the world a meaſure contenting,S,
erg gorye, and ſufferynge, is founde & had, but in coueitouſnes which neuer is
ſatiſfied. Coueitouſnes may be compared to the Moldwarpe, whiche is a beaſte
that lyueth onelye of the earthe. And neuer hathe inoughe. For ſhe thinkethe,
that it will fayle her, and ſhe is alwayes permyrye.Paule

¶Saynte Paule ſaythe, that Co­ueytouſnes is the chyefe of all euill. For the
coueytous perſon is neuer full. In lyke caſe as the weight and charg of the
bourden that the Aſſe or horſe dothe beare, is to the pro­fyte
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=93) of another,
and to the greate payne of the bearer, that is to ſaye of the Horſe. So the
coueytous perſon dothe gette and kepe togyther hys rycheſſe by hys greate
payne and laboure, to the profyte of thoſe to whom he dothe leaue hys ſayde
rycheſſe, the whych do make merie wyth it.

¶Pithagoras ſaith that the coueitousPythagoras, perſones maye be called
Pai­nymes, for the Sarazyns doe wor­ſhip their Idols of gold & ſiluer, ſo the
auaricious perſons, doe wor­ſhyp theyr rycheſſe.

¶Senec ſayth,Senec that it is better to ſpend folyſhly, then to get and kepe
vnlawfullye.

The Maiſter of Sentences ſaithmaſter of ſen­tence, that there is no man
content with his degre and eſtate.

¶Saint Auſtine ſaythe,S. Au­ſtine. that a co­ueytous perſon, maye be compared
and likened to hell, for hell is neuer [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=93) full nor
ſatyſfyed. Nor the Couey­tous perſon wyth all the money of the
worlde.Mar­ciall,

¶Marcyall ſaythe, that ſo long as the Coueytous perſon dothe lyue, he neuer
dothe profite to any man.Senec Senec ſaithe that coueitouſnes is the hyghe way
of ſpyrituall death. And alſo often tymes of the temporall deathe.Paule

¶Therfore Saynte Paule ſaithe.

¶Radix omnium malorum eſt cupidi­tas,

## 54\. ¶Of Humylytye, And in howe manye maners it is deuided. And of thoſe
thynges whiche dyſ­cend of it. ¶The .liiii. Chapter.

HVmylytye,Ory­gyn. as Orygin ſaithe is to refrayne the intente of ye wyl of
the courage, ther is
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=94) dyuers
maners of Humylytie. The fyrſte is to ſhewe hym ſelfe, not ſo good and worthye
as other. The ſeconde, is to be of humble conuerſacyon, and famylyarytye wyth
e­uerye man. The thyrde is to repute himſelf vnworthy to be in the com­panye
of greate men. The fourthe is to beleue to haue ſuffycyent and vnable in all
thynges. The fyfte is to feare thoſe thynges whyche ou­ghte to be feared. Of
Humylytye deſcende and come foure thynges. The fyrſt is honour, that is to
ſay, to gyue honour to another manne. The ſeconde is to gyue honoure to a
better then hym ſelfe. The thirde is to obeye them that haue aucto­rytye to
commaunde hym. The .iiii. is to knowledge the benyfyte that a man hath
receyued. Of Humyly­tye do dyſcende theſe vertues mekenes, pytye, deuocyon,
franchyſſe [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=94) or lybertye,
contemplacyon, feare of god, ſimplenes, and equytie.

¶Salomon ſaythe, if a greate or noble man do the honoure,Salomon, doe not
exalte thee therfore.

¶God ſaythe,God, he that doth humy­late hym ſelfe, ſhalbe exalted. And he that
doth exalte him ſelf, he ſhal be made meke.

¶Saynte Gregorye ſaythe,S, gre­gorye, that the man ſhal haue no maner of
vertue excepte he haue fyrſte Humyly­tye.

¶Ariſtotile ſaith,Ariſto­tile, that the euil mā waxeth proude, when a man
doth giue him. And the wiſe man dothe humylate hym ſelfe.

¶Longin ſaithe,Lon­gyn, that as the Byr­des do ſtreyne theyr winges, when they
flye agaynſte the hyll. So a man muſte conſtraine hym ſelfe by humylytie, if
he will mount and aſ­cende into heauen.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=95) ¶Salomon
ſaithe,Salo­mon, doe all thinges by humylytye, and thou ſhall be lo­ued of
euery man. And ſaythe that the woman in humblinge her ſelfe, dothe ouercome
and rule her huſ­bande.

¶Cato ſaith,Cato, gyue place to a better man then thy ſelf. And diſpraiſe no
man for any maner of thinge, or if the man be poore, yet his vertues may be
great, humylitie is a greate vertue, and verye conuenyente and neceſſarye, as
well to lytle as to greate.

¶Salomon ſpeakyng of the ſame ſaythe.Salomon,

¶Quanto maior es humtlia et ipſum in omnibus et coram ce in uenies gra­ciaw,

## 55\. ¶Example of Humy­lytye, ¶The .lv. Chapter.

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=95) OF the
Vertue of Humylitie,Exam­ple, it is red in the Hiſtoryes of rome, that when
their was any Lorde or Captaine ſent by the Romaines to conquere anye
coun­trey. And if he retourned to Rome with victorie, the Romaines made him.
iii. honours. &. iii. diſhonours. The firſte honour was, that al the people of
the Cytie, ſhoulde go to mete hym and receyue hym.

The ſeconde was, that he was ſet vpon a Charet drawen wyth foure whyte horſes.
And all the people a­bout him, bringing him into Rome wyth Candles and Torches
bren­nynge.

The third was that al the princes that he had conquered, did come after him,
behind the Charet.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=96) The fyrſte
dyſhonoure was, that there was ſytte wyth hym in the Charet, the moſte vyle
and wret­ched perſon that coulde be founde in all the Cytye, whyche was done
to gyue example to other, to come to ſuch eſtate.

The Seconde that afore the peo­ple. Thys Vyllayne dyd gyue hym manye greate
ſtroakes, and ſayde, thou oughte not to be proude for the Honoure that is done
vnto thee, for I am a manne as well as thou.

The Thyrde was,Exam­ple, that duryng all thys daye of Tryumphe, eue­ry man
that wold, myght ſaye anye maner of Iniuryes to hym they wold, wtout anye
ponyſh­mente.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=96)

## 56\. ¶Of Pryde, and of the vices that deſ­cende aud come of the ſame, And
how Pryde dyſpleaſeth god and the world, and how the proude perſon dothe
torment hym ſelfe in thys world. ¶Thy. lvi. Chapter.

PRyde is a vyce, con­trarye to the vertue of Humyletye.

¶Aryſtotile ſaythe,Aryſtotyle, that Pryde is pro­perlye to wyll to bee lyke to
a greater or better then himſelfe. And there is many ſortes and maners of the
ſame, that is ty ſaye, Pryde of hyghnes, as to will to put hys ſelfe alwaies
afore all men, and to take hym ſelfe for the beſt. Pride
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=97) of gouerning
& ruling, as to will by himſelfe alone, to gouerne & rule all other. Pryde of
folie, which is to do more then a man may. Pryd of miſ­knowledg & ignoraunce,
that is to ſay, to kepe greater eſtate then doth appertaine & belong to the
perſon, beleuing him ſelf to be worthy therof. Pryde of beaſtialitie or a
beaſtly pride, as he which wil not honoure thoſe perſons to whom it doth
ap­pertaine, but wil deſpraiſe them. Of the ſyn of pryd decend. iii. thinges,
that is to ſay, not to beare honoure to a better then him ſelf. The ſecōd is
Inobedience, as not to obey thē that haue auctority & power of him The thirde
is Ingratytude, as not to knowledge the ſyn of pryde. And a man maye compare
pryde to the Faulcon, whiche deſireth to rule & gouerne. The faulcon is of
ſuch condycyon, [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=97) that there where
he dothe build and make his neſt, he beateth al the riuers about him in ſuch
wiſe that he will not ſuffre none other byrde of pray to haunt & vſe, there,
but he hym ſelfe. And wyll by hys greate pryde be lorde of all the Ry­uer.

¶Ptholomeus ſaythe,Ptholomeus. that the more that anye Lordſhyppe, Do­mynyon,
or Rueynge is exalted, the more peryllous it is, wherfore it is red in the
olde Teſtamente, that God dyd fourme and create the fayreſt Aungell of all
other. And by hys Pryde, he thought to be equall wyth God. And wolde haue
reſiſte hym: but God ſeinge hys greate Malyce, dyd commaunde Saynte Myghell to
caſt him out of heauen, wyth al his felowes, and ſo it was done.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=98) ¶Salomon
ſaythe,Salo­mon, that there be three vices among all other which do very ſore
dyſpleaſe God, that is to ſay, a poore man proud, a ryche lyer, and an olde
lecherous perſon. And ſaythe, that there is alwayes queſtions, and debate
amongeſte proude men.

¶Saynte Bernarde ſaythe,S, ber­narde I doe meruaile muche of proude men, the
whyche can not be in Peace. And can not come and aſcende into heauen, wherfore
they muſte needes fall into the fyre of Hell, whych ſhal deuoure them, there
is difference betwene Vayneglorye and Pryde, albeit that Vayneglorye dothe
de­ſcend of Pryd. For pryde doth hold it ſelfe within the hearte and cou­rage.
And vainglory is to ſhew the wil of the courage. And to wil to be prayſed.

¶Saynte Auſtyne ſaithe that theS, au­ſtine. [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=98) vyce of
Irreuerence, and Dyſobe­dyence, is a token of Folie and gre­ate Pryde in the
hearte. And ſaith that a man muſte more feare and flye from Irreuerence, then
from deathe.

¶Salomon ſaythe,Salo­mon, that he why­che dothe not gyue Reuerence and Honoure
to hys Father and Mo­ther, ſhall be vnhappye and all euyl and myſchyefe ſhall
come vnto hym.

¶Senec ſaythe,Senec, that when thou ſhall doe anye thynge better then another,
doe not boaſte thy ſelfe therof.Cato, For if thou doe, Cato ſaythe that thou
ſhall be dyſprayſed ther­by.

¶Saynte Auſtyne ſaythe,S, au­ſtine, in the Booke of the Cytye of God, that
boaſtynge is an euyll and peruerſe vice to the ſoule. He doth loue prai­ſing
of man, whyche doth diſpraiſe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=99) the verye
witnes of hys owne con­ſcience.

¶Therfore Salomon ſaythe.Salo­mon,

¶Qui poſuit nobis ſuparbiam, aut diutriarum iactariam, qui contulit nobis.

¶Orygen ſaythe,Ory­gen. wherfore and howe can or dare the perſon, being but
earthe and aſſhes, be proude, when he doth remembre hys naty­uitie. And how he
is come into this world, or how his life is conteyned in a feble Veſſell, or
what ordure or fylth he doth caſte oute, by the con­duytes of his bodye.

¶Saynte Gregorye ſaythe,S, gre­gorye, that there be foure maners of
Arrogan­cye, and Pryde, in the whyche all the ſwellinges of pryde be ſhewed.

The fyrſt is, if a man thinke that al the goodnes that is in him doth come of
him ſelfe.

The ſeconde is, that if he beleue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=99) to haue it
of God. And to iudge to haue well deſerued it by his mery­tes.

The third is when he doth vaunte and boaſte hym of goodnes & there is none in
him.

The fourth is, when in hym ſelfe he doth dyſprayſe another, and de­ſireth that
a man knowe the good­nes that is in him. And of this the wyſe man ſaythe.The
wiſe man.

¶Arroganciam et ſuperbiam et os bi­lingue beteſtor.

## 57\. ¶Howe a manne oughte to gouerne hym ſelfe, as well of the tongue, as
of wyt and vnderſtanding, for to ſpeake well and wiſe­lie to all folkes, and
how by wordes a man is prayſed or diſ­prayſed. ¶The .lvii. Chapter.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=100) THou oughte
to conſy­dre when thou ſhall ſpeake, ordre and rea­ſon therfore afore that
thou doe ſpeake, con­ſydre ſyxe thynges, that is to ſaye, know well what thou
will ſpeake, and to whom. And wherfore, how, and in what time, and what
reaſon. And then beware that thou be not to haſtye in ſpeakynge, for feare
that thy will doe not agree to reaſon.

¶Salomon ſaith,Sala­mon, that he whyche can not refrayne, and gouerne hys
ſprytes in ſpeakynge, is lyke to a towne, or Cytye wythoute walles, and is all
open. And ſaythe that he that wil not cōſidre, what he doth ſpeake, ſhall
ſuffre much euyll. And [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=100) in another
place ſayth, ſpeake lytle for in much ſpeakynge, there is ofte times muche
folye. And ſaithe that the fole ſemeth to bee a wyſe man, when he dothe holde
his peace. It was demaunded of a Pliyloſepher wherfore he did ſpeake ſo lytle,
and whether he did it by reaſon of wyt or ſolye: and he aunſwered that the
fole could not hold his peace.

¶Cato ſaithe,Cato, that the cheefe ver­tue is, to refrayne the tongue.

¶The Maiſter of ſentences ſaith,maſter of ſen­tence, that ſo long as thou
doeſt kepe the from ſhewyng thy ſecrete, it is thy ſubiecte, but when thou
haſt diſco­uert and ſhewed it, thou arte then in pryſon and ſubiecte vnto it.
It is better and more ſure for the to hold thy peace, then to crye to another
that he holde his peace.

¶Senec ſaith,Sene [...] that if thou can not refrayne thy ſelfe from
ſpeakynge, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=101)
how will thou commaund another to holde hys peace, thou oughte to conſydre, if
he be thy fryende or ene­mie, to whom thou doeſt ſpeake, for there is not a
ſwter thynge in the world, then a good friēde to whom thou mayſte tell and
ſhewe thy ſe­crete, as to thy ſelfe.

¶Tullie ſayth,Tullie that although that thy words be not fayre & eloquent.
Neuertheles if thou do pronounce themiently, and voith faire maner, they
ſhalbe prayſed, and if the wor­des be neuer ſo good and fayre, and thou do not
ſhewe them iētlie, they ſhalbe blamed.

¶Sidrac ſaythe,Sidrac that when thou wyll purpoſe any thyng, beware a­boue al
thynges to ſpeake to much, for to much ſpeakynge and a longe tale,
dyſpleaſethe and greueth the hearers.

¶Saint Auſtine ſaith,S, auſtine that a man [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=101) ought to
beware to iudg ani thing againſt another, for a man can not tell if he whych
doth the thing, do it for good intent or euyll.

¶Our Lorde ſaithe in the Goſpell,Iheſu chryſt, Iudge no man, and thou ſhall
not be Iudged.

¶Saynt Iohn Criſoſtome,Creſo­ſtome, ſpea­king againſt thē which do iudge
o­ther folkes and ſaithe, howe doeſt ſe ſo many litle faultes in the dedes of
another man. And dothe let pas ſo many great faults in thine owne dedes, thou
ought to be dyligent to conſydre thyne owne dedes, more then the dedes of
other men.

¶For our Lorde ſaithe in the goſ­pell.Iheſu chriſt,

¶Qui autem vides feſtucam in oculo fratris tui, trabem autem in oculo tuo non
vides.

A Philoſopher ſaid vnto a friend of his,A philoſopher, be euermore glad &
wilinger [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=102) to
heare and harkē then to ſpeake, vſe thynes eares more then thy ton­gue,
ſpeake nothinge but good, and leaue the euyll, for to ſpeake good of another
man, it is the beginnynge of loue and frendſhip, and to ſpeake euyll, is cauſe
of great hatred. And a certayne Philoſopher ſaithe, that good and ientle
wordes do amend the dedes. And ſaithe alſo, that a good and ientle aunſwere,
breketh the Ire & wrathe of man. And ano­ther ſaithe, be well ware that thou
doe not ſpeake verye ofte, if thou be not a good and a faire ſpeaker. And
ſaythe, that the fole can not but de­fame hym ſelfe in ſpeakynge, for he can
not ſtop nor make an end of his wordes and ſpeaking.

¶Tulle ſaith,Tulle, amongeſt al myſchi­efes and daungers that be in frendſhyp,
flāterynge is the greateſt.

¶Salomon ſaith,Salomon, that the perſon [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=102) full of
flaterynge, is a ſnare to take the Innocēt perſons. And ſaith be­ware in any
caſe that thou do not incline thy ſelfe to flatering words for they be ſnares
to take thee.

¶Saynt Gregorye ſaith,S, gregorye, that we ought to haue thoſe in greate
reuerence, whiche do preache the holye ſerypture, for they be curſers that go
before our lorde, & our lord doth folowe them. The holy preachinge commeth
before, and our lord com­meth after in the viſion of our heartes and courages,
the words make the curſe before: and trueth is ſpred abroade in our
vnderſtandynge, to this purpoſe, God ſaithe to his Apoſtles. ¶Qui vos audit me
audit et qui vos ſpernit me ſpernit.

¶And Socrates ſaith,Socra­tes. the tongue of the fole, is the key of hys
ſecrete. And ſayth, that the tōgue of a man ſheweth and declareth his wit and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=103) Wyſdome, or
his folye.

¶Barbalicus ſaith,Barbalicus. a man of good diſereciō ought not to exerciſe
him in thinges vnuailable, nor to ſpend more then his winning is.

¶Argelicus ſaithe,Argel­licus. a mā may haue but paine & laboure in this
world.

¶Oruſiane ſaithe,Oruſi­ane. he that cateth not ſhall die for hungre, & if he
eate more then in ough, he ſhalbe ſycke, therfore it is a defycile thinge to a
man to be long in health.

¶Bernicus ſaithe,Berni­cus. truſte hym not that forſweareth his ſaith for
worldely thynges, And he ſaythe, Idle­nes engendreth Ignoraunce, & Igneraunce
engendreth erroure.

¶Sedechias ſaith,Sede­chias, in long ſteping is not profite, but harmer o vſe
it, and ſaith beware that thou diſpēd not half thy time in Idlenes.

¶Ciuyl ſaith,Cyuil, the good ſoule wold haue no reſt in this world: than he
[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=103) that
wil haue a good ſoule oughte to beware of reſte.

¶Galyen ſaith,gallen gouerne the ſo wel that thou kepe the from euill doēg, &
ſuffyſe thee wyth the good dedes that thou ſhal do beſide for chriſtes ſake.

¶And Gregorie ſayth,S, gregorye, he that wil wit whether hys ſoule be noble &
cleane, or foule and corrupte, he ou­ght to conſydre in hys delectacyon and
hys conſcyence, and if he de­lyghte hym in doeng good and vertuous workes,
with faithe, hope, & charytye, than hys Soule is clene and noble. And if he
delyghtethe hym in doenge foule and tranſyto­rious thinges, and of no value,
thā hys ſoule is foule, for euery thinge reioyſeth him, with hys ſemblable,
the good with the good, and the e­uyll wyth the euyll.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=104) ¶Socrates
ſaith let not to do wel though thy good dedes be not knowen,Socrates, for wel
doenge is ſo good of it ſelfe, that it ſhalbe vailable inough to the at laſt.
And ſaith when thou wyll chaſtiſe or correct any many for hys vice, thou ought
to moniſh and exhort him by good and ientle wordes. And ſaith, that the man
ſlau­dering with wordes, is worſe then a theefe. And ſaith that he is good and
wiſe, whiche can reherſe the good deedes of the wyſe men, and couer theyr
malyce. And it was de­maunded of hym, when the wyt of a man is perfite, and he
aūſwered, that when he doth not ſpeake, but wel and diſcretely, & as he ought
to do. And ſaith that it is better for a man to ſpeake wel, then to hold his
peace, and to ſay nothing: he ſayth refraine thy tongue, and thy euyll wil,
and it ſhalbe the fayreſt robe & [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=104) garmente that
thou caneſt weare.

¶And therfore the prophet Dauid praied our lord that he wolde take hede of his
mouth,Dauid. & be keper ther­of, and to ſet a dore or a gate at his lippes to
kepe thē cloſe, to thintent that he ſhulde not ſay not ſpeake a­ny maner of
thynge, that ſhuld diſ­pleaſe God, to whom we ſhall praie that al thinges
which be aforeſaid may be to his glorye, to the whiche the Father the Sonne
and the holy Ghoſt bring vs all. Amen.

FINIS.

¶Here endeth the Booke of Wyſ­dome, after the ſayenges of aun­cient
Phyloſophers, and other noble wiſe mē. Lately tranſlated out of French into
Engliſhe. And here ſo  [...]eth the Table.

## Appendix A Here begynneth the Table of thys Booke.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=105)

FIrſte the Auctoures names, Follio, 2, The Prologue, fol, 3 ¶The auctoure ſhew
how a man or a womā oughte to be adorned with vertues. And how that Prudēce
ought chiefly and fyrſt of all, rule and gouerne the creatures,

  * The fyrſt Chapter, Follyo. 5,
  * Howe prudence is cheefe buckler & defence of all vertues, & of the greate goodnes that may come of the ſame to al perſons, after the auncient Phylo­ſophers. The ſecond chapter, fol 6.
  * Example of the vertue of prudence.
  * The thyrd chapter, fol, 11.
  * How Folie is contrary to prudence. And how Folie is deuided into manye partes of the man. Alſo the maner to knowe the folie by the dedes, and the wyſe man, by hys workes.
  * The .iiii chapter. fol. 13.
  * Howe Temperance is one of the Flowers of Prudence, And howe he [[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=105) that hathe it in hym, maye reſyſte and withſtand many euylles, after the ſay enges of the wiſe men, in the chapter going before. The v. chapter fol 16.
  * Howe Dyſtemperaunce is contra­rye to Temperaunce And howe it is the pryncypall cauſe of all euyll.
  * The, vi. chapter, fol, 18.
  * Example of Dyſtemperaunce. The vii. chapter. fol, 19.
  * How the Auctour ſpeaketh of Loue of Beneuolence, and of delyberacion, & how of loue he maketh iiii, chapters. The .viii. chapter. fol. 19.
  * Howe the loue of God, is the loue a­boue al loues that dureth the longeſt. And that without the whiche the crea­tures can not be ſatyſfyed nor contented. The .ix, chapter, fol. 21.
  * Howe the loue of father and mother with other parentes commeth, & what reuerence and honoure we oughte to giue to oure father & mother. And the maner to loue hys wyfe and children, & to correct & leade them in this world. The .r. chapter, fol 23.
  * Of the loue of compaignons & friendes, and how to entertaine it,
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=106) The, xi, chapter, fol, 26.
  * How the loue of concupicence com­meth to men and women, and of the great daunger that do chaunce & come of the ſame. The .xii, chapter, fol, 29.
  * Example of the vertue of Loue.
  * The xiii chapter. fol 30.
  * How Enuy is contrary to the vertu of Loue: and what enuy is, and alſo of the paine that the enuyous man bea­reth in hym ſelf. The xiiii chap, fol 32, Exāple of enuy. The xv chap, fol 33,
  * How a man ought to take gladnes & Ioy: and of what thing and what gladnes or Ioy is. The xvi chap, fol 34.
  * Howe heauines is contrary to glad­nes, & how the wiſe man ought neuer to put any in his hearte, wherof heauines and mellancholly may be engen­dred, The xvii chap. fol 35,
  * How mellancholly is daungerous, and what is mellancholly: and how it cauſeth many to fall in great trauaile paines & miſeries, & conſequentlye in great pouertie, The xvii chap, fol 36.
  * Exāple of heauines, or penſiuenes, The xix chap, fol 39,
  * How the vertue of peace ought to be [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=106) mayntayned & kepte, and of the great goodnes that cōmeth of the ſame, and what peace is, The xx chapt, fol 40,
  * How Ire is contrarye to peace, and what Ire is, & how it doth deſtroy and waſte the vertues and bodies of them that be entangled with the ſame, and of the euyll that dothe come of it,
  * The xxi chapter, fol 41,
  * Exāple of Ire, The xxii cha, fol 43,
  * Of chaſtytye, & how ſhe ought to be withholden, obſerued & kept, & the pe­rils that the wiſe ſhuld flie, for feare to leaſe ſuch vertu, The xxiii chap, fol 45
  * Example of the vertue of Chaſtytie, The xxiiii chap, fol 46,
  * How lechery is contrary to chaſtity & in how many ſortes it is deuided, thē is ſhewed the daūgers that come ther­of, as well to the bodyes of men as to theyr ſoules, The xxv chap, fol 48,
  * Of force or ſtrength, & what it is, the maners and compariſons of the ſame, and who may be called ſtronge, and of thoſe alſo whych be alwayes ſtronge. The xxvi chap, fol 50,
  * How pacience cauſeth a mā to beare eaſelye the paines & trauailes of thys [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=107) world, and how many ſortes therbe of pacyence, The xxvii chap. fol 52.
  * How feare and dread, be contrarye to ſtrēgth & valliantnes, & what feare is, & who thoſe be that be feareful & for what cauſe, The xxviii chap, fol 53.
  * Of ſuerty & how many maners ther is therof, & how feare and ſuertye doe ſtriue togither by dyuers languages. The xxir chap, fol 57.
  * How the wiſe man ought to doubt, & how by doubte & feare many times the mē becōe vertuous. The xxx cha. fo 60
  * How good Fame oughte to go afore men, & of the goodnes that commeth of the ſame. The xxxi chapt. fol 63.
  * How glotony is a daungerous vyce & of the great euill that cōmeth therof to the bodies of mē, & how the vertues of men be diſtroyed and corrupte by the ſame. The xxxii chap, fol 64.
  * How abſtinence is that wherof glo­tony is conſumed, and by the goodues that is therin, and that may come ther of, The xxxiii chap, fol 65,
  * How Conſtancie & Inconſtancie be dyfferent, & how conſtancie is a noble vertue, and what Inconſtauncye is, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=107) The xxxiiii chap, fol 66,
  * Of the vertue of noblenes of courage of men, and howe the men be ofte ty­mes prayſed by reaſon of the ſame, The xxxv chap, fol 67,
  * Example of Noblenes of Courage, The xxxvi chap, fol, 68,
  * Of vainglory, & how many maners there is therof, & howe vainglory is to be diſpraiſed, The xxxvii chap, fo 68,
  * Example of Vayne glorye, fol. 69.
  * How Iuſtice ought to be done, & how it is yt thing that doth meaſure al thin­ges vpon earth, The xxxix chap, fo 70
  * Exāple of Iuſtice, The xl chap, fo 72
  * How Iniuſtice or wrong, is contra­rye to Iuſtice, and how many maners therbe of Iniuſtyce, & howe Iniuſtyce demaundeth vengeaunce afore god, The xli chap, fol 74,
  * Example of Iniuſtyce, The xlii chap, fol 76,
  * Of Loyaltye, and by Loyaltye the perſon is greatlye prayſed, The xliii chap, fol 77,
  * Of falſehed, what it is, & of the diffe­rence that is betweene ſuſpycion and Ielouſye, and treaſon and malyce. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=108) The xliii chap. fol 78.
  * Exāple of falſhehed. The xlv cha, fo 80,
  * How trueth is to be cōpared by rea­ſon to the perdryche, & how truethe is that thing which iuſtyfieth the man a­fore al perſons, The xlvi chap, fo 81,
  * Example of the vertue of Verytye, The xlvii chap, fol 82,
  * How lyeng is an euyl vice, the ma­ners to eſchewe it, and in what ſorte, and whyche is euyll Lyenge, The xlviii chap, fol 83,
  * What mercye is, & of the operacyon of the ſame, & how mercy is that wher by a man obteyneth the loue of God, The xlix chap, fol 84,
  * Example of mercy, The l cha, fo 86.
  * Of Crualtie, & howe many ſortes be therof, and of the greate euyls and in­conueuients that be done by crualtie, The li chap, fol 86,
  * Of Lyberalitye, how it is contrarie to coueitouſnes, & how a man ought to be lyberall, and in what maner, The lii chapt, fol 87,
  * Howe Coueytouſnes is a greuous vice, of the euils that do come therof, and of the Inſaſiatnes of the ſame. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=108) The liii chap, fol, 90,
  * Of humilyty, & in how many māers it is deuided, & of thoſe thinges which diſcend of it, the liiii chap, fol 92,
  * Example of Humylytye, The lv chap, fol 94,
  * ¶Of Pryde, and of the vices that deſ­cende and come of the ſame, And how Pryde dyſpleaſeth god and the world, and how the proude perſon dothe tor­ment hym ſelfe in thys world. The lvi, chap, fol 95,
  * ¶Howe a manne oughte to gouerne hym ſelfe, as well of the tongue, as of wyt and vnderſtanding, for to ſpeake well and wiſe­lie to all folkes, and how by wordes a man is prayſed or diſ­praiſed. The lvii chap. fol. 98.

FINIS.

## Appendix B

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=109)

❧IMPRINted at London in Fleteſtreate, beneathe the Conduyte, at the ſygne of
S. Iohn Euangeliſte, by Thomas Col­¶well.¶ ¶(?)¶

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=16674&page=109)

[Home](/)

Date: 1565  

