## (unknown project)

# A dyall of dayly contemplacion, or deuine exercise of the mind instructing
vs to liue vnto God, and to dye vnto the vvorld. First colected & published in
Latin, at the request of a godly Bishop, and Reuerent Father, Richard,
sometime Byshop of Dirham, and Lorde Priuie Seale. Novv nevvly translated into
Englishe, by Richard Robinson, citizen of London. Seene, and allowed. —
Contemplacyon of synners.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=1)

A DYALL Of dayly Contemplacion, or deuine exerciſe of the mind: inſtructing vs
to liue vnto GOD, and to dye vnto the vvorld. Firſt colected & publiſhed in
Latin, at the requeſt of a godly Biſhop, and Reuerent Father, RICHARD,
ſometime Byſhop of Dirham, and Lorde Priuie Seale. Novv nevvly Tran­ſlated
into Engliſhe, by Richard Robinſon, Citizen of London.

Seene, and allowed.

MATTH. 24.

Estote & vos ideo parati, quia qua hora non putatis filius hominis venturus
est.

RECORDARE ET REDDE Simplicitate & Synceritate.

ANNO. 1578.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=2)

## ¶ CLARISSIMO DOCTRINA, ET Pietate viro, D. Alex­andro Nowello, Paulinae
Eccleſiae Ca­thedralis digniſſimo Decano, Patro­no ſuo ſingulari. R.
Robinſonus Londinenſis, Gratiam & Benedictionem A Do­mino Deo ſempi­ternam.

ALVMNVS Salutis noſtrae munificentiſſimus IESVS CHRISTVS, (Reuerendiſſime
Patrone) VT DIVI PAVLI AD EPHESI. CAP. 2. LEGI­MVS, (VOLENS MOR­TALES Q
VOSLIBET PER PECCATA MOR­TVOS, GRATIA DIVINA VIVIFICARE SVA) variis quaſi
modis noſtram per ſemetipſum re­ſtitutam felicitatem demonſtrans, nos ſic ſibi
conſer­uatos: ad recordationem hinc inde debiti noſtri, tan­quam optimus Pater
filios, Paſtor egregius oues, nec non dux vigilans, & Conſolator validus
commilitones ſuos maximopere inſtimulare viſus  [...]ſt. Quo quidem exemplo,
ſi mundi nationes quaecunque, integrum Corpus Eccleſie ſuae fidelis
incorporatum, hodierna luce inter ſe probationem veriſſimam adimplere que­ant:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=3) Si vel quae
nam earum dudum longinquae,  [...]am ve­ro propinquae, gratiae promiſſioni
diuinae preſentis, aut iminentis factae ſint: Inter eaſdem, nimirum An­gliae
huic noſtrae, praeluxit etiam admirabilis gratiae ſa­lutiferae ſplendor.
IVSTICIA SCILICET, CVM ET PAX SVA APVD NOS PER ANNOS IAM MVLTOS DEOSCVLATAE
SVNT IN­VICEM, MISERICORDIA PARITER ET VE­RITAS NON SOLVM SIBI OBVIAVERVNT
VERVMETIAM NOS OMNES TVTISSIME CIRCVMVNIVERVNT. Adeo vt Patria hec noſtra a
priore lapſu ad preſentem ſtabilitatem, a defectione ad perfectionem a
periculo ad felicitatem, a ſeruitute ad libertatem, a tenebris ad lucem, a
morte denique ad vitam, reſtituta, viſitata, & in hunc modum viuicata, non
mediocre habet vnde congratuletur his verbis: A DOMINO FACTVM EST ISTVD, ET
EST MIRABILE IN OCVLIS NOSTRIS. Ita­que tanta prouidentia ex ultans diuina,
Quanto ma­gis de ſe erga ſaluatorem hunc ſuum mentem ſanam in corpore ſano, de
tempore in tempus omnimodo pre­bere debeat, etiam orbis totius ſaciei liquido
conſtat. Prefertim iam inſtantibus nouiſſimis diebus quae (vt ſcriptum eſt
Actibus Apoſtolorum. cap. 2.) Pater iſte Celeſtis ſua conſtituit poteſtate,
non noſtrum ſit noſce tempora nouiſſima, nec temporū articulos. Eo liben­tius
accipiamus, igitur interea virtutem, quam Spiritus Sanctus attulerit nobis:
Prebeamus que noſmetipſos non ſolum cum HIERVSOLEMIS, VNIVERSA IVDEA, atque
SAMARIA, PRIORE MVNDI AETAE· Verumetiam toto cum Eccleſiae ſuae fidelis
corpore incorporato apud hoc ſeculum vbicunque diſ­perſo
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=3) ſua in
ſeruitute ſeruos vigilantiſſimos, vt ſimus ei teſtes acceptabiles etiam vſque
ad vltimum terrae. Mundum quinimo facineroſum, Demonem Malicio­ſum, Carnemque
procliuam ad malum a nobis exu­entes: Corpus autem lucidum, armaque lucis
nobis in­duentes, accurate inuigilemus, fideliter oremus, noſ­metipſos denique
noſtras lampades oleo repletas iugi­ter preparemus, Summum, Celeſtemque
ſponſum, ag­num illum immaculatum in throno ſuo regnantem, gaudio & letitia
ſumma vt conueniamus. Ad haec gra­tiſſima (REVERENDE IN CHRISTO PATER) Quocies
cunquae nos non hoſpites & incoles, ſed & conciues ſanctorum & domeſtici. Dei,
ad nuptias Agni inuitatos, oleoquae letitiae comuniter vnctos Contem­plor,
Architectureque diuinae quaſi ſtructuram orna­tiſſimam templi ſancti ſui, tum
temporalis in hac vita, tum ſpiritualis in futura preordinatam et vocatam:
Iterum atque iterum animi mei intimis affectibus in­ter alios exoptans
feliciter ſtabiliri pacem ISRAELIS noſtrae (Tametſi, dicto, facto, etiam vel
cogitatione infi­mus minimusque eſſem expectationi cuilibet optimae
coreſpondere) Tamen quoquo modo beneuolentiam adhibens optimam, meo memet
metiens pede prote­nus in ſtuporem redactus: Dum dudum hac ex parte proprio
Colluctarier ſtudio. Tandem propoſito fauens meo. Ecce, ENDYMIONIS (ſi ita
dicam) SOMNI­VM CVIVSDAM IGNOTI, occurrebat, beneuo­lentiae pariter et
imperfectioni ſuppeditaturum meae. VT POTE. DE VITA CONTEMPLATIVA, (quae ſit
vita non ſecundum hominem, communem, vt apud Ariſtotilem, lib. Ethicorum. 10.
ſed et vita diuina eaque optima imitanda) ab Authore ignoto, iuſſu vero
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=4) REVERENDI
CVIVSDAM RICARDI DV­NELMENSIS EPISCOPI in ſeptenam quotidia­namque
excercitationem, commemoratiuam dige­ſtum, ex ſacris Scripturis, Doctorum
Primitiuae Eccle­ſie, aeque ac poſteriorum auctoritatibus deſiunptum in
Latinis primum divulgatum verbis, per annos ab hinc ſeptuaginta et octo
elapſos obdormitans, Hoc iam de­nuo tam tenui induſtria mea elaboratum, a
ſomno, ad vigilantiam, a morte ad vitam, extra obliuionis ſepul­tura ad
memorabilem famae ſculpturam, poſtremo e Latino ſermone in maternam linguam
noſtram qua­lecunque manibus euadit completum meis, Publicae tantum vtilitati
commendaturum, omni conamine in lucem emittere ſtatuebam. Explorato deinceps
MOY­SE vel AARAONE quodam paſtore obſeruantiſſi­mo, cuius ſatis perſpectae
vitae integritati (nempe vt profeſſioni ita et probationi, vox ipſa populi
tanquam vox dei in patronum eligendum applauderet conſēta­nea) Inter alios
tum doctrinae, tum pietatis fyncerae preſtantiſſimos noſtra aetate MAECENATES.
Max­ima equidem animo meo de Paternitatis tuae dignita­te ſeſe inuoluebat
beneuolentia, cum optimis quibus­que de Patrocinio, benemerita. Cuius quidem
Paterno fauori, Iuditio non tam docto quam approbato, prae­fulgidoque vitae
ſanctimonio, velut examplari condig­no, fauſto nunc demum omine, SVB TITVLO
HOROLOGII CONTEMPLATIVIQ VOTI­DIANI, velut novellum quoddam Anni iam inſequē
­tis omni cum humilitate pariter et reuerentia debita, a me conſecratum,
dedicatumque, Si modo gratum et acceptabile fuerit viſum: Ceteri omnes non
dubita­uero domeſtici fidei, inde in optimam acceptantes par­tem,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=4) quod (AD
RECTE VIVENDVM DEO, MORIENDVM­qVE MVNDO SPECTAT) non ſolum conſequi poſſint,
Verumetiam tam Simplicem quam Synceram Be­neuolentiam erga omes meam facilime
contemplen­tur et complectentur promptiſſimam. DEVS OPTI­MVS MAXIMVS, ſua
immenſa clementia, et boni­tate ineffabili dignetur, cum de Caeleſti
tribunalique throno ſuo Iudex ſupremus, ſedere ſit venturus, Nos omnes vnius
ſuae fidei contemplatiuam Eccleſiam, pa­ri opera vigilantes, vinculoque
ſimili, ſpei, pacis, et di­lectionis, obtemperantes ſuae, Ditione eternali
cohe­reditari ſecum preſeruaret conſeruaretque beatiſſima ſua▪ Ad quam et in
qua Deitasvna in trinitate et tri­nitas vna in Deitate abſolutiſſima potentia
PATRIS FILII ET SPIRITVS SANCTI, ſua ſemper gratia et benedictione, tuam
paternitatem cogitaciones tu [...]s, ſimul et actiones omnes diuinas, beat,
regat, dirigat, Protegatque, ad nominis ſui gloriam propagandam, Eccleſiae,
ſanctae ſuae, nec non congregationis chriſtianae vti­litatem. Denique ad
animae tuae ipſius, conſolationem in Chriſto IESV Perhennem. Amen.

¶ Londini ex Domicilio meo, in Perochia Sancti Iohannis Euangeliſtae
nuncupa­ta.Primo die Menſis IANVAR 11. ANNO ſalutis humanae. 1578.

Tuae Dignitatis humilimus Stu­dioſiſſimusque Orator, Ricardus Robinſonus.
Londinenſis.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=5)

## The Auctors Epiſtle, or Preface to this woorke. SAPIENCIAE. CAP. 2.
Exiguum, & cum tedio, Eſt tempus vitae noſtrae.

SYTHEN that by natu­rall courſe, the date of mans life is ſhort, and as
experience ſheweth, the Proceſſ of the ſame is full of perilles, both of ſoule
and body. And moreo­uer, our mortall complexion is yet ſubiect to many
corporall infirmities, paſſions, and inordinate affections of the ſpirite. And
ſo we paſſe away our dayes by continuall enterchange: as then ſicke, nowe, in
health, then tich, nowe poore: then in hope, now in diſpayre: and now in
diſcomfort, then in conſolacion. Therefore IOB, making familier compariſon,
likeneth the beginnyng, the middes, and the end of mans lyfe, vnto a flowre.

For right as a flowre in the firſt appearance or ryſing is tender and feoble,
and ſoone ouerthrowen, oppreſ­ſed, and conſumed and all be it that in the
proceſſe of growyng, it ſpringeth and ryſeth pleaſantly, yet by al­teracion of
Nyght and Day, mutabilitie of winde and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=5) weather,
miſty Cloudes, and tempeſtious ayre. This foreſaid flowre is in continuall
enterchange, and ſtan­deth neuer ſtable in one floriſhing ſtate any long time,
but finally fadeth away, returnyng to very earth and powder.

Right ſo a man in the tender ſtate of his inno­cencie, is vnable to helpe him
ſelfe, and to nouriſhe him ſelfe, in the neceſſitie of Nature he hath no
ſuffi­ſaunce. Then growyng vp to Childhood, he is both feeble of corporall
ſtrength, and weake in witte: and by caſuall chaunce of any int
[...]mperancie, exceſſe, or ſurffet, he is ſoone quayled and brought to his
ende. Then floriſhing and ſpringing vp to the ripenes (that is) vnto yeeres of
diſcretion, portlines of ſtature, and perfection of manly ſtrength: he is apt
to be poſſeſſed with many ſondry perils both ſpirituall and corporall, and
vnder the chaunge of many fortunate chaunces.

And ſo concludingly, in decrepit aige he muſt neede ſuffer the impotencie
thereof, and the miſerie of many ſore languors: and finally be ſequeſtred from
this lyfe and worldly vanities thereof. And thus he neuer ſtan­deth fyrme in
one ſtay.

IOB. 44.

Homo natus est de muliere bre­ui viuens tempore, repletur multis miſerijs:
Qui, quaſi flos egreditur, & eonteritur, & fugit velut vmbra, & nunquam in
eodem statu per­manet. &c.

And thus our tyme reuoluing by continuall altera­tion, (to conclude and
finiſhe our perillous pilgrimage in this vaile of teares) ſucceedeth dollorus
Death: the which no man by naturall courſe can eſchue. And of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=6) the time, the
place, the maner, or the kind of his death, is no man that naturally knoweth:
and then according to his deſeruing he ſhall haue his dome.

Therefore, ſythen our time is but ſhort and vncer­tayne, and by reaſon of
diuers impedimentes ryght daungerus, it ſhoulde be the rather more profitably
ſpent: For as Sainct Bernard ſayth, There is nothyng committed to the
diſpoſition of Man, more precious then time. All be it, many worldly men
labour and turmoyle them ſelues with weerineſſe in worldly tra­uels, waſtyng
their dayes in meare vanitie. And carnall Creatures, blinded with ſenſuall
appetites, lothſomely conſume their precious tyme, wherein they might at­tayne
vnto knowledge and ſoules health, making no more accompt of loſt tyme (whiche
is vnrecouerable) then as it were but of vyle price, and of no value.

BERNAR.

Nihil precioſius tempore: heu, nihil hodie vilius computatur. Tranſeunt dies
ſalutis, & nemo ſibi diem vnquam cauſatur re­diturum.

And though for the profitable employment of our time moſt requiſite it be for
all eſtates and conditions what ſo euer, to be exerciſed in readyng or hearing
di­uers woorckes and compiled matters, wherein might be conteyned noble
hiſtories, morall documentes, and royal examples of perſonages renoumed for
their ver­tuous lyfe and conuerſation: whiche when we duely reade and regard,
may fructifie and bring profite to vs in our lyues and maners of liuyng, for
the aduaunce­ment of vertue, and the aholliſhing of vice. Yet is there no
exerciſe or labour taken in hand, nor tyme better
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=6) ſpent, then
in reading the ſacred volumes of the Scrip­tures. For the knowledge of
Scripture, by many rea­ſons, ſtrengthneth our Pacience, and geueth vs
conſo­lation in all aduerſitie. VVherefore, the vnderſtanding of it to euery
eſtate higher or lower, is both honora­ble, pleaſant, and profitable, as
Caſſianus ſayth.

Non aliqua in mundo potest eſſe fortuna, quam literarum non auget glorioſa
notitia.

Yet notwithſtandyng, holy Scripture hath a ſpeciall prerogatiue beyonde all
other doctrine, or prophane compiled matters. VVhetefore Sainct Ierome
com­pared holy Scripture to a Mirror, or a Glaſſe, ſaying.

Scriptura enim ſpeculum est, feda ostendens, & corrigere docens.

GREGO.

Sacra enim ſcriptura, est quaſi Speculum quod oculis mentis opponitur: Ibi
enim ſentimus, Quantum proficimus, & quan­tum a profectu longe distamus.

For like as a Glaſſe ſheweth a man the ſpots, defor­mities, and faultes of his
face, the which by the ſight of his eye, he can not diſcerne: ſo the
declaration of holy Scripture lightneth a mans reaſon, and maketh him more
profoundly to know the goodnes of God, his owne vnthankfulnes, the daunger of
ſinne, the vallure of vertue, the vicious vanitie of this world, the ſhort
proceſſe of our lyfe, the endles torment of hell orday­ned for ſinners, and
the perpetual pleaſures of heauen, prepared for iuſt and godly perſons. And
though by the iudgement: of natural reaſon, men may indiffe­  [...]ently haue
a groſſe conceipt betweene vice and ver­tue,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=7) good and
euyll, ſome diſcernyng clearely, ſome darckly, accordyng to the meaſure of
ingenious witt and capacitie in him that ſo deemeth and iudgeth: yet
notwithſtandyng, holy Scripture cleareth a mans con­ſcience and conceipt, yea
and helpeth reaſon perfectly to vnderſtand in what ſtate he ſtandeth: and
whether in the wayes of vertue or vice he furdereth or failleth. Therefore,
Dauid the Prince of Propphetes, ſayd.

Declaratio ſermonum tuorum illuminat, & in­tellectum dat paruulis

And by a groſſe compariſon, though all mertalles be good in their vſe, yet is
there great diſtinction of degrees among them, and diuerſity of value: as
Braſſe is more of price then Iron, Tynne, better then Leade, and Copper
exceedeth Tynne▪ and one penny of ſil­uer, is worth ten of Copper: and one
penny of golde, is vvorth ſeuen of ſiluer. Euen ſo is it among Treati­ſes,
Lucubracions, and matters compoſed and compi­led: for they haue their
diuerſitie and difference both in matter and maner of ſaying. And diuers
degrees of goodnes maye bee founde in the ſame, As good, better, and all the
beſt. VVherefore in behol­dyng wel this perſwaſion, I intend neither to
diſprayſe, nor yet to attribute▪ ſinguler prayſe ſuperfluus to any fourme of
compilacion or trauell in ſpeciall. But by this digreſſion, I purpoſe by Gods
grace, to commend vnto deuout and godly diſpoſed Readers, this memo­riall:
that for as much as our tyme is precious, ſhort, and full of Impedimentes:
that by their knovvledge, they ſhoulde chooſe rhe beſt matter for rheir
ſpirituall and gohſtly nouriſhment of the ſoule: as they vvould doo in meate
and drincke, clothinges, and neceſſaries
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=7) for the
ſuſtentation of their body, and take their ſpeci­all and frequent recourſe in
the exerciſe of readyng ſuch bokes, as ſhal make beſt for their conſolacion
and profit ſpirituall. Thus in as much as holy Scripture, and the fruites
thereof vvel vnderſtanded and duely execu­ted, is a very guide to eternall
lyfe, as is ſayd.

IOHN. 5.

Scrutamini Scripturas, quia vos putatis, in ipſis vitam eternam habere.

And becauſe novve a dayes men are beſt delighted to heare or reade ſuch
vvoorkes as are compendious, pleaſant, and profitable, ſhort in ſentence, and
large in ſence. Although for lacke of cunnyng, and others ſondry impedimentes,
I am inſufficient to compile ſuch a peece of vvorke, yet neuertheleſſe, by the
grace of GOD, I entend to accompliſhe my beſt endeuour, accordyng to my
ſclender talent, in ſetting foorth a compendius Treatis, to the honor & prayſe
of God, and ſpirituall profite of ſuch as ſhall take any pleaſure in readyng
thereof, vvhich may be called, the Con­templacion of ſinners. And by a
ſimilitude, forſomuch as euen as a man delighted in the diuerſitie of meates
and drinckes, and apparel for the body (for alteration or chaunge thereof,
renueth appetite and affection) So likevvyſe the ſpirit of man reioyceth and
taketh com­fortable refreſhing of the enterchaunge and diuerſitie of deuine
matters, vvhich is the foode and furnirure of the ſoule. I purpoſe to deuide
this Treatis in ſeuen partes, accordyng to the ſeuen dayes of the vveeke: ſo
that for euery day a man may finde in readyng, a ſeue­rall delectacion, and
remember a nevve excercitacion. And to make this compilacion more autentike, I
pur­poſe not to inſert nor alledge any ſentence thereof in
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=8) the Latine
tongue: but eyther that vvhiche is proba­ble by holy Scripture, pronounced by
our Sauiour Chriſte him ſelfe, the foure Euangeliſtes, or that vvhich his
Apoſtles haue left vs, or that vvhiche the auncient Fathers of the Primatiue
Church haue vvritten for ou [...] [...]omfort, or ſometimes the morall
mixtions of Philo­ſophers addicted to vertue hath reuealed vnto vs, ey­ther
els ſuche good and godly aduertiſementes, as the good and godlye vvryters of
the latter times haue offered me, incident to the conſummation and fini­ſhing
hereof in good and decent order: although our groſſe natiue language (and
ſpecially in compoſing of meeter is ſuche) that it can not in all poyntes
agree with the perfection of the Latine tongue, hath made me to vvrite the
matter it ſelfe in Latine, and to com­priſe my ovvne priuate opinion vnder the
ſame in engliſhe verſe: ſuppoſing that ſome lyght is rather thereby made into
the vvorke, then any obſcuritie by my dooing.

And to conclude, beſeeching euery man that ſhall heare or reade this aforeſayd
Treatice: that they iudge not, ne backbite my do­inges, before they haue read,
and ſuffi­ciently digeſted the ſame: I ſubmit my poore and inſufficint
capa­citie to the diſcreete cor­rection of euery reaſo­nable Reader.

## Table of contents

  * ¶ CLARISSIMO DOCTRINA, ET Pietate viro, D. Alexandro Nowello, Paulinae Eccleſiae Cathedralis digniſſimo Decano, Patrono ſuo ſingulari. R. Robinſonus Londinenſis, Gratiam & Benedictionem A Domino Deo ſempiternam.
  * The Auctors Epiſtle, or Preface to this woorke. SAPIENCIAE. CAP. 2. Exiguum, & cum tedio, Eſt tempus vitae noſtrae.
  * 1\. ¶THE AƲCTHORS Commemoration for MVNDAY.
  * 2\. ¶ THE AVCTORS Commemoration for TVESDAY.
  * 3\. ¶THE AVCTORS Commemoration for VVENSDAY.
  * 4\. ¶THE AVCTORS Commemoration for THVRSDAY.
  * 5\. ¶THE AVCTORS Commemoration for FRYDAY.
  * 6\. ¶ THE AVCTORS Commemoration for SATVRSDAY.
  * 7\. ¶ THE AVCTORS Commemoration for SONDAY.
  * 8\. Per Authorem.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=8)

## 1\. ¶THE AƲCTHORS Commemoration for MVNDAY.

Behold this worldly wretchedneſſe,

Of euils which euer vs poſſeſſe.

The Tranſlators Application.

Firſt when Thalmighty prouidence dyd heauen and earth create,

An vniuerſall darkneſſe dyd them both obtenebrate:

Then likte the Lorde to make a light deuided from darkneſſe,

The darkneſſe should night ſignifie, the light should day expreſſe.

This day therfore darkneſſe mundame,

Eſchevve and vvalke in light oh man.

PAVLE ad Rom. CAP. 15.

WHatſoeuer thinges are written, for our lear­ning and inſtructon are written,
that by paci­ence, and conſolacion of the Scriptures, we might haue hope.

BERNARDVS ſuper Cantica.

IT behoueth a man to knowe, in what or­der, with what affection, with what
in­tent, and what thinges they are whiche he ought to know: That is, in what
order, That he doo firſt learne throughly that whiche is
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=9) moſt in
ſeaſon, or fitte for time, tendyng vnto welfare. With what affection, That he
learne ſuche matter as is more feruent and more vehement to make him in loue
with knowledge. To what intent, That a man not for vaine glory, neither for
curioſitie, or any ſuch like, doo take any thing in hand to know or make
knowen, but only to the ende that God may thereby be glorified him ſelfe, and
his neighbours edified.

HVGO de Sancto victore.

THere is nothing in this life perceaued, or felt more ſweeter, there is
nothing taken more greedely, there is nothing which ſo ſe­queſtreth a mans
mind from the loue of the world, nothing ſo ſtrengtheneth and fortifi­eth the
mind againſt temptations, nothing ſo encourageth a man, and furdereth to the
accompliſhing of euery worcke and of euery trauell, more then the ſtudy and
zeale of, and vnto the ſacred ſcripture.

PROVERBIORVM. CAP. I.

A Wyſe man that heareth wyſedome, ſhal become therby more wyſer then he was.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=9)

This volume breefe of ſclender quantitie,

Called, of ſinners the contemplation.

Accordeth well for eche ſtate and degree,

Guiding by grace and due direction.

Our Soule to ſeaſe in ſure ſaluation,

Therefore this tytle profoundly knowyng:

VVhich of thy conſcience may cauſe correction,

In hart emprint, with matter folowyng.

CHRISOSTOMVS ſuper Matthe.

THere is knowen to be in the Sea a con­fuſed noyſe, a continuall feare to ſuch
as ſayle there, an infatigable beating togeather one waue with an other, an
vnconſtancie continuall: and euen ſo fareth it with the world.

PSALMORVM. 77.

THY way and thy pathes are in the ſeas in many waters.

AMBROSIVS.

THis life of ours is repleniſhed with ſuch euils, that in the compariſon
therof, euen death it ſelfe is thought to be a remedy, and not a puniſhment
vnto vs.

ESAI. CAP. 45. de impijs.

THey are all confuſed and aſhamed, all the woorkers of wickedneſſe are
togeather [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=10)
gone to confuſion.

IEREMI. CAP. VI.

THey being confuſedly ſcattered, are not confounded, and are nothing aſhamed
of their wickedneſſe.

BERNARDVS.

THE ſmall number of ſoules that liue well, tryeth the danger of this world,
and ſo dooeth the multitude of them that perſiſt and goe through the ſame.

AMBROSIVS in ſermone.

IN the troubleſome ſea of this world (ſayth he) we muſt greatly feare, leaſt
that eyther the ſturdy violence of the tempeſt doo carry away our ſhippe, or
that the flowing ſtreame doo ſincke and ſwallowe it vp, either els leſte that
ſome cruell Pirate, or Rouer doo ſeaze vpon it as his prize, and ſo leade it
away with him into perpetuall thraldome.

Theſe ſentences before reſemble by figure,

The world as it were ſet in the ſalt See:

VVhoſe perillous paſſage as in portrature,

Explaneth mearely cares and calamitee.

VVherevnto is ſubiect, eche ſtate and degree,

For as the Sea is euer in commotion:

VVith raging ſtorme, and perillous perplexitee.

So is this world wallowyng in confuſion.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=10)IOEL Proph.
CAP. 3.

THE Sunne and the Moone are depri­ued of their light, and the ſtarres of the
Firmament haue withdrawen their glitte­ring hue.

PSALM. 14.

THey haue all gone out of the way, and are altogeather become vnprofitable.

SAPIENCIA. CAP. 17.

FOR with one chayne and bond of dark­neſſe, were they all bound togeather.

AVGVSTINVS.

I Haue ſlyded away into temporall and worldly matters, which are vaine and
tran­ſitory, and ſee, I was beſet with darkneſſe.

BEDA.

HE that reacheth after the cuppe wherein is poyſon, dooth as it were ſippe
vppon the brimme of the cuppe for the Hony ſake: becauſe he would feele how
ſweete it is, and not becauſe he feareth how deadly an ende it bringeth.

TRENO. 4.

HOw dimme of cullour is the gold be­come, the beſt colour therof is faded and
changed: the cheefe ſtones of the Sanctua­rie
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=11) are
diſperſed in the vpper end of the ſtreetes.

MATH. CAP. 15. de impijs.

THey are blind them ſelues, and the gui­ders of ſuch as are blind.

Eche ſentence here of foreſayd Scripture,

Sheweth Sunne, Moone, and Starres to our ſight.

To haue been enuironed with cloudes obſcure,

Dimmed with darknes, which ſomtime blaſed bright.

So in the world ſome eſtates lacke the light,

Of grace, in maner of lyfe and religion:

The day of Vertue turnyng into night,

So blinded in wicked worldly abuſion.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE proſperous and happie thinges counted in this world, haue with them a
certaine vnfained bitter taſte, a deceitfull pleaſantneſſe, a ſure and
certaine heauineſſe or ſorowe to truſt vnto, and an vncertaine pleaſure to be
delighted withall.

BOE [...]IVS de conſolatione.

FOR ſure (I ſuppoſe) that aduerſitie doth more profite men, then proſperitie.

ARISTOTLE Ethico [...]um primo.

VErtue ſhineth clearely, when man is in aduerſitie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=11)OVID.

FOrtune diſtributeth all thinges as plea­ſeth her, and taketh away the ſame
againe at her pleaſure: he is ſodenly made a lanke and ſclender perſon, which
euen nowe was a graunde paunche.

BERNARDVS.

LET a man deſire the temporall goodes of this tranſitorie world, and he ſhal
euer­more be vexed and diſquieted with the deſyre thereof.

Idem.

EVen as thoſe thornes, are not thornes in deede whiche pricke not, ſo are
thoſe rit­ches no ritches worldly, whiche doo not diſ­quiet the mind of man.

DAMACIVS.

YT is not at all to be doubted, but grea­ter is the vexation of mind vnto that
co­uetous man whiche enioyeth all thinges at wyll, then of the poore man
whiche almoſt hath nothing at all.

IOB. CAP. 30.

THE children of the vnwyſe, and of baſe degree, dyd ſuppoſe and deeme, that
plea­ſures were hidden vnder thornes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=12)

O wicked world wrapped in wretchedneſſe,

Fye on thy fraude and fickle felicitie:

Fye on thy balefull blundred buſineſſe,

Thy blandeſhing blindneſſe in proſperitie.

Hedged with Hawthorne, care, and calamity,

VVith drede, dolour, and double diſeaſe:

Thy pleaſant poyſon ſlayth ſoule and body,

So rewardeſt thou ſuch as ſeeke thee to pleaſe.

GENES. 18.

THerfore is the crying of the Sodomites and Gomorrheans increaſed, and their
ſinne is too too much greeuous in the ſight of the Lord.

BERNARDVS.

THE lyfe of ſinne profereth vnto ſuche as enter in thereto, the Hony mixed
with bitterneſſe to ſuch as goe forwards therein, gall and vineger, and vnto
them that paſſe out of the ſame lyfe, the poyſon of Adders in­curable.

APOCAL. 2. c.

I Know where thy dwelling place is, where alſo thy ſeate is Sathanas.

ESAI. 24.

FEare and trembling, a deepe pitte, and a lake is ouer thee which inhabiteſt
on the earth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=12)4\. REGVM.
24.

NAbuchodonozor carried away Ioachim and the kynges Wyues, the kynges Eunuches,
& Iudges of the land, the ſtrong Men, the Artificers, and warriers out of
Hieruſalem, into the land of Babylon. So nowe in like maner by the ſuggeſtion
of the Deuil, many Chriſtians are miſerably cari­ed captiues from the ſtate of
grace, into bon­dage of ſinne.

O poliſant graue and donghill clad with ſnawe,

Thou ſiſter to Sodome, and ſeate to Sathanas,

Thy likyng luſtes laſt but for a thrawe,

Thou tyrant treaſonable, and germaine to Iudas.

VVhom thou canſt kiſſe, ſalute, and imbrace,

By honor, ritches, delight, and dignitie:

As Iudas betrayed Chriſte with flattering face,

His ſoule thou ſeazeſt in endles captiuitie.

ECCLESI. primo.

I Eccleſiaſtes, was the kyng of Hieruſa­lem, and purpoſed in my mind wyſely to
ſeeke and ſearche out, as touching al thinges that are doone vnder the Sunne.

CAP. 2.

I Haue exalted and magnified my workes, I haue heaped togeather vnto mee
ſiluer and gold, and the ſubſtance of kings and pro­uinces,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=13) I made to be
ordeyned mee ſingers, and ſinging women, and all the delites fitte for the
ſonnes of men: and all thinges which my eyes deſired, haue I not denyed nor
for­bidden them from my hart, but that it ſhould enioy all maner pleaſure. And
when I had turned me agayne vnto al thoſe works which my handes had made, and
vnto thoſe labours wherin I had vainely toiled, I then ſaw, that in them all
there was vanit [...]e, and diſquiet­neſſe of mind, and that there was nothing
of durance vnder the Sunne, and I ſawe that wyſdome differed ſo much from
fooliſhneſſe, as the light dooth from darkneſſe.

3\. REGVM. 11.

HE had to wyues, which were al queenes, ſeuen hundred, and three hundred
Con­cubines. And when he nowe waxed aged, his hart was ſo depraued by women,
that he folowed after ſtrange goddes.

3\. REGVM. 4.

THE bread of Salomon was dayly .xxx. quarters of meale, tenne ſtalled Oxen,
and twentie out of the paſtures, & an hundred Sheepe, beſides Hartes, Buckes,
and wylde Gotes, and Capons. And Iuda and Iſrael
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=13) dwelt
without feare, euery man vnder his Vine, and vnder his Figge tree, from Dan to
Beerſeba, all the dayes of Salomon.

That prudent prince, and wyſe kyng Salomon,

Preferred his pleaſance in ſuch proued plentee:

For honor, ritches, delites, and renoune,

He had no peare, ſo ſurpaſſed hee.

Raignyng in all moſt royall felicitie,

Natheles his ſtate, he ſayd, for concluſion:

VVas of no force, but meare vanitie,

Through corporall toyle, and ſpirituall affliction.

BERNARDVS ad Eugenium.

WHether doo theſe wicked accurſed ex­erciſes drawe thee, if notwithſtanding
thou perſeuer and goe forwards ſo to addict and geue thy ſelfe to them, that
thou lea­ueſt thee nothing of that whiche is thyne owne. Thou dooeſt but loſe
time in thoſe thinges wherein there reſtes nothing but la­bour, vaine
diſquietneſſe, and vexation of the ſpirite: for what is the fruites thereof
els, but the webbes of Spiders. One day vtte­reth an others brablinges, and
one nyght adiudgeth the malice of an other.

ESAI. CAP. 59.

THey haue conceiued labour and trauell, and haue brought foorth iniquitie,
they [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=14) haue
hatcht the Egges of Adders, and haue wouen the webbes of Spiders, their works
are vnprofitable, ſpoyle and repentance are in the wayes of them, and the way
of peace haue they not knowen.

THAALES Philoſophus.

WHEN on a tyme this man (being one of the ſeuen Sages) was demaun­ded, what
thing was hard: he anſwered, A man to know him ſelfe.

HVGO de Sancto victore.

DIſcend, and returne vnto conſideration of thyne owne hart, and wyſely
diſcuſſe of thy ſelfe, and conſider from whence thou commeſt, whither thou
goeſt, howe thou fra­meſt thy lyfe, howe much thou dooeſt dayly profite, or
how much thou dooeſt diſprofite.

Some are ſo choked with worldly buſineſſe,

Both Spiritual and Temporal, as time doth oft ſhevv

They haue but ſmall care of Hell or heauenlineſſe,

To ſaue them ſelues they are vvoonderous ſlovve.

Such ſtudy not hovv their concience for to knavv,

As a Spider fighteth to catche a Flee:

Making her net, vvhich faileth vvith a flavve,

Such ſell their ſoules for vaine proſperitee.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=14)EZECHIEL.
CAP. 2.

THOV ſonne of man, there are vnbe­leeuing people, and ſubuerters of the trueth
with thee, and with Scorpions dooeſt thou inhabite.

HIERONIMVS.

A Man of rare diuerſitie, is eyther made good or bad, only by meanes of
keeping company with others.

ECCLESIASTES. CAP. 7.

DEpart thou from the company of the vn­iuſt man, and that which is euill ſhall
de­part from thee.

BERNARDVS.

THE worlde is there conuerſant, where as is much malice, and ſmall wyſedome,
where as all thinges are ſlammy like Birde lyme, all thyngs frayle and
brittle, al things couered with darkneſſe, beſette with ſnares, where ſoules
are put in ieopardy, and bodyes deſtroyed, whereas alſo is vanitie, and
vexa­tion of the ſpirite.

OZEA. CAP. 4.

THERE is no trueth, there is no mer­cie, and there is no knowledge of GOD
vppon earth, but curſing and lying, man­ſlaughter,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=15) and thefte:
yea, and vnto adulte­rie haue they ouerwhelmed them ſelues, and blood hath
medled with blood: for this cauſe ſhall the earth mourne, and all fleſhe
ſhalbe brought lowe that inhabiteth the ſame.

SENECA.

ROugh proſperitie hath borne me away perforce from beholdyng the wholſome
lyfe.

O ſtrong tyrant, traytour right treaſonable,

Conuent of all contagious company:

Thy faded floriſhing is Fantaſie fayleable,

Thou graue of guile, ſchoole of cupidity.

Father of falſhood, nurſe of iniquitie,

The changeable chaunce of thy fooliſh renovvne:

Oppreſſing the iuſt, placing euill men on hie,

Maketh many to looſe an incorruptible crovvne.

SAPIENCIA. CAP. 6.

ƲNto you, O ye kyngs therfore, doo theſe my woordes appertayne, that you may
learne wyſedome, and not walke out of this preſcribed boundes.

PSALME. 2.

NOwe ye kynges be wyſe and learned, ye that iudge the earth, ſerue the Lorde
in feare, and reioyce before him with trem­bling.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=15) Lay hold
vpon diſcipline in time, leaſt that the Lorde be angry at any tyme, and then
you periſhe out of the right way.

PLVTARCHVS Philoſophus

VSed dayly to admoniſhe and inſtruct his ſcholler TRAIANE the Emperour, in
foure ſeuerall thinges. The fyrſt, to feare GOD, and honour him duely. The
ſecond, in diſcipline of neceſſary duety towards eche degree. The third, that
he ſhould make much of them that were in aucthoritie vnder him. And the
fourth, that he ſhould protect and de­fend his ſubiectes from all violence and
iniu­ries: for thou (ſayth he) ſhalt handle all thynges woonderous well, yf
thou dooeſt not digreſſe from thy ſelfe: yf thou fyrſt frame thy ſelfe to a
decent lyfe, and yf thou diſpoſeſt all that is in thee vnto vertue, all
thinges ſhal proſper well with thee.

ARISTOTLE. 5. Polit.

A Prince ought to be a woorſhipper of GOD, becauſe men doo leſſe feare that
the Prince can away with that which is euil, yf they thinke he be a man that
feareth God.

PLATO.

HE that can not gouerne or guide his owne ſoule, which is but one only, howe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=16) ſhall he
gouerne and guide a multitude of ſoules.

ARISTOTLE de Regimine Principum.

A Cheefe poynt of wyſedome in a King, is to gouerne him ſelfe.

PSALME. 101.

THERE ſhall not dwell any within my houſe, which ſhall doo after the maner of
pride, or arrogancie: my eyes are vppon the faythfull in the land, that they
may ſitte with me. And he that walketh in the vndefiled way, ſhall miniſter
vnto me, or ſerue me.

2\. PARALIPO. CAP. 19.

IEHV the Prophete ſayd vnto Ioſaphat the kyng of Iuda, Thou geueſt helpe vnto
the wicked man, & ioyneſt amity with them that haue hated the Lord, and
therefore true­ly haſt thou deſerued the diſpleaſure of the Lord.

SOLON Philoſophus.

THIS man being one of the ſeuen Sa­ges of Greece, ſayd, It behoueth him that
beareth ſoueraigne rule, to be gentle and curteous, that his ſubiectes may
rather haue him in reuerence and honor for his clemencie, then feare him for
his crueltie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=16)M. Tullius
Cicero.

THERE is no defence of armed men to be counted ſafe and without daunger in
reſpect: but it rather ought to be enuironed with charitie and good wyll of
the Citezins, and not with armour.

That morall man, and famous Philoſopher,

Foure thinges commendeth befitting a king:

To his diſciple Traiane the Emperour,

Fyrſt dreade and loue God aboue all thyng.

Next of his perſon haue diſcreete gouernyng,

Then ſee that his officers be true and diligent,

Laſtly his ſubiectes euer defendyng.

Shall winne theyr loue, as conqueſt congruent.

EXODVS. CAP. 18.

IETHRO ſayd vnto Moyſes, (Who was the Ruler, graund captaine, and iudge of
ſixe hundred thouſand men?) Why ſitteſt thou all alone, and all the people
committed to thy charge, looketh for thy preſence, from the mornyng, vntyll
the nyght. Thou ſhalt be conſumed and vanquiſhed with this thy fooliſhe
labour, yea, both thou and this peo­ple which is with thee. Thou haſt more to
deale withall, then thy habilitie can well diſ­poſe withall, and thou being
but one man, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=17)
canſt not beare this heauy burden: but heare my woordes, and the counſell I
ſhall geue thee. Doo thou chooſe out of euery tribe, men of wyſedome, and
ſuche as feare GOD, in whom trueth remayneth, and which ſhall de­teſt
couetouſneſſe. And then let ordeyne cer­tayne of them to ſerue as Tribunes, or
gene­ralles, and Rulers ouer a certayne number, and Rulers of fyfties. And let
be alſo ordey­ned Deacons, which ſhall ſitte in iudgement ſeate ouer the
people at all times conuenient: and what ſo euer ſhalbe of weyghtier
impor­tance, that let them referre vnto thy dealyng therwith, and let them
ſelues haue iudgement of leſſe matters: And yf thou doo this thyng, thou ſhalt
perfourme the Lordes kingdome. And Moyſes dyd as he was thus wylled.

SOLON Philoſophus.

THIS man, one of the ſeuen Sages, be­ing demaunded by what meanes Cities, or
theyr Kynges myght be gouerned, made this anſwere. Yf the Elders and Rulers of
the ſame, framed theyr lyues accordyng to theyr lawes.

APOCALIP. CAP 2.

I WYLL reward euery one of you accor­dyng to your woorkes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=17)

In weyghty matters geue perſonall preſence,

In ſmaller actions geuyng commiſſion,

To men of fayth, good name, and ſapience,

Iuſtice to keepe without exception.

As they wyll anſwere to God and your crowne,

And take inqueſt how iuſtly they proceede,

VVithout feede or fauour, or cloked correction,

Then graunt them dome accordyng to deede.

PSALME.

GEVE vnto them accordyng as theyr woorkes haue deſerued, and accordyng to the
iniquitie of their inuentions, reward them oh Lorde.

SAPIENCE. CAP 3.

FOR the wicked are become cruell in that thing which they haue fynniſhed.

ECCLESIASTES. CAP. 3.

DOO not thou grudge to ſee the glory and wealth of the vngodly: for in deede
thou knoweſt not what maner ſubuertion is com­ming vpon them.

Valerius Maximus, libro. 6.

FOR Cambyſes was of a ſtrange ſeuerity in iudgement, which cauſed the ſkinne
of a [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=18)
certayne wicked Iudge to be flayne of from the body, and commaunded the Iudges
owne ſonne to deſcend in iudgement ſitting thereup­pon: for this barbarous
kyng ordeyned that cruell and newe kind of puniſhment vpon this iudge, leaſt
that any other afterwardes ſhould in lyke maner offend.

PROVERBIORVM. CAP. 16.

THoſe are abhominable vnto the Kyng whiche doo wickedly: becauſe in iuſtice
ſhall his throne be eſtabliſhed.

EZECHIEL. CAP. 7.

I Wyll doo vnto them accordyng to theyr wayes, and accordyng as they geue
iudge­ment, ſo wyll I iudge them.

So dyd Cambiſes, which of Perſia was kyng,

Geuing aſray to officers of iuſtry,

Vpon a Iudge he made ſuch puniſhing,

Becauſe he handled his office vntruely.

Cauſd his ſkinne to be rent from the body,

And on the ſeate where he gaue ſentment,

Made ſtretch it foorth for laſtyng memory,

Placing his ſonne to ſitte in iudgement.

ARISTOT. 5. Ethicorum.

THE adminiſtration of the office of a Prince ſheweth what maner of perſon
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=18) him ſelfe
is: euen as he is to be accompted woorſt, which not only vſeth the
inſtrumentall meane of malice towardes him ſelfe, but alſo towardes others. So
that Prince is to be re­puted a good prince, which not only towards him ſelfe
procureth the vſe of goodneſſe and vertue, but alſo whiche manefeſteth the
ſame vnto others.

Idem. 9. Ethicorum.

EAche man becommeth freende vnto his equall, and therefore a good man can not
fauour an euyll man.

DAVID Pſalmiſta. 139.

I Haue not ſet before myne eyes the thyng that is vnrighteous, I haue hated
ſuch as haue done wickedly, and him haue I perſecu­ted, which hath ſlaundred
his next neighbour.

VERSVS.

Opto placere bonis prauis odioſus haberi.

ARISTOTLE. 10. Ethicorum.

WE muſt excite and prouoke, or rather encourage ſuche as we would haue to doo
vertuouſly, by promiſing and perfour­ming of rewardes: but altogeather muſt we
denounce and determinate the puniſhment
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=19) without
redemption, vppon ſuche as are of them ſelues euyll diſpoſed.

BRIXEN.

IT ſtandeth with the office and duetie of a Kyng, to keepe downe and repreſſe
euyll perſons, and to exalt and promote them that are good.

3\. q. 5. c. Regum. Heſter. 16.

FOR by auncient hiſtories is it approued, how and by what meanes of the euyll
ſug­geſtions (which certaine perſons haue prac­tized) the cares and
enterpriſes of Kynges, myght be depriued of good ſucceſſe.

VVere in a kyng ſuch diſpoſition kend,

That he would iuſt men promote and cheriſhe,

And from his Court and Counſell ſuſpend,

Such as are knowen corrupters of iuſtice.

And open malefactors ſuffer in no wyſe,

That ſhould ſtabliſhe iuſtice, policy, and peace,

Cauſing good order into the Realme to ryſe,

And make euill men ſoone from their ſinne to ceaſe.

IERONIMVS ſuper Eſaiam.

AS in the ordinances made by the euyll Magiſtrate, that man is reputed
parta­ker of the offences whiche are committed by meanes of the ſame
ordinances ſo by hym made. So as touching the ordinances made
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=19) by the elect
and holy ones of GOD, he that hath ordeyned that which is good, is a parta­ker
of the righteouſneſſe thereof.

DANIEL. CAP. 14.

SAyth Daniel to Cyrus Kyng of Perſia, O Kyng, be not deceaued, couet to be
in­ſtructed in the hiſtorie it ſelfe, and not in the gloſe thereof.

AVGVSTINVS in ſermone.

THE charge in gouernyng a ſhip, ought not to be committed vnto him which
kno­weth not howe to hold the ſterne.

ARISTOTLE 6. Politicorum.

IT is not the beſt way to make euyll men Lordes and Rulers in a Kyngdome,
be­cauſe them ſelues had more neede of others to ouerſee them, then they to
ouerſee others.

ARISTOTLE in Yconomi.

IT is a matter impoſſible that euyll and negligent perſons in aucthoritie,
ſhoulde be diligent ſeruantes.

BERNARDVS.

THE Cleargie ought euery where to haue regard in euery age and degree, as well
thoſe that are learned, as that are vnlear­ned
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=20) (ſo farre as
ſtandeth with the Eccleſia­ſticall charge) that in ſuch ſort they liue, as
though a man myght without cares diſ­charge his duety, when he ſhall come to
take charge vpon him ouer them.

GREGORIVS.

THERE is nothing that more offen­deth, or treſpaſſeth vnto the Churche of GOD,
then that vnwoorthy perſons ſhould atteyne vnto the charge of cure ouer
ſoules.

PSALM. de impiis. 79.

O GOD the Gentiles are come into thy heritage, they haue ſpoiled thy holy
tem­ple, they haue. &c.

GENES. 41.

PHARAO exalted and preferred Io­ſeph, becauſe of the goodneſſe and wyſe­dome
which was in him. And ſo dyd Nabu­chodonozor preferre Daniel, although theſe
twayne were their bondmen, and very ſtran­gers of other countreys.

Nowe then would Princes to Churchly promotion,

Aduaunce none other, but men of ſuffiſance,

VVhich truely ſhould keepe their ſtate and profesſion,

Seeking ſoules health without disſimulance.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=20)Gracious and
godly in their gouernace,

So might Princes in fame and meede increaſe,

Cauſyng the Cleargy keepe good obſeruance,

should bridle many from hurtful blindnes.

2\. PARALIPO. CAP. 19.

IOſaphat dwelt in Hieruſalem, and on a time going out of the Citie vnto the
people of Barſaba, euen vntill the mount of Ephra­im, he called them againe
vnto the conſidera­cion of their Lorde God and King: and dyd let ordeyne
Iudges of the lande to be placed in euery citie within the land of Iuda in
eue­ry circute, and gaue the ſame Iudges in charge, thus. Take good heede
(ſayth he) to your matters that ye haue to deale in: and neyther ſhall you doo
and execute the iudge­ment of men, but of God: and what ſo euer you ſhall
adiudge and determine, ſhall re­dound vnto you, and vpon your owne heads. Let
the feare of the Lord remaine with you, and doo you all thinges with
diligence: for truely there is none iniquitie with our Lord GOD, neither
accepting of any perſon in iudgement, nor coueting after bribes or re­wardes.
And he alſo conſtituted Leuites and Prieſts in Hieruſalem, and Rulers ouer the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=21) houſholdes
of Iſrael: to the end they ſhoulde handle the iudgement, and cauſe of the
inha­bitantes there. And he moreouer charged them, ſaying, Doo you ſo behaue
your ſelues faythfully in the feare of God, in a perfect and vpright hart,
declare the lawe vnto the people, that they do not tranſgreſſe and ſinne
agaynſt the Lorde: and leaſt that his wrath come vpon you, and vpon your
brethren. Be you therefore of good comfort, and handle your dueties with
diligence, and the Lorde ſhall be with you. &c.

And as a Prince hath cheefe correction,

On ſpirituall ſtate, ſo may his hygh prudence,

Into the Church cauſe reformation,

By fauourable meanes of princely excellence.

For all his Realme to him geues attendance,

so dyd Ioſaphat which was kyng of Iury,

His whole empyre by his great diligence,

He cauſd to keepe the lawe of God duely.

1\. REGVM. CAP. 2.

WHO ſo euer honoureth me, I wyl ho­nour him, and they alſo that doo deſ­piſe
me, ſhalbe brought lowe.

ARISTO. Politi. libro primo.

AS that man which obſerueth the lawe, is the beſt liuing creature: ſo is he
the [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=21) woorſt
of all creatures liuing, whiche liueth without order of lawe, and digreſſeth
from iuſtice.

2\. PARALIPO. CAP. 24.

IOiada made a league betweene all the people and the kyng, that they ſhould
be­come the ſeruantes of God.

ESAI. CAP. 32.

THERE ſhall be a reuerence vnto iu­ſtice, euen of thoſe whiche are layde a
ſleepe, and a ſafety vnto them for euer.

ARISTOT. Politi. 2.

IT is beſt for a Citie to liue in vnitie and concord, after the rules of amity
and frend­ſhippe.

Idem Politicorum. 3.

WIthout iuſtice, it is impoſſible for men to dwell togeather.

2\. q. 7. c.

THAT man can not be faythful towards men, which ſheweth him ſelfe vnfaythfull
to GOD.

ECCLESIASTICI. CAP. 6.

THERE is no compariſon to be made vnto a faythfull freend.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=22)1\. PARALI.
13. c.

FOR Dauid, and all the whole houſe of Iſrael, delighted in GOD with all
ver­tue and godlineſſe.

Then ſhould God in eche ſtate honoured bee,

Hereby might men both grace and glory obteyne,

Iuſtice ſhould raigne with peace and policee,

And trouth returne with triumph home ageyne.

VVhich is exilde, and almoſt forlore cleane,

Thus might men liue in great ſecuritie,

And loue theyr God, which doth eche ſtate ſuſtayne,

VVere Vertue captayne of theyr cheualry.

IT is better to be gouerned by a good king, then by a good lawe.

ARISTO. in Epiſtola ad Alexandrum.

EVEN as the captayne is the defender of the hoſte, ſo reaſon with ſkil and
know­ledge, is the guide of humane lyfe.

ARISTOT. de Regimine Princi.

MEN were woont to feare theyr kyng, when they ſawe that he feared GOD.

Ibidem.

THE cheefeſt poynt in a Kyng of wyſe­dome, is that he be able to gouerne hym
ſelfe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=22)3\. REGVM.
CAP. 1.

MY Lord and Kyng, vppon thee are the eyes of all Iſrael wholy bent, to beholde
thee. The Queene of Saba ſayth vnto Sa­lomon as it is written.

3\. REGVM. CAP. 10.

FOR that cauſe that the Lord hath loued Iſrael for euer, therefore hath he
annoyn­ted thee to be kyng ouer them, to the ende thou ſhouldeſt execute
iudgement and iu­ſtice.

PSALME. 63.

BVT the Kyng ſhall reioyce in GOD, and the daughter of Sion ſhall reioyce in
their King.

IEREMI. CAP. 23.

THE King ſhall raigne, and he ſhalbe en­dued with wyſedome, and ſhall execute
iudgement and iuſtice vpon earth.

1\. TIMOTHEI. 2.

YOV ſhall pray for all men, fyrſt and ſpecially for all Kinges, and for all
ſuche as are appoynted to beare cheefe rule vnder them.

Doctor Nicolaus Lyra.

EVEN as there are ordeyned ouer vs both Princes and Prelates, for whom we
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=23) ought
ſpecially to pray, (for of, and by theyr good diſpoſition and well
gouernement, de­pendeth the common wealth of eache eſtate) ſo is it of good
right, that we encline our ſelues to liue quietly and peaceably vnder their
gouernement in all godlineſſe and cha­ſtitie. And not only ought we thus to
pray, for Chriſtian Princes, but alſo for the Infi­dels vnder whom Chriſtians
remayne cap­tiued.

2\. ESDREA. CAP. 6.

THERE ſhalbe offered ſacrifices of thankeſgeuing vnto the mighty GOD for the
Kyng and his chyldren, and the peo­ple ſhall pray for their liues. &c.

Eche Subiect ſhould ay,

For his Soueraigne pray

Thus ſythen in earth amongſt men mortall,

The weale and woe of euery region,

Dependes vpon the Kyng moſt principall,

Therefore we ſhould with true intention,

Beſeeche Chriſte Ieſu with deuotion,

All mortall ſinne that he may put aſide,

And efte in heauen, as with his benediction,

So eake on earth would eache good prince guide.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=23)ARISTOTLE.
lib. 5. Polit.

THE Prince ought to be a woorſhipper of GOD, becauſe men doo leſſe feare that
the Prince can away with that which is euyll, yf they thinke he be a man that
feareth GOD.

Lactancius Firmianus.

THE fyrſt duety of Iuſtice, is to be ioy­ned with the ordinance of GOD, the
ſecond, is to be ioyned with the lawe of man. Let the Iudge therefore ſo
execute iuſtice, that he doo not offend GOD, and iniurie his neyghbour.

SENECA ad Lucillum.

AND wylt thou haue all thinges ſubiect vnto thee, doo thou then ſubmit and
yeeld thy ſelfe to reaſon: for euen reaſon ſhall go­uerne many Kinges, and
thee alſo.

AMBROSIVS.

HE ſhall haue to iudge of an other mans offence, whiche hath not in him ſelfe
that he may condemne by equitie: leaſt when he iudgeth an other man, he geue
ſentence vpon him ſelfe alſo.

GREGORIVS.

IT happeneth for the moſt part, that he ſit­teth in ſeate of iudgement, whoſe
lyfe is [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=24)
leaſte agreeable vnto the woorthyneſſe  [...]f that place, and it oftentimes
comes to paſſe with him, that he condemneth the guiltles, and ſaueth thoſe
that are guilty.

PROVERBES.

THE Kyng which in trueth iudgeth the poore, ſhall haue his throne eſtabliſhed
for euer.

MICHEAS. CAP. 3.

HEARE, O ye Princes and Rulers of Iacob, and you Captaynes of the houſe of
Iſrael: is it not your part to knowe what iudgement and iuſtice is, which do
hate that that is good, and loue that which is euill.

But where ſome Princes and leaders of the lawe,

Breake fayth to God by loſt alleageance,

Their ciuill iuſtice muſt ſuffer ouerthrawe,

This vertue Iuſtice is made intemperance.

VVhom grace not guiding, keepes none obſeruance,

VVhat Prince to Poore keepes Iuſtice without leſing

Hearing complaint with good deliuerance,

In Heauen and Earth he ſhall be floreſhing▪

ARISTOTLE. 5. Politicorum.

THE greateſt policies are diſſolued and violated, by reaſon of the
tranſgreſſion
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=24) and offence
committed in dooing iuſtice.

M. Tullius Cicero:

IVſtice is the Lady and Miſtreſſe of all thinges, and the Queene of Vertues.

CIPRIANVS.

THE iuſtice of the Kyng, is the peace of his people, the ſauegard and defence
of his countrey, the ioy of men, the ſolace of poore men, the inheritance of
children, and vnto him ſelfe this iuſtice, is the very hope of bleſſedneſſe in
time to come.

M. Tullius Cicero.

THE lawe is nothing els but a ſtraight and perfect reaſon, whiche proceedeth
from the cleare light of the day, commaun­ding ſuch thinges as are honeſt, and
prohibi­ting ſuche thinges as are contrary. There­fore we ought (as Virgil
ſaith) to obſerue the fidelitie or faithfulneſſe in the lawes pre­ſcribed.

AVGVSTINVS.

TAKE away Iuſtice, and what els are Kingdomes but great ſpoyles of robbe­ries.

ESAI. CAP. 32.

PEace ſhalbe the woorke of Iuſtice, and there ſhalbe a reuerence vnto Iuſtice,
euen [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=25) of them
whiche are layd to ſleepe, and they ſhall dwell in ſafetie for euer.

ECCLESIASTICVS. 10.

THE Kyngdome ſhalbe tranſlated from one nation vnto an other, by reaſon of
their iniuſt dealinges and iniuries, and by meanes of their reproches, and
becauſe of the diuers deceiptes which they practize.

As Iuſtice is cauſe of peace and policie,

And VVell of welfare in euery Region,

So without Juſtice Kingdomes feele contrarie,

For robberie, theft, pouerty, and oppreſſion,

Murmure, diſcord, and deſolation,

Confiſkes many a Kingdome ane huge Impery,

From theyr late former good condicion,

For want of Iuſtice through iniquity.

ESAI. CAP. 59.

THEY haue wreſted iudgement back­wardes, and Iuſtice hath ſtoode a farre of,
becauſe trueth hath fallen downe in the ſtreetes, and equitie coulde not enter
there, and trueth was made a guſte of forgotten freendſhip, and the man that
departed from dooing euill, felt the ſmart of a prized ſpoile.

IEREMI. CAP. 21.

BEholde, I deliuer before you the way of life, and the way of death: doo your
iudge­ment [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=25)
in due time, and bring the oppreſſed ſoule out of violence, leaſt that my
diſplea­ſure and wrath, doo haply depart from me, towardes you, as a conſuming
fyre, and ſo burne you, that there ve none to quenche the ſame, by reaſon of
the malice of your inuen­tions.

ISIDOR.

WIcked Iudges, euen after the maner of Woolues, do rauen and make hauocke of
all thinges.

IEREMI. CAP. 51.

NAbuchodonozor eateth me vp, and gree­dely dooth as it were deuoure me.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 20.

BRibes and rewardes doo blind the eyes of Iudges, and as a gift in the mouth
dooth ſtoppe their reprehencions.

In England then, trueth ſhewe thy ſtately ſtyle,

And Iuſtice thou thy Baner brode diſplay,

All leagerdy maynes from hence quite exile,

Graunt God that good meaning mainteined be may

All ſubtyll ſhiftes to conuince and bewray,

VVherewith the couetous encombred bee,

Leaſt that the great flee the ſmall eatyng alway,

Doo the ſame deuoure by lawles libertee,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=26)MICHEA
prophet. CAP. 3.

HEARE this, ye Princes and Rulers of the houſe of Iacob, and you Iudges of the
houſe of Iſrael, whiche haue abhorred to doo iuſtice in iudgement, and doo
peruert all thinges that are good: becauſe you build vp Sion with bloodſhed,
and Hieruſalem with iniquitie, their Princes ſhall geue iudge­ment for
rewardes: for this cauſe ſhall Sion be furrowed vpon, euen as a feelde.

ISIDOR.

THE ſimple people are more greeuouſly torne in peeces of the euyll Iudges,
then of their moſt cruell enimies: For there is no robber ſo greedy of other
mens goodes, as a wicked Iudge is amongſt thoſe whom he hath aucthoritie of.

AVGVSTINVS.

IN ſo much as the miſcheefe of couetouſ­neſſe waxeth nowe ſo ripe, that euen
of cuſtome the very lawes are bought and ſolde, iudgementes are corrupted, the
very ſentence it ſelf is ſet to ſale for mony, & there can be no cauſe without
care and vexation tryed.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=26)ESAI. CAP. 5.

WOO be vnto you whiche iuſtifie the wicked for bribes and rewardes, and doo
wreſt the iuſt mans cauſe from him.

Farre from vs, O God, expell corrupt iuſtice,

VVith couetouſneſſe and falſe affection.

That goodneſſe of eache cauſe may full ſuffiſe,

To try it ſelfe cleare in the action,

Of euill buddes let no bitter abuſion,

Make crooked cauſes cloked to bee,

In Conſiſtory Court, or Ciuill Sesſion,

But graunt, O GOD, to trueth the victory.

ESAI. CAP. 49.

HEARE me, O ye of hard harts, which haue ſequeſtred your ſelues farre from
Iuſtice.

Expoſitio Matth. 22.

YOV haue forſaken thoſe two moſt graue reſpects of the law, that is, the one
iudge­ment, the other mercie.

PATRONIVS.

FOR nowe Iuſtice is made none other thyng, but a common marchandize.

PSALME. 2.

NOW, O ye Kynges be wyſe and lear­ned, you that iudge the earth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=27)ECCLESIASTICV
S. CAP. 47

IT is the office and duety of kinges, to keepe vnder thoſe that are euil, and
aduance ſuch as are good ſubiectes.

1\. MACHABES. CAP. 15.

ANtiochus ſaide, I wyll be reuenged vp­pon them whiche haue corrupted the
land. &c.

AVGVSTINVS.

IN this poynt doo Kinges ſerue God, yf in theyr kingdomes they commaund and
eſta­bliſhe that whiche is good, and forbid that which is euil, not in matters
only parteyning to humane ſociety, but as concernyng deuine religion: for
neither liue they at eaſe free from cares of mind, and trauels of the body:
but beſtowe their tyme in great diſquietneſſe and labour, vntill ſuch time as
they haue accom­pliſhed their functions and dueties to all per­fections.

SAPIENCIA. 6.

THE hardeſt iudgement ſhall be mini­ſtred vnto them whiche beare aucthoritie
ouer others.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=27)

To Kyng without colour that lyſt to keepe Iuſtice,

The neareſt way moſt honorable and eaſie,

Ys corrupt men to ſuffer in no wyſe,

By falſe affection or parcialitie,

To execute the office of Iuſtice duely,

And yf in this poynt a Prince be negligent,

His mind perſwaded may be fully,

He ſhall incurre Gods dreedfull iudgement.

ECCLESIASTES. CAP. 10.

BLeſſed is that land, whoſe King is of no­ble race.

ARISTOTLE primo Politico.

VErtue and malice doo determine and handle matters betweene bondmen and
freemen, betweene noble men, and thoſe of baſe degree.

Idem. 5. Politicorum.

NObilitie and Vertue, are in few perſons to be found remayning togeathee.

PSALME. 101.

MY ſong ſhalbe of mercy and iudgement, to thee, oh Lord. Idem. I haue done
indifferent iuſtice, and executed iudgement, I haue hated the workes of
iniquitie. &c.

IOB. CAP. 29.

I Haue clothed me with Iuſtice, and with my iudgement haue I apparrelled me as
it [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=28) were with
a garment, and Dyadem of ho­nour, I haue been in ſteade of an eye to the blind
man, and as a foote to helpe the lame: A father haue I alſo been of the poore,
and ſuch cauſe as I was vtterly ignorant in, haue I diligently ſearched for
the certeyne trueth thereof: I haue deſtroyed the labours of the vniuſt man,
and out of his Iawes haue I ta­ken the ſpoyle.

MATTHEA. 5.

BLeſſed are they whiche hunger and thyrſt after righteouſneſſe, becauſe theirs
is the kingdome of Heauen.

AVCTHOR.

FOR as from day to day there is a conti­nuall thirſt and hunger renewed in our
ſto­mackes after meates and drinkes corporall: ſo ought there appeare in vs a
freſhe and new appetite, or affection inſeperable after iu­ſtice, in
correcting of offences committed.

Nowe Princes, Lordes, and Nobles of renowne,

VVhom it pleaſeth to vſe Iuſtice with mercie,

Take Iob and Dauid examples to your crowne,

VVhen to the poore they had a piteous eye,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=28)And of mighty
offenders puniſht peruerſitee,

VVhom Gods good grace hath remunerate

VVith blesſinges moe then may expreſſed bee,

In laſting fame ay to be Lawreate.

SEleucus Prince of Locria, on a time be­ing in the cheefe Citie thereof whiche
he had, eſtabliſhed & protected with moſt whol­ſome and profitable lawes, when
as his ſonne was condemned for adulterie, accordyng to the lawes whiche he him
ſelfe had ordeyned, that ſuch offender ſhould be depriued of both his eyes:
and that the whole Citie for the ho­nour of their Countrey, did for a certayne
ſpace withſtand and gayneſay to diſpence with neceſſity of puniſhment in this
reſpect. The father being throughly ouercome with the inſtant requeſtes of the
people: becauſe he would doo ſome moderation of iuſtice, and borowe the lawe
in ſome part, executing it at full in an other, firſt cauſing one of his owne
eyes to be quite pluckt out, and then after­wardes one of his ſonnes eyes,
left vnto them both but two eyes to ſee with. So farre dyd he perfourme a due
meaſure of puniſhment, with a woonderfull temperature, as the equi­tie of the
lawe might require, making hym
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=29) ſelfe
partaker in the puniſhment wholy due vnto his ſonne, perfourmed him ſelfe a
mer­cifull father, and iuſt diſtributer of the law in this maner.

Ad Titum. 2.

LET vs liue ſoberly, iuſtly, and godly in this world, looking for the bleſſed
hope and glory of the mighty God.

PSALME. 40.

BLeſſed is the man which hath the name of the Lord for his hope, and hath not
beheld nor looked after vanities and miſcheuous falſhoodes.

Idem.

BEhold the man which hath not taken God for his helper, but hath truſted in
the mul­titude of his ritches, and preuayled in his va­nitie, the hope of the
vngodly ſhall periſhe.

Our hope, our happe, we ſet in worldlines,

And men with men defraude in vvhite and black,

Corrupting conſcience, all daring in darknes,

In our conceiptes as vve ſhould aye hold ſvvack,

Our crazed Cables all at a caſt vvyll crack,

Yf God ſo pleaſe his ſtormes but once to ſteare,

VVherefore in time for our miſſe, mendes lets make,

And ſtand vve faſt, els periſhe vve in feare.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=29)BERNARDVS.

WHat madnes is this where men doo de­ſire to forſake plaine and ſimple
dea­linges, for double double dealinges. Where is the couetous man, where is
the lecherous perſon, where is the ambicious and vayne glorious, where is the
vnthankfull perſon that whineth at the fe [...]icitie of this world: becauſe
howe much the more God hath be­ſtowed his benefites vpon ſuch one, ſo much the
leſſe feareth he to offend him, and repu­tyng not him ſelf beholdyng in duety
for the benefites of God receaued, doth rather more impugne and withſtand him.

DEVTERONO. 32.

WHOM the Lorde hath loued, is puft vp with fatneſſe, and hath ſpurned a­gainſt
the Lord his maker.

PSALME. 119.

THEY are troubled and mooued vnto miſcheefe as a drunken man.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE thing that thou deſireſt to enioy, is like vnto a Mouſe trappe, whyles
thou ſeekeſt to catch thy deſyre, thou thy ſelfe art
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=30) ſnared:
whyles thou holdeſt that which is an other mans, thou art holden caytiue of
the de­uill.

BERNARDVS.

WHAT dooth GOD puniſhe, or what dooth he hate, but a mans ſelfe wyll in
ſinfulneſſe. Let ſelfe wyll in ſinfulneſſe ceaſe, and there ſhal be no hell
ordeined for thee. &c.

There is no reaſon our miſrule can arreſt,

This vvretched vvord ſo farre vvakes our vvitte,

Invvard to vvyſedome our vvyls vve doo not vvreſt,

For Couetis hath vs in his chaine ſo knitte,

And vvicked examples of ſinners can vs tvvit,

VVhat reſteth more, vve ſhrinke not to treſpas,

From this guilefull vvorld, as vve ſhould neuer flitt,

But our vvylles vve vvorke, tyll out run be our glas.

1\. CORINT. CAP. 3.

THE fooliſhneſſe of this world, is coun­ted wyſedome before God.

GALATHE. 3.

YOV fooliſhe dotyng Galathians, who hath bewitched you, that you wil not obey
the trueth.

ESAI. 19. de Impiis.

WHERE are nowe become thy wyſe men, the Princes of Zoan are
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=30) become
fooles, the Princes of Noph are de­ceaued: euen they that were reputed the
cheefe ſtay thereof, haue deceaued Egypt: in the midſt of it hath the Lord
powred the ſpi­rite of wickedneſſe, yea they haue deceaued Egypt in euery
woorke thereof, euen as a drunken man ſtaggereth in his vomit.

TERENCIVS.

EVen ſeeing it with my eyes, my ſelfe wittingly and willingly doo periſhe, and
am vndone.

AVGVSTINVS in confeſ.

O You louers of the world, for what cauſe doo you goe to warres with your
ſelues: Can your hope be greater in the world, then that you become freendes
vnto the worlde? what other thyng els can you finde there, but a frayle and
brittell veſſell full of dangers. All theſe things let them periſhe, let vs
geue ouer theſe vaine thinges, and let vs goe ano­ther way to the wood, to the
ſearching foorth of thoſe thinges which haue none end.

AMBROSIVS.

HE that is poore in the purſe, and ritche in good conſcience, ſleepeth more
ſoundly in the Cottage, the [...] the ritche man that en­ioyeth
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=31) gold and
purple at pleaſure.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE world paſſeth away, and the concu­piſcence thereof. Whether hadſt thou
lea­uer loue temporall thynges, and with them paſſe away in time, or loue
Chriſte, and with him liue for euer.

AMBROSIVS.

WHO was he at any time ſo mindful of the world, that hath been mindfull of
Chriſte as he ſhould be.

Epheſ. pri. Petri. CAP. 2.

I Beſeech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, that you abſteyne your ſelues from
carnall deſyres, which fight agaynſt the ſoule.

SENECA ad Lucillum.

STrangers and Pilgrims doo harbour them ſelues in many & diuers Innes, but
they finde no freendſhip by their ſoiournyng at all.

Therefore I counſell eache chriſtian creature,

In vvorldly vvayes his mind to modefy,

To liue in rrueth iuſtly, and not to iniure,

Yea and vvith glad pacience to vvelcome aduerſity,

VVith dreade and temperance vſing proſperity,

Thinking this vvorld a throughfare of vvo,

VVhat euer God ſend, bleſſe him ay gladly,

As vve vvere Pilgrimes pasſing to and fro.

FINIS Of the Contemplacion for MVNDAY.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=31)

## 2\. ¶ THE AVCTORS Commemoration for TVESDAY.

The state of innocencie heare,

Continually in mind lets beare.

The Tranſlators Application.

The ſecond day a Firmament, the Lord God dyd ordeyne,

VVaters aboue, as wel as vnder, to deuide in twayne,

The vpper Firmament Heauen cald, the neathermoſt Earth is,

The Mornyng and the Euennnng cleare, he let be made with this.

The ſtate of innocencie cleare,

In mind and maners let appeare.

PSALME. 25.

THE innocent and iuſt men haue taken part with me.

IOB. CAP. 27.

VNtyll I dye wyll I not depart from my inno­cencie.

ECCLESIASTES. 15.

HAVE thou no delight in wicked chil­dren, yf they ſhalbe multiplied vpon the
earth: for one childe that feareth GOD, is better then a thouſand of the
vngodly, and it were better to die without iſſue, then to leaue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=32) wicked
children behind thee.

IOB. CAP. 22.

THE innocent ſhalbe ſaued. Idem CAP. 3\. What innocent perſon did euer yet
pe­riſhe at any time.

ECCLESIAST. GAP. 15.

A Man is knowen and diſcerned in his children.

PROVERBES. CAP. 23.

WIthdraw not diſcipline from thy child, for yf thou beate him with the rod, he
ſhall not dye.

AMBROSIVS.

THE diſſolute or looſe life of the children, is referred vnto the negligence
of the pa­rentes.

The Aucthor figured here by the portrature,

Of Adam and Eue our parentes innocence,

VVhen they a time in God his grace ſtood ſure,

Before their fall, he geues intelligence,

Howe we ſhould frame our liues with diligence,

To the recouerie of our loſt heritage,

To God and Man eſchewing all offence,

By lyfe innocent of eche eſtate and age.

SENECA.

IT is needefull that vertues haue a maſter and teacher of them: but as for
vices, they [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=32)
are learned of vs without any teacher, be­cauſe vertue is a thing wherein
difficulty conſiſteth.

SENECA.

THE bringing vp of children, and the diſ­cipline, or awe of correction wherein
they ſtand, doo confirme theyr maners and con­uerſation, and euery childe hath
a taſte & per­ſeuerance of that which he hath learned.

1\. CORINT. 16.

THE doore is ſet open for vs, but there is a manifeſt daunger before our eyes,
and we haue many aduerſaries·

NONE ſhall be crowned with the gar­land of victory, but he that hath fought it
out to the vttermoſt.

IERONIMVS.

I Doo arrogate and callenge vnto my ſelfe a moſt fooliſhe victory, yf I doo
not fyght, and I clayme a crowne without victory.

PLATO. 2. Ethicorum.

TO doo euyll, is an eaſie matter, but to doo well, it is hard for vs.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE beginnyng of vertue in a man, yea the cheefe vertue ſelfe, is to embrace
ver­tue. &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=33)

Right as white paper is redy to the print,

Of blacke and blew faire and foule Imagery,

So is the ſoule of man conuenient,

To good and euill addict vndoubtedly,

But ſythen Vertue hath ſuche difficulty,

Men learne the ſooner to be vicious.

In lacke of labour we flowe in folly,

For ſlothfull ſottes can not be vertuous.

GALATHIANS. CAP. 6.

BE not you deceaued in your owne doings, God is not mocked withall: what ſo
euer a man ſoweth, the ſame alſo ſhall he reape.

PROVERBES. CAP. 22.

WHO ſo ſoweth iniquities, ſhall reape to him ſelfe that which is euyll.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 25.

IF thou haſt not geathered togeather ſome ſtore in thy youth, howe ſhalt thou
fynde wherewith in thy aged yeeres to helpe thee.

PROVERBES. CAP. 20.

A Chylde is knowen by his ſtudyes and trauelles.

AVGVSTINVS.

FOR innocencie is the defencible armour of God, which yf thou haſt, thou and
all thyne ſhalbe in ſauety.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=33)BERNARDVS.

IT lyeth in vs to gette the victory, if we wyll endeuour our ſelues therevnto,
and out of this battell or conflict, none of vs a­gaynſt our wylles ſhalbe
deiected.

IERONIMVS.

AS thou groweſt in yeeres, ſo let grace in­creaſe with thee more and more: let
iu­ſtice increaſe, as the number of thy yeeres increaſeth, and how much the
elder thou art, ſo much the more perfect let thy fayth ap­peare in thee.

SENECA.

THERE is no greater vertue can re­mayne in man, then to bridle and came vices.

PROVERBES. CAP. 24.

I Paſſed by the feelde of the ſlothfull man, and there grewe vp thornes which
couered his woorkemanſhip.

VVhat ſeede men ſowe, ſuch corne they muſt ſheare,

As we oft ſee by prooued experience,

Euen ſo in youth, who liketh to forbeare,

The ſeedes of ſinne, of ſlothe, and negligence,

And ſowe the ſeedes of vertue and ſapience,

So with ſmall labour in great ſecurity,

VVith mede honor and inward compacience,

Theit age ſhall floriſhe in fayre felicity.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=34)PSALM. 126.

HE that ſoweth in teares, ſhall reape in ioy.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 3.

GLorious is the fruite of good labours.

SENECA.

THere is nothing vyler, then he which toy­leth, and wyll haue all thinges that
he doeth to be counted good, and yet he him ſelfe laboureth not to be reputed
a good man.

PROVERBES. CAP. 20.

THE ſlothfull man would not plowe be­cauſe of the colde weather, he ſhall
there­fore goe a begging in the ſommer, and no man ſhall releeue him.

GREGORIVS.

EXcept a man doo with all endeuour trye out the maſtry to the vttermoſt, there
is no ſuperfluous triumph of victory to be had.

BERNARDVS.

O True pronounced ſafe battle in Chriſtes cauſe, and for Chriſtes loue is that
con­flict wherein neyther is a man wounded, caſt vnder foote, nor ſtricken
downe, neyther yet being ſlayne a thouſand times (yf it were ſo poſſible)
ſhall he be fruſtrated and deceaued of the victorie: ſo that he ſtand to it
manful­ly, and ſtart not away.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=34)

The tyme of ſowing is called tedious,

But of the reaping ſvveete is the ſeaſoune,

So of good life beginnyng is laborous,

Then folovveth fruite of honour and renoune,

Euerlaſting life, and eke an heauenly crowne,

Therefore, O youth, in theſe thy yeeres greene,

Fyght feruently vvith harty affection,

And tyre not that triumph eternall to obtayne.

IOB. CAP. 2.

HIS bones ſhall be fylled with the vices of his youth, and with hym ſhall they
ſleepe in the duſt.

IERONIMVS.

THE continuall cuſtome of tranſgreſſing and offendyng, hath made the way of
ver­tue vnpleaſant and ſharpe vnto vs.

IEREMI. 13.

IF the blacke a More may change the cul­lour of his ſkinne, or the Leopard her
ſpec­kled heare, euen ſo is it poſſible with man to doo well, when he hath
learned alredy to doo euyll.

BERNARDVS.

THere is nothyng more precious then tyme: alacke there is nothyng at this day
deemed more vyle. The dayes of mans
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=35) luſty and
healthfull tyme paſſe away, and no man thynketh of the well beſtowing thereof:
for euen as there ſhall not periſhe one heare of the iuſt mans head, ſo
neyther ſhall there eſcape hym one minute of tyme vncounted vpon. All the tyme
that on thee is beſtowed, ſhall be required at thy handes, in what man­ner
thou haſt ſpent the ſame.

PROVERBES. 27.

BEtter are the ſtripes of him that loueth thee tenderly, then the deceitfull
kyſſes of hym that hateth thee.

But novve alacke youthy yeeres and innocence,

To vice and vertue vvhich is indifferent,

So ſoked is in ſinne and inſolence,

Through euill examples, and liberty verament,

That of youthy yeeres time is miſpent.

Though meete it be, that loſt lyfe be refound,

Euyll vſage maketh ſo great impediment,

It vvyll not be but Gods grace more abound.

PROVERBES. CAP. 22.

THE young man ſhall walke in the way that I haue preſcribed him, and when he
waxeth olde, he ſhall not depart therefrom.

CASIODORVS.

THE beauty and deformity of mans mind, is preſcribed in the quality, eyther of
the [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=35) vertues,
or of the vices thereof.

BERNARDVS.

IT is a hard thing to be brought to paſſe, nay it is a thyng altogeather
impoſſible for deuine vertue, where once the yoke of ſinne is taken vppon vs,
to ſhake it of from our ſhoul­ders: becauſe he that committeth ſinne, is the
ſeruant and bondman of ſinne.

IO. 8. Amos. 5.

HE hath fallen, and hath not taken holde wherevpon he myght aryſe vp agayne.

AMBROSIVS.

I Haue more eaſely founde out who they be that haue obſerued innocencie of
baptiſme, then whiche repented theyr ſinfull lyues as they ought to haue done.

GREGORIVS.

THAT man recouereth vp with muche a doo, whom the maſſy weyght of euyl
cu­ſtome keepeth vnder.

ISIDORVS.

CVſtome and countenaunce in maner of li­uyng, confyrmeth the maners of lyfe,
and the vſe of the yoke, is as the inclination of nature.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=36)SENECA.

THAT beſt order or rule of lyfe is to be choſen, whom cuſtome ſhall make
plea­ſant and ſweete vnto vs.

EZECHIEL. 18.

BE you conuerted, and repent you of all your iniquities, and your iniquities
ſhall not be the cauſe of your deſtruction.

ECCLESIASTI. 5.

MAKE no tarriance to turne vnto the Lord, and deferre not of frō day to day:
for ſuddenly ſhall his wrath come, and in his wrath he ſhall deſtroy thee.

ISIDORE de ſummo bono.

AN euill cogitation bringeth foorth a noughty delectation: the delectation, a
conſent: the conſent, a deede: the deede, a cuſtome: the cuſtome, an euyll
neceſſity.

Reuolue further yet yf any thou knewe,

Spending their youth in ſinnes criminall,

VVhich with difficulty could their maners renewe,

Therefore dreade God, and for his grace doo call,

For to preſerue thyne innocence from fall,

And yf that ſtate be loſt with abuſance,

Sleepe neuer with ſollace in bondage of Belyall,

But turne and take in tyme the plaſter repentance.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=36)Bernardus 5.
ſermone de Aſcentione.

HOWE comes it to paſſe, that certayne haue the penury and ſcarcity of
ſpirituall grace, when others haue the plentifull abun­dance. Vndoubtedly he
that is the diſtribu­ter and beſtower thereof, is neyther couetous to keepe it
to him ſelfe, nor bare and needy to ſuch as he thinkes woorthy of the
beſtowing thereof: But where as empty veſſels for the purpoſe are wanting,
there muſt the oyle want her vſe. The loue of the world ſhowueth her ſelfe in
to euery corner with her conſola­cions, nay rather deſolations, ſhee keepeth
and obſerueth the maner of her comming to a man, ſhee ruſheth in at the
wyndowes of the mind, ſhee poſſeſſeth the mind of man, but not his mind that
hath ſaide, My ſoule hath not refuſed to be comforted, I haue ben mind­full of
GOD, and I am delighted in him: for ſurely the ſacred delight forſaketh and
de­clineth from the minde that is exerciſed in worldly deſyres: neyther can
thinges true, be mixed with thinges that are vayne: ney­ther thinges eternall,
with things frayle and tranſitory: neyther yet corporall things with
ſpirituall thinges. It is thus to be concluded
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=37) for
principall, that a man ought to be wyſe in thinges that are aboue, as well as
in thinges vpon earth.

The ſoule of man ſo noble is of nature,

And made to ioy ſo hygh an heritage,

VVithout delight it can not long endure,

Therefore men ſhould in their tender age,

VVith vertue and deuotion haue vſage,

VVhich without lothſomneſſe bringeth delyte,

Encreaſing euer her valiant corage,

For of taſte, ay ſhe renueth appetyte.

GREGORIVS.

IT ſeemeth there is this difference betwene the delightes of the body and of
the minde, as, the corporal pleaſures, when they are not enioyed, do kindle a
greeuous deſire towards them ſelues, and being enioyed, they turne all thinges
to deſtruction. And on the other part, the delightes of the ſoule are quite
con­trary: becauſe howe muth the more the taſte of them is ſauoured, ſo muche
the more the ſame is eſteemed, to the ende they may be be­leeued with more
auidity or greater deſyre: and therefore not being enioyed, they can not be
embraced or beloued, becauſe the taſte of them is not knowen or approued.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=37)PSALME. 34.

TAſte and ſee howe ſweete the Lorde is, and this he meaneth (as who would ſay)
you haue no perceauerance of the Lorde, ex­cept you taſte and feele the
goodneſſe of him.

PSALME. 107.

THeir ſoule hath abhorred all meates, and they haue drawen neare vnto the
gates of death.

NVMERI. 11.

OVR ſoule perprabraketh vppon the re­ceipte of this light meate.

Though corporall foode haue that quality,

The greater abſtinence, the greater appetite,

And the more taſte, the more tedioſity,

Yea nowe we lothe, where we late dyd delite,

From ſpirituall foode which differeth quite,

The more we abſteyne, the leſſe we deſyre,

The goodneſſe of the taſte no man can endite,

VVhich had augmented celeſtiall feruent fyre.

AVGVSTINVS.

THERE is no torment greater then the torment or vexation of the conſcience.
And wylt thou then neuer be ſadde or mole­ſted, lyue well. A mans mind that is
ſecure, dooth eaſely ſuſtayne and away with ſadnes: A good lyfe hath euer ioy
among.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=38)PROVERBES.
CAP. 9.

IOY ſhalbe mixed with ſorowe, and there is euer mourning foloweth extreme
ioyes.

AVGVSTINVS in confeſ.

THOV Lorde haſt commaunded, and it comes ſo to paſſe, that there is a torment
due vnto euery inordinate mind that can not meaſure it ſelfe.

BERNARDVS.

SVrely there is no man whiche ought, or may thinke, that there aryſeth greater
fe­licitie of the mind, in, or by the vſe of vices, then there dooth in and by
the exerciſe of vertue.

HEBRE. 11.

THE holy and elect children of GOD, haue conquered kingdomes by fayth, haue
wrought equitie and iuſtice, and haue a­dopted them new promiſes of ſauing
health.

GREGORIVS.

IF humane minde, with a ſtrong and fyrme deſyre be directed towardes God: ſhe
eſtee­meth euery bitter thing to be ſweete, and thinkes euery thing to be as
it were a quiet reſt, whiche dooth moleſt her. And moreo­uer, ſhe earneſtly
deſyreth to paſſe ouer this
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=38) life by
death, to the end ſhe may the more ful­ly obteyne lyfe.

GREGORIVS.

IT ſtandeth moſt with equitie, that we doo loue him aboue all thynges, which
hath lo­ued vs aboue all thynges.

More ſweeteneſſe tis vnto ſound conſcience,

And vertuous lyfe with delectation,

Then any pleaſant carnall complacence,

Or fadyng gladnes of worldly abuſion,

To pleaſe God euer in concluſion,

VVith vertuous lyfe, whoſe ſolace is moſt deare,

Full recompenſt with hyre of heauenly crowne.

As of Gods saintes examples witneſſe beare.

Actum Apoſtolorum. CAP. 9.

WHEN he had receaued meate, he was comforted.

MATTH. CAP. 4.

MAN dooth not liue by bread only, but by euery woord that proceedeth out of
the mouth of GOD.

PSALME. 63.

MY Soule is repleniſhed as it were with marowe and with fatneſſe.

2\. REGVM. CAP. 2.

LET your handes receaue comfort, and be you the children of valiant and
coura­gious [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=39)
mindes.

AVGVSTINVS.

PRayer is a ſauegard of the Soule, a ſo­lace and conſolation to the good
angell, a ſcourge vnto the Deuill, and an acceptable obſequy or ſacrifice of
man vnto God.

GREGORIVS lib. 28. morall.

THE fortitude or courage of the repro­bate in this world, is enclined to the
loue of tranſitorie thinges, and neuer ſtinteth that affect: but without
reaſon (not knowyng what ſhee dooth) hardneth her ſelfe agaynſt the ſcourge of
the maker of this world. The fortitude or courage of good and godly per­ſons,
is bent to ouercome the fleſhe, and to goe againſt her owne pleaſure: to
extinquiſh the delectations of this preſent lyfe, to em­brace the ſharpe and
bitter ſtormes of this worlde, for and in conſideration of the euer­laſting
remuneracions: to contemne the flat­teryng allurementes of proſperitie, and
man­fully to vanquiſhe in the hart all feare of ad­uerſitie.

For right as mem enfeobled with labour,

Or which in battell haue beſtowed their blood,

Through ſuſtenance recouer vitall power,

Reſuming to them force and courage good,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=39)So by
reſemblance and ſimilitude,

In ſpirituall toyle and conflict toſſed they,

To vertue hauing deuoute conſuetude,

Reſtore them ſelues to firme eſtate ſoone may.

AVGVSTINVS.

EXcept thy conſcience be pure and cleane from ſinnes, thou ſhalt not be heard
of God: then make cleane the chamber of thy hart onely, and thou ſhalt fynde
him within that wyll heare thee at full.

Ricardus de ſancto victore.

HOwe many are there whiche enter into the houſe of God to pray vnto God, how
fewe are there heard of him, howe many are there which cal God theyr father,
as in their prayer, (Our Father. &c.) which are not his chyldren, but the
fathers children of whom it is written: You are of the father the Deuill,
becauſe they are not the chyldren of GOD, which haue lost his grace and
fauour, but are rather the Deuils children, who hath begotten them in malice,
and nouriſht them in miſchefe.

BERNARDVS.

EVen as fyre and water can not be both togeather in one ſubſtance at once, ſo
ney­ther can the delites of the body & of the ſoule abide to dwell togeather.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=40)HVGO 2. de
Anima.

A Good conſcience is the tytle and ſigne of religion, the Temple of Salomon,
the feelde of bleſſing, the breeder of delites, the golden reclaiming meane of
a tranſgreſſor, the ioy of Angels, the Court of God, the ha­bitackle or
dwellyng place of the holy ghoſt, the booke opened and ſhut, which ſhal be
ma­nifeſted in the day of iudgement.

CASSIODORVS.

WHAT is there thought may be ob­teyned, where as a good conſcience is loſt.

GREGORIVS.

THere is no man more corrupt in life, then he that ſeemes to him ſelf to be
cleare and ſound in lyfe.

SENECA ad Lucillum.

LOoke vppon the mind, ſcanne vppon the maners, marke and be mindful of thy
do­inges, for euer in them, and by or of them, ſhalt thou knowe what thou art.

CICERO.

IT is a poynt of fooliſhneſſe properly for a man to prye and looke neare into
other mens faultes, and to forgeat his owne.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=40)

God graunt al ſtates to keepe with diligence,

In conſcience good the moſt aſſured ſtay,

Of treaſures heauenly higheſt in excellence,

VVhich may our mindes chearefull make alway,

That lyfe from learnyng doo not goe aſtray,

Ne yet with ſhiftes of cloked colluſion,

Our ſelues and our freendes corrupt we may,

To turne vnto our owne confuſion.

ZACHE. CAP. 13.

I Wyll ſmite the Shepheard, and the ſheepe of the flocke ſhalbe ſcattered one
from an other: the integritie of them that beare rule, is the health of the
Subiectes.

ECLESIAST. CAP. 8.

IT falleth out nowe and then, that one man hath power ouer an other to his
owne hin­derance.

PROVERBES. CAP. 11.

THE Citie ſhall reioyce in the wealth of iuſt and vpright Rulers, and there
ſhal be ioy ouer the deſtruction of the wicked.

BERNARDVS.

MAN is neuer in ſtate of honour with­out dolour and ſorowe: in pleaſure
with­out payne, in aucthoritie without vanitie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=41)ESAI. CAP. 3.

I Wyl geue them children for their princes, and ſuch as are of womaniſh
mindes, ſhall beare aucthoritie ouer them, and the people ſhall periſhe.

BERNARDVS ad Impios.

THY Shepheardes are chaunged into fleeſers of their flocke, thy Lambes into
Woolues, thy defenders, into diſperſers of the flocke, and they that ſhould be
ſober, are dayly geuen to drunkenneſſe: they that ſhould be chaſte, are
vicious liuers: for godly Prelates, thou ſhalt haue wicked Pilates: and they
that ought to be god [...]y inducers and teachers of thee, ſhalbe ſeducers,
and fetchers of thee from the right way.

Eche Communalty then ſtandeth in good ſtate,

VVhen as their princes rulde are by reaſon,

But be they vicious and infatuate,

Then falleth all to foule confuſion,

VVe haue to marke then what abuſion,

Other Realmes doo on them ſelues ay bring,

By their miſrule, way our condicion,

In happier ſtate God knoweth floriſhng.

AVGVSTINVS.

DAVID, the ſecond Kyng of Iſrael, dooth ſurely ſhine in mankind, as it were
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=41) a certayne
brightneſſe that would dazell our eyes. In what man at any time were there
found togeather theſe two thinges: that is to ſay, ſo great aucthoritie
conceaued with ſo great humility, ſo great courage, ſo great clemencie, ſo
great a care as he conteyned to­wardes the diſpoſing of his worldly affaires,
ſo pure and deuoute contemplacion, or medi­tating of ſpirituall matters: to
kill ſo many men, and to ſhed teares of repentance: to fall into ſo great
offences as he dyd, and to per­fourme ſo good repentance.

PSALM. 119.

I Am delighted in the way of thy teſtimo­nies, as in al the riches and worldly
wealth which I haue.

Idem.

DElight thou thy ſelfe in the Lord, and he ſhall rewarde thee euen to the
deſyres of thy owne hart.

Idem.

WEre it not but that my meditation is in thy lawe, I ſhoulde then perhappes
haue periſhed in my owne humilitie. Lorde, my hart is not puffed vp, neither
are my eyes lifted vp, neither haue I walked in greate thinges, nor in
woonderfull thinges aboue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=42) my reache.
Lord remember Dauid, and all his mercie.

Auguſt. in Epiſt. ad comit chariſ.

WIth exhorting thee (good brother) I beſeeche thee, that vnto euery ſeruaunt
of thy houſholde, from the greateſt vnto the leaſt, thou wouldſt be a
meſſenger of loue and ſweetenes towardes the obteyning of that heauenly
kingdome, and denounce vnto them the horror and trembling that is in the
infer­nall pit of hell: and that thou be wyſe thy ſelfe for theyr welfare, and
be as a watche man vnto them: becauſe for euery ſeruaunt which is within thy
houſe, thou ſhalt render an ac­count.

PSALME. 101.

DEpart ye wicked from me, and I wyll ſearche foorth the commaundementes of my
God.

VVho euer yet conioyned in one perſon,

So profound meekenes with high excellence,

Such temporall trouble with harts deuotion,

So great ſlaughter, ſo prteous penitence,

Seuere iuſtice mixt with compacience,

As had King Dauid, loe appeareth well,

To God and man his watchfull diligence,

At this day Princes many doth excell.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=42)SAPIENCE.
CAP. 15.

FOR the louers of euill men are woorthy of death.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 7.

GOE away from the wicked man, and there ſhall no euill come neare thee.

1\. CORINTH. CAP. 5.

I Haue written vnto you, that you ſhould not entermingle your ſelues with
fornicators, with offenders, ſpecially whiche haue com­mitted fornication
againſt God. And this dyd I vnto that end, that eyther they myght be
confounded, or amended.

MATTH. CAP. 7.

HEarken not you vnto the falſe prophetes, whiche may come vnto you in Sheepes
clothing.

CHRISOST. ſuper Matth.

IN nature of worldly things (ſaith he) thus falleth it out: that ſo ofte as
the euyll man is a companion vnto the good man, the euill man is not made
better by the good man, but by the euyll man, the good man is made woorſe.

HIERONIMVS.

THERE is nothing ſo much hurteth a man, as dooth euyll company. I thinke it
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=43) a thing more
then poſſible, that that man can any longer continew in dooing well, whiche is
dayly conuerſant with euyll men.

PSALME. 1.

BLeſſed is the man which hath not walked in the counſell of the wicked, and
hath not ſtand in the way of the vngodly, nor hath not ſit in the chayre of
peſtilence, but hath repo­ſed his wyll and deſyre in the lawe of the Lorde.

PSALME. 18.

WIth the holy, thou ſhalt be holy, and with the froward, thou ſhalt learne
fro­wardneſſe.

In two poyntes dependeth principally,

The key of honeſt conuerſation,

Into wyſe counſayle and good company,

VVherefore as Princes with due diſcretion,

Knowe euery counſellours diſpoſition,

For better ſauety in good gouernment,

Semblably eche baſer ſtate and condicion,

By company and counſell are ruled verament.

HESTER. CAP. 18.

WHiche matter is prooued by auncient hiſtories, and by ſuche perſons as they
are accompliſhed dayly, how by the euill ſug­geſtions of certaine which are in
aucthoritie [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=43)
about ſome princes of the world, the trauels and affaires of thoſe Princes are
brought to yll paſſe.

2\. PARALIPOM. CAP. 24.

IOAS the King of Iuda dyd that whiche was acceptable in the ſyght of the Lord,
ſo long as Ioiada the high Prieſt liued: but of trueth when Ioiada dyed, the P
[...]inces of Iu­da entred into the fauour of Ioas the K [...]ng, and did
honour the King as a God: who be­ing ouercome with their flattering ſeruices,
gaue eare vnto them, and both the King and his Counſell then forſooke the
Church of the Lorde, and dyd woorſhip vnto the ſtarres of the Firmament, and
grauen Images, and the wrath of the Lorde was mooued vppon Iuda and Hieruſalem
for this offence.

PROVERBES.

I Wyſedome haue my dwelling in the coun­ſels of men.

3\. REGVM. CAP. 12.

ROboam the King, forſooke the counſell of the Elders of the kingdome:
wherevp­pon it came to paſſe, that of twelue tribes which ruled in Iſrael, he
loſt ten of them.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=44)PROVERBES.
CAP. 12.

THE counſels of the vngodly are meare deceiptfull ſnares vnto them ſelues.

VERSVS.

Regnum ſtat ſanum, per conſilium veteranum,

Where auncient heads doo counſell giue,

The kingdome there dooth ſafely liue.

Regnum decreſſit, vbi conſilium iuueneſcit.

That kingdome muſt of needes decay,

Where counſellors young do beare ye ſway.

Et proprium lucrum creſcit, Liuorque pateſcit.

And eche mans priuate gaines increaſe,

And malice from miſcheefe doth not ceaſe.

PSALME. 26.

I Haue hated the vniuſt liuers, and I am ab­horred of them.

Good company is of ſo great vertue,

It cauſeth ſinners to become gracious,

VVhen they endeuour them ſelues to reſcew,

From their folly and faultes defamous,

And eke euill company is ſo contagious,

That it corrupteth good inclination,

It is ſo vigorus, violent, and venemous,

It puts euen princes to great perdicion.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=44)PSALME. 112.

THERE is riſen vp a light in place of darkneſſe, to ſuche as are of a true
hart.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 17.

FOR with one chaine or band, were they all linckt.

ESAI. CAP. 56.

THVS ſayth the Lorde, Keepe equitie, and doo right: for my ſauing health ſhall
come ſhortly, and my righteouſneſſe ſhall be opened.

SENECA ad Lucillum.

PVT thou no confidence in fortune of this world, for in a moment is the Sea
altered and chaunged.

GREGORIVS.

THE great ſurges of temporall thinges, carrieth with them the iudgement of
eter­nall damnation.

HIERONIMVS.

IT is not poſſible for a man to enioy both the preſent felicities of this
life, and of the life to come: and here to fyll his belly, and there to
ſatiſfie his mind, and from pleaſures to pleaſures to paſſe his appointed
courſe, that he may be both happy and bleſſed in hea­uen and earth togeather.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=45)GREGORIVS.

IF we wyll ſeeke for the ſweete, it is requi­ſite that wee doo ſuffer and
tollerate the ſower.

VERSVS.

Dulcia non meruit, qui non guſtauit amara.

The ſweete to haue deſerues not he,

That hath not taſted the ſowre tree.

SOPHONI. CAP. 1.

THEY ſhall walke as the blind doo, be­cauſe they haue ſinned againſt the
Lorde.

EXODVS. CAP. 10.

AND Moyſes lifted vp his handes vnto Heauen, and there was made horrible
darkneſſe for the ſpace of three dayes, vppon the whole land of Egypt, ſo that
no man kn [...]we his owne brother, neither knewe he in what place him ſelfe
was: but contrary­wyſe▪ where ſo euer the children of Iſrael had their
abiding, there appeared light vnto them.

IOHN. CAP. 10.

THE light ſhineth in the darkneſſe, but the darkneſſe comprehendeth it not.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=45)ESAI. CAP. 9.

THE people that walketh in the darke­neſſe, haue ſeene a great light appeared
vato them: there is light aryſen vp vnto them that dwell in the ſhadowe of
death.

LVKE. CAP. 1.

TO lighten thoſe that ſitte in darkneſſe, and in the ſhadowe of death.

Actum Apoſtolorum. CAP. 9.

A Light from Heauen compaſſed him, ſhining rounde about him: and when he
opened his eyes, he ſawe nothing.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 2.

FOR their owne malice hath blinded them ſelues.

Among the plagues of Egypt moſt horrible,

One was of darknes three dayes enduring,

VVhich was a token troubleſome and terrible,

To all the Egyptians: but there abiding,

The people of Iſrael had large light ſhining,

So though this world be blinded by abuſance,

Yet amongſt all ſome be in grace growyng,

To innocent lyfe, through fruitefull repentance.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 40.

THERE is great labour and trauell ordeyned for all men, and a yoke of
gree­uous [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=46)
painefulneſſe, which ſhall be laid vpon the ſonnes of Adam from their birth
day, vn­till they ſhall returne vnto the Earth their graue, the mother of all
thinges: euen from the degree of him which beareth the ſcepter, and weareth
the Diadem or Crowne, vnto that lowe degree of him that is clothed in
ſackecloth: fury, zeale, hurlyburly, trem­bling, and the feare of death
burning in ire­full indignation and contencion, ſhall moleſt him, and when he
would take his reſt in his bedde, the dreame of the night paſſed, ſhall take
away his vnderſtanding.

IOB. CAP. 14.

MAN which is borne of a woman, hath but a ſhort time here to liue, and is
filled with many miſeries, with heate, colde, and hunger, and neuer remaineth
in one eſtate, becauſe he is nowe in good health, ſtraight­way ſicke. &c.

All mortall creatures conceaued in ſinne,

VVretchedly borne, liuing in variaunce,

Are lyke fragrant flowres in a Garden,

VVith fading floriſhe euer chaunging the chaunce,

The newe to olde ſucceedeth by ordinaunce,

So in his kinde goeth humane ſuccesſion,

Now ſicke, now ſound, now glad, now in greeuaunce,

Neuer ſtandeth in one eſtate by condicion.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=46)BERNARDVS.

HOO ritche Lorde art thou in mercie, howe mighty in iuſtice, howe bountifull
in grace: O Lorde our GOD, there is none like vnto thee.

PSALME. 34.

BVT thoſe that ſeeke foorth the Lorde, ſhall not be put to confuſion in euery
good enterpriſe: wherevppon ſaith Casſiodorus, When we loue the Lorde, we
finde al things in him, he is one onely to be ſought for: but he is that one
wherein all thinges are con­teined. Oh woonderfull gaine, oh ſinguler ſallary,
or ſteepend for our paines: why then doo we wearie our ſelues by diuers
meanes: but let vs with one vnitie of mind make haſte vnto him, who being had,
let vs ſeeke for none other felicities beſides him, but let vs holde him with
fixed faith.

GENESIS. CAP. 31.

THOV hadſt very little before that I came vnto thee, and nowe thou art made
riche by me, and God hath bleſſed thee at my entrance vnto thee.

THOME. CAP. 2.

AT all times and ſeaſons doo thou geue praiſes, and pray vnto God, and deſire
of [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=47) him that
he would direct thy wayes, accor­ding to his wyll.

VVherefore our God, meekely to thee we call,

Graunt vs thy grace for moſt ſureſt ſuffiſance,

To ſet aſide all ſinnes ſenſuall,

And be our guide with all good gouernance.

In myſty darkneſſe of worldly variance,

Graunt wylling mindes thy will to execute,

That vve may ſo ſerue thee vvithout disſimulance,

So as of thy grace vve be neuer deſtitute.

IERONIMVS.

THERE is nothing more like vnto the woorkes of the Deuils, then to be
conti­nually at ſtrife and debate one man with an other.

CASSIODRVS.

SEe that you haue vnitie in the bond of peace, becauſe there is not a more
liuelier ſhape and fourme of Angelicall conuerſati­on, then is brotherly
vnitie of one man with an other.

AVGVSTINVS.

GOD loueth the bonde of concorde and vnitie.

GREGORIVS.

THERE is nothing more precious with God, then the vertue of loue: there
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=47) is nothing
that the deuill deſireth, more then the extinguiſhing of charitie and loue.

IERONIMVS.

THERE is nothing hard or difficult vnto thoſe that doo loue, there is no
tedi­ous trauell in loue. Let vs therefore loue Chriſte, and what ſo euer
thing is hard of it ſelfe vnto vs, wee ſhall thinke it very eaſyly to be
atcheeued of vs.

MARO Poeta.

THE labours and trauelles of louers can not by any meanes be tedious and
burde­nous vnto them, but euen them ſelues are de­lighted therein, as they
that haue a delight eyther in hunting, fowling, or fiſſhing.

BERNARDVS.

WHAT man ſo euer he be that ſhall perfectly diſcerne the burden of ſinne, and
the wound of his ſoule or conſcience, ſhal eyther very little or nothing at
all feele the payne, or vexation of his body, neyther ſhall he thinke much of
the labour beſtowed, wherein he ſhall vnderſtand howe to deface and wype away
his ſinnes doone and paſt, and learne to take heede how he commit any more
ſuch offences in time to come. &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=48)

As nothing more maketh reſemblance,

To feendiſh feares then ſtrife and debate,

So humane kinde by charitable acquaintance,

To heauenly Angels is aſſociate.

This laudable loue makes man laureate,

Loue makes our labour light in compariſon,

Loue is a vertue of valure inuiolate,

And chaungeth care to conſolation.

AVGVSTINVS.

BEtter is that medicine preſerueatiue, then that which is curatiue.

AVGVSTINVS.

ALL haynous offences and horrible, whiche man dooth by cuſtome commit, are
eyther thought by him to be but ſmall, or none at all: ſo as not only they are
not to be cloked and couered, but alſo doo require to be publiſhed and openly
detected.

Philippus in Prolog. 3. Phil.

CErtaine perſons there haue been ſo ac­cuſtomed to feede vpon very poyſon,
that they haue taken it for their onely meate.

SENECA de vita & moribus.

GOod cuſtome ought to ſhake out and re­iect thoſe thinges, which the euyl
cuſtome hath put in vre, and trayned in man.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=48)ARISTOT. 7.
lib. Ethicorum.

IT is a hard thing for man to reſiſt & with­ſtand cuſtome, becauſe ſhe is made
ſo like nature in her proper vſe: yet notwithſtan­ding it is an eaſier thing
for vs to alter and chaunge cuſtome, then naturall inclination.

PSALME. 42.

ONE depthe calleth vpon an other, they haue prolonged their iniquitie.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 37.

O Moſt wicked preſumption, from whence art thou deſcended?

Thy corporall health from ſickneſſe to conſerue,

Is more of priſe then any medecine,

So then thy ſoule may rather deſerue,

Of deadly wound all ſinne for to decline.

Then for to taſte the venemous propine

Of ſinne, and after ſeeke the ſalue of repentance,

Preſumption ryſeth of the olde ſerpentine,

VVhiche doubtles doth proue a perillous peſtelance.

BERNARDVS.

O Thou my ſoule, whiche art the badge of a Chriſtian, made noble after the
image of God, decored with equall forme, ſpouſed vnto him in fayth, endowed
with the ſpirite, redeemed with his blood, made heyre with angels, receauer of
bleſſedneſſe, the child of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=49) grace, and
partaker of reaſon, what haſt thou with thee, as touching thy frayle fleſhe
what may be ſaide, haſt thou not found it an vnſauery and noyſome dounghil?

Idem BERNARDVS.

O Cleare white vnſpotted Lilly, oh thou tender and delicate floure, there are
vn­beleeuing people abidyng with thee, and ſuch as ſeeke thy ſubuertion, and
with Scorpions haſt thou thy dwelling. Take heede, and ſee that thou walke
warely amongſt the thorns, becauſe the worlde is full of thornes: they breede
on the earth, they are in the ayre, and they are in thy fleſhe. To be
therefore con­uerſant amongſt theſe, and by them not to be hurt, conſiſteth in
the power deuine to with­ſtand, and not in any vertue that thou haſt.

AVGVSTINVS.

O Howe is that Soule vnhappy, which is ſequeſtred from the cheefe felicitie,
and ouer whom the deuill hath ſway, ſhe is made voyde of lyght, and enuironed
with darke­neſſe, ſhe is conſumed with pleaſure, and made drunke with bitter
waters, ſhe loſeth life, and fyndeth death. &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=49)

Of our ſoules Lord we make record with ruthe,

As flowres fayre, tender, and delicate,

To Chriſte our ſpouſe wedded with ring of truthe,

Though in this life we haue dayly debate,

Yet graunt in fayth that we be laureate,

From hurtfull ſinne with ſyncere conſcience,

O Lord to thee let vs not liue ingrate,

Sithe thou with vs wolte haue thy reſidence.

¶ FINIS Of the Contemplacion for TVESDAY.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=50)

## 3\. ¶THE AVCTORS Commemoration for VVENSDAY.

The damage due to deadly ſinne,

To ſeeke to voyde, let vs not linne.

The Tranſlators Application.

The third day this Creator then, the waters here belowe,

Into  [...]ne place dyd geather, and, them in one floodde beſtowe,

The drye land thence deuided hee, the Sea thoſe waters named,

The Sea for trauell to and fro, the Earth for fruite he framed.

VVho liues then in this earthy vale,

Taſte fruites of trouble, death, and bale.

PSALME. 51.

BEcauſe I doo acknow­ledge myne iniquitie, and my ſinne is alway a­gainſt me.

TOBIA. CAP. 12.

BVT they that com­mit ſinne and iniqui­tie, are enimies to their owne ſoule.

GREGORIVS.

THERE ſhould no aduerſitie or miſhap hurt vs, yf there dyd no iniquitie
con­demne and adiudge vs woorthy therof.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=50)PSALME. 38.

MY iniquities are gone ouer my head, and as a great burden are they heauy
vppon me.

PROVERBES. CAP. 14.

SInne maketh the people become miſera­ble.

AGVSTINVS.

WHAT can be more miſerable, then the wretched worldling which hath no
compaſſion of him ſelfe.

ESAI. CAP. 13.

I Wyll vizite the landes with diſeaſes, and agaynſt the wicked wyll I goe with
theyr in [...]quities.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 27.

AS the Lion is euer lurking for his pray, ſo dooth the ſinnes of man lye in
wayte for them that woorke miſcheefe.

AVGVSTINVS.

SInne is defined, to be any thyng ſpoken, or any thyng done, eyther any deſyre
ſtriuing agaynſt the lawe of God.

BERNARDVS.

O Howe wretched is the ſtate of ſinners, which eſteeme of the ſonne of God, as
of a Swineheard.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=51)ESAI. CAP.
59.

YOur iniquities haue ſet enimity betwene you and your God, and your ſinnes
haue couered his face from beholdyng you with mercie, and that he ſhoulde not
heare you when you pray vnto him.

Idem ſequitur.

OVr iniquites are multiplied before him, and our ſinnes haue made anſwear vnto
vs.

2\. REGVM. CAP. 3.

DAVID ſpake theſe woordes touching Ioab, The Lorde recompence the euyll man,
according to the mallice of his miſ­cheefe.

PSALME. 31.

THOV haſt hated all them that doo woorke wickedneſſe.

To define of ſinne in ſentences ſhort,

No man well may, ſo full it is of care,

Neuertheleſſe as novv I purpoſe to report,

Howe in eache ſeaſon ſinne is moſt contrare,

To mans weale, ſupplanting eache afare,

Vnto his damage where it may preuayle,

Enforcing ay of bliſſe to reue him bare,

In ſoule, in body, and in goodes temporall.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=51)AVGVSTINVS.

SInne is the ranſacking ſpoyle of the good grace receaued, and a corruption
natural­ly grafted in man.

PROVERB. CAP. 4.

BVT the wicked and vngodly in the land, ſhalbe deſtroyed.

PROVERBES. CAP. 4.

THE way of the vngodly, is as the darke­neſſe, they knowe not where they fall.

IEREMI. GAP. 5.

OVR ſinnes haue debarred and prohibi­ted the good graces of God from vs.

PSALME. 10.

IN the woorkes of his owne handes, is the ſinner ſnared and taken.

PSALME. 31.

MANY plagues are there ordeyned for ſinners, but mercy ſhall compaſſe him
rounde about, that putteth his truſt in the Lorde.

BERNARD.

BE aſhamed (oh my Soule) and bluſhe at thy folly: thou haſt chaunged thy
deuine ſhape and forme, into a brutiſh and beaſtly forme.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=52)Idem.

THERE is nothing more beaſtly, then that man which is endewed with reaſon, and
vſeth it not.

Idem.

HOw much the more a man ſhall ſinne, ſo much the leſſe ſhall he knowe what
ſinne is, and in deede ſo much the more ſhall he be delighted therewith.

Robart Groſthed Lincolnienſ.

SInne is the iſſue, or generation of the de­uill, the parent of death, the
corruption of nature, and the deformation, or defilyng of the ſoule.

GREGORIVS.

WHAT greater poynt of madneſſe can there be in man, then for a very little
pleaſure of the fleſh, to make him ſelf a bond­man vnto euerlaſting
puniſhmentes.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 28.

WHAT yf thou wouldeſt deſire of God that thou mighteſt heare the voyce of this
thy Lorde and God ſpeaking vnto thee, that thou ſhouldeſt obſerue and
accompliſhe all that he commaundeth. The Lorde ſhall ſtrike thee with madnes,
and with blindnes,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=52) and with
fury of the minde, that thou ſhalt ſtumble at the noone day, as the blind man
is woont to ſtumble in the darknes, and thou ſhalt not guide thy footeſteppes,
but ſhalt al­waies ſuffer reproche, and be oppreſſed with violence, neyther
ſhall there be any man to deliuer thee free from his fury.

Sinne is the cauſe of our perdition,

Sinne, of the Deuill is daughter venemons,

In ſoule and body ſinne cauſeth corruption,

Sinne is a ſickneſſe right contagious,

Sinne maketh a man fooliſhe and furious,

All in wood rage running without reaſon,

His dayes ouerdriuing in ſtate ſtyll daungerous,

VVith confuſed courſe of time and ſeaſon.

PSALME. 14.53.

THEY haue trembled with feare, where there was no feare at all.

LEVITCVS. CAP. 26.

IF ſo be that you wyll not heare me, ney­ther doo all that I haue commaunded
you, but ſhall deſpiſe my lawes and ordinances, I wyll ſet my face agaynſt
you, and you ſhall periſhe before the face of your enimies, and you ſhalbe
caſt vnder foote of thoſe that haue hated you. The King ſhal put them in
feare, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=53) yea,
the noyſe of a leafe blowen from the Tree, ſhall make them afraide: they ſhal
fall downe to the earth, when there is no man to ſtrike them.

PROVER. CAP. 12.

THE way of the vngodly, ſhall deceaue them: the deceitfull man ſhall finde
none aduantage.

APOCAL. CAP. 18.

THERE is prepared a dwelling place for all the Deuils, and a place of cuſtody
for euery vncleane ſpirite.

OZEA. CAP. 9.

THEY are become abominable, euen as thoſe idols that they haue embraced and
had in honour.

PROVERB. CIP. 18.

THE belly of the wicked perſon, is neuer ſatiſfied.

SOPHONI. CAP. 1.

THEY haue walked as the blinde that ſawe not, becauſe they haue ſinned againſt
the Lorde.

IOB. CAP. 18.

HIS foote path is hidden in the earth: feare and trembling ſhall make him
a­fraide on euery ſide.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=53)IOB. CAP. 20.

THE praiſe of the vngodly ſhal be but for a ſmall ſeazon, and the ioy of an
hypocrite is like vnto the poynt of a ſwoord: yf his pride ſhall lift it ſelfe
vp vnto the heauens, and that his head doo touche the cloudes, yet in the ende
it ſhall be deſtroyed, euen as the filthy dounghil, and as a dreame that is
vani­ſhed, ſhall it not be found.

The mind of ſinners is figured vnto hell.

VVherein is fyre and feendiſh cruelty,

Gods lawes and maners reſiſting as rebell,

VVith lothſome ſtenche of wylful iniquity,

Committed by the ſeuen ſinnes deadly,

And he that ſinne into his chayne can lincke,

By ſubtyll ſhiftes and ſhameles impiety,

Tys a ſpeciall gift, yf they twayne euer ſhrincke.

ROMANS. CAP. 6.

THE reward of ſinne, is death.

PSALME. 146.

HIS ſpirite ſhall goe foorth, and ſhall re­turne into his owne land: in that
day ſhal all his cogitations periſhe.

PROVERBES. CAP. 11.

THE wicked man being once dead, there reſteth no further hope vnto him.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=54)BERNARDVS.

O Thou Soule of man, not with precious golde or ſiluer, but with the blood of
the Lambe of GOD redeemed: Why wylt thou deliuer thy ſelfe into deſtruction,
ſeeing Chriſte (for the loue that he beareth vnto thee) hath ſhed his moſt
precious blood.

HYLLARIVS.

THE Soule that ſheweth not her ſelfe nete and clearely ſhining, indewed with
the garment or robe of holy life: is not the Soule eſpouſed vnto Chriſte, but
the Deuils darling.

AVGVSTINVS.

HAppy is that Soule which ſhall ſo ende­uour her ſelfe to gouerne her life,
that ſhe may through Chriſte deſerue to receaue and entertaine Chriſt as her
geſte and inhabiter within her.

ECLESIAST. CAP. 4.

BE ſorowfull and heauy for thy Soule.

PSALME. 69.

THE zeale of thy houſe Lorde, hath euen as it were eaten me vp.

1\. REGVM. CAP. 22.

THERE is none that ſoroweth for my ſtate.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=54)ECCLESIAST.
CAP. 32.

THE wicked are hardly chaſtized to a­mendment, and the number of fooles is
infinite.

PSALME. 32.

BEcauſe mercie hath come vppon him, he ſhall with mercie be chaſtized.

AMBROSIVS.

THE lewde and diſſolute life of the child, ſhalbe imputed the negligence of
the pa­rentes.

PSALME. 141.

BVT the oyle of a ſinner ſhall not hurt my head.

TVLLIVS.

FOR euery pouniſhment and correction ought to be without reproche, neither to
the reproche of him whiche ſo puniſheth, or chaſtizeth any perſon: but to be
referred only for the commoditie and profite of the weale publique.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE wrath of GOD is then greate, when the offender is not by due chaſtiſe­ment
reclaimed: but ſuffereth him ſelfe to
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=55) runne in
further offence, by taking a wan­dring libertie.

Mans ſoule is a iewell incomperable,

By Chriſte his bloodſhed dearely bought,

VVherefore he wyll that we be coumptable,

To him in good wyll for ſauety ſought.

VVhen to captiue vs Satan ſought,

Bereft of all ſolace then ſurely were wee,

Tyll this our champion for vs fought.

VVe deſerued the ſcourge of his equitee.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 7,

REmember thy laſt dayes, and thou ſhalt not doo amis for euer.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 11.

IF a man doo liue many yeeres, and in all this time ſhall reioyce and be
meery, yet he ought to remember the dayes of darkneſſe, and the daies of many,
which ſhal then come, ſhal plainely teſtifie, that the dayes paſt were the
dayes of vanitie.

GREGORIVS.

THE true and perfect life, is to be med [...] tating howe to dye well.

Idem.

HE that conſidereth with him ſelfe what maner of perſon he ſhalbe when death
aſ­ſayleth [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=55)
him, is euermore fearefull in his af­faires to offend.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 12.

THE Lorde ſhall bring all thinges to re­ceaue iudgement, that are done vnder
the heauens.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 9.

REmember the Lorde in thy life time, be­cauſe death detracteth no time.

HVGO, de ſancto victore.

WE ought to knowe, that neyther the iuſt man, nor the vniuſt, the child, nor
the olde man, are exempted, but be diſſolued by death the ſoule from the body,
before they be in that ſtate of goodneſſe or euill, beyonde the which, yf they
ſhould heare liue alway, they ſhoulde neuer paſſe further to any feli­citie.
&c.

ECCLESIASST. CAP. 14.

OH death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee vnto a wicked man, hauing
peace in his ritches.

AVGVSTINVS.

OH life, howe many haſt thou deceaued, whiche whyles thou fleeſt and paſſeſt
a­way, art as nothing: whyles thou art ſeene of vs, thou art as a ſhadow:
whyles thou art
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=56) made much
of, thou art as a vaniſhing ſmoke: ſweete art thou vnto fooles, and bitter
vnto wyſe men: therefore thou art to be ſhunned, thou art to be feared,
becauſe thou art daun­gerous. So fareth it with man in this lyfe, euen as a
man that ſoiourneth in an other mans houſe, not knowyng when it ſhall be ſayde
vnto him, ariſe and depart from hence.

Ad Romanos. CAP. 5.

BY meanes of ſinne, death entred into the worlde.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE true death in deede, which men doo feare, is the ſeparation of the ſoule
from God, who is the life of our ſoules.

VERSVS.

O happy is mortall kinde,

If he alwayes life fynde,

And feare the eternall good end,

in reſpect of his vertuous mind.

A mighty medecine, a royall eke remede,

Sinne to ſubdue I finde for eche degree,

Is to remember that ſtate yf he were deade,

VVhen ſoule all ſorowfull departes the body.

Then waying this liues inſtability,

VVe ſhalbe ſure to receaue iudgement,

Togeather both in ſoule and body,

Of woord, and worke, of thought, and time miſpent▪

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=56)ECCLESIAST.
CAP. 10.

WHY art thou proude, O thou Earth and Aſhes.

sequitur.

A King to day, and to morowe dead: and when a man dyeth, he ſhall become the
heyre of Serpentes, Beaſtes, and Wormes.

GENESIS. CAP. 3.

DVſt thou art, and into duſt ſhalt thou re­turne againe.

HIERONIMVS.

WE dye dayly, and we are changed day­ly, and yet we thinke our ſelues to be
eternall, euen this very woord that I ſpeake, that I write, when I eate, when
I drinke, or what thing els ſo euer I doo, ſomewhat ther­by is my life time
ſhortened.

PSALME. 44.144.

MAn is made like vnto vanitie, his dayes doo paſſe away as a ſhadowe.

VERSVS.

Eſt homo res fragilis, durans pro tempore parvo,

Hic eſt, hic non eſt, quaſi flos qui creſcit in aruo.

Man is a brickle and fraile thing.

That lasteth but ſmall time,

Now here, nowe fades as flowre,

In feelde that groweth fine.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=57)ECCLESIAST.
CAP. 9.

MAN dooth not know his end, but as the fyſhes are taken with the hooke, and
the birdes are catcht in the ſnares, ſo in the euill dayes are men ſnared, and
yet notwithſtan­ding this man knoweth not whether he de­ſerue more to be hated
or loued, but the vn­certainetie of thinges are reſerued till a fur­ther time.

EZECHIEL. CAP. 3.

THE vngodly and wicked ſhall die in his ſinnes.

AMBROSIVS.

WHAT thing can be more miſerable vnto vs, which are caſt foorth into this life
as all bare and naked, fraile in body, weake in mind, doubtfull and full of
diſquiet­neſſe, ſlowe to take paines, prone and redy to pleaſure.

AVGVSTINVS.

IT is a fooliſhe thing for a man to liue in that caſe, wherein a man dare not
aduen­ture to die, and he is of better courage which ſlumbreth and reſteth
with one deadly ſinne, going no further, then he that waigeth battel with
ſeuen enimies.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=57)

Thinke on thy corpes now delicately fedde,

VVhoſe foode ſhalbe euen woormes and ſcorpion,

Thinke howe with coſtly clothing thou art cladde,

VVhich death ſhall change into corruption.

Yet of our death by naturall condition,

No creature knoweth time when, nor place,

VVhether Heauen or Hell for our poſſeſſion,

Eyther els ioy or ſorowe, we ſhall imbrace.

PSALME. 94.

MIſcheefe ſhall fall vpon, and enſnare the wicked to his deſtruction.

AMBROSIVS.

IT is better for ſinners that doo euill to dye, then that they ſhoulde remaine
ſtill long in ſinne.

ARISTOT. 3. Ethicorum.

OF all fearefull thinges, death is the moſt fearefull.

PSALME. 49.

THE graue is their dwelling place and laſt end, they ſhall leaue their ritches
vnto others to poſſeſſe.

PROVERBES. CAP. 11.

RItches ſhal not profite nor preuaile them that haue abuſed them in the laſt
day of reuenge, but iuſtice ſhall deliuer a man from
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=58) death of
hell.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 3.

FOR horrible is the death of the vnrigh­teous generation.

GREGORIVS in moribus.

EVery man feareth the death of the fleſhe, but fewe doo feare the death of the
ſoule.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 1.

ONE generation paſſeth, and an other commeth.

2\. REGVM. CAP. 13.

BEhold, we all taſte of death, and are as it were water caſt vpon the earth,
which re­turneth not from whence it is ſent: ſo do we fall away.

ECCLESI. CAP. 1.

THERE is no ſuruiuing memorie of them that went before.

PSAME. 9.10.

THE memorie of them is periſhed, as it were with a ſodaine noyſe.

PSALM. 9.10.

I Am yeelded vp vnto obliuion, as a man that is dead from his owne hart.

BARVCK. CAP. 3.

WHERE are the Princes of the na­tions become, which were lordes ouer the
beaſtes of the feeld, which delighted them
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=58) ſelues in
the foules of the ayre, whiche haue hoorded vp their ſiluer and gold wherein
men do put their truſt, and thoſe neuer linne ſear­ching for the ſame, which
doo woorke there­vpon, and are buſie therein: their dayes are ended, and them
ſelues are gone downe into the deepe pit.

Death vnto the wicked, is terrible euermore,

But vnto the godly, a comfort doubtles,

To liue well, eche man be carefull therefore,

And whyle thou haſt light, refuſe darkneſſe,

Behold the nine nobles of famous woorthynes,

As Dauid, Salomon, Hector, and Alexander,

Iulius Caeſar, and the reſt of noble renowne

VVhoſe flickring fame through the world doth wan­der,

Hath not death by his dart laid them adowne?

DEVTE. CAP. 32. de impiis.

IT is a nation without aduiſe or counſell, and without wyſedome: would God
they would once be wyſe and haue vnderſtanding, and woulde prouide for
[...]heir later dayes. Which woords being more amply diſcuſſed by ſaint
Bernard, he ſaith, Would God they would be wyſe in three thinges that are
paſt, that is to ſay, In the loſſe and lacke of good thinges, whiche are
brought to paſſe vnder
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=59) mortall
power, or in dooing thoſe thinges which they haue neglected to doo. 2. That
they woulde be wyſe in not conſtituting the wicked in aucthoritie, whereof the
number is infinite in the worlde. 3. And that they would be circumſpect and
carefull in the loſſe of time, then which thing there is nothing to be
coumpted more precious.

And ſayth ſaint Bernard, Would God they would vnderſtand three things that are
preſent: that is to ſay, 1. The ſhortneſſe of our life: becauſe we haue
neither certaine day nor houre how long to reſt here. 2. The difficulty of our
ſaluation: becauſe ſtraight is the way that leadeth therevnto, and fewe there
are which walke in thereby. 3. And the ſmall number of them that are to be
ſa­ued: becauſe there are many called, but fewe are choſen.

And againe he ſaith, Woulde God men would prouide for thoſe three things that
are to come: that is to ſay, 1. Death, then which nothing is more bitter. 2.
The iudge­ment that ſhall be generall at the laſt day, then whiche nothing
ſhalbe more horrible to heare. 3. Eternall puniſhment ordeyned for the
vngodly, then the which nothing ſhal­be
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=59) more
ſharper.

The memorie of the dead, for rhe liuing is a preſident,

How better we ſhall for our ſtate prouide,

VVhyle we haue grace and ſpace of the Omnipotent,

Print we well in hart what others hath betide.

VVhich haue eyther walkt ſtraight, or ſtaggered aſide,

At our neighbours fall let vs be eke vvare,

Leſt vve that ſtand faſt, vvith them doo not ſlyde,

Our armour of perceuerāce, in good life lets prepare.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 14.

BE mindful of death, becauſe when he com­meth, there is no ſtay with him.

IEREMI. CAP. 4.

THEY are wyſe ynough to doo wicked­ly, but to doo well, they haue no
know­ledge at all.

ESAI. CAP. 44.

I The Lorde am he that doo tranſport wyſe men backwards, and doo make their
perſe­uerance to become meare fooliſhneſſe.

IOB. CAP. 7.

MY dayes are paſſed away, my cogi­tations are diſperſed, diſquieting my hart,
they haue changed the night with me into day, and againe yet after darknes, I
hope to ſee light.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=60)BERNARDVS in
meditatio.

TELL me, where are the louers of this worlde become, whiche a fewe yeeres
be­fore paſſed were with vs, there is nothyng remaining more of them at this
day, but duſt and woormes.

Had they not their appoynted time to drinke with thee, to eate with thee, and
to laugh with thee? And ſo eſteemed they of their dayes ſpent in their wealth
and ritches, and in the ende they are gone downe into the neathermoſt pit.

Their fleſhe is here in the earth beſtowed vpon the woormes, and in hell,
there theyr ſoule vnto the flaming fyre, tyll being againe lincked in that
vnhappy familie, they are toſ­ſed in perpetuall burning flames.

VVithout repentaunt turning, vve encreaſe eche day,

To death and his dome, vvherefore vvith diligence,

Amend vve our miſdeedes vvithout delay,

To ſaue our ſoules, ſhevv vve our ſapience,

Eſchevving the vice of vvylfull negligence,

That the time redeemed, may render alvvay,

Sound fruites of vvoordes, vvoorkes, and conſcience,

To ballance accompt iuſt at the iudgement day.

PSALME. 11.34.

THERE is ordeyned a moſt vyle death for ſinners.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=60)PROVERBS.
CAP. 5.

HE ſhall dye that hath not receiued diſci­pline.

GREGORIVS.

FOR the moſt higheſt is a pacient rewar­der of the wicked, for thoſe that he
hath long ſuffered to ſinne, to the ende that they might be conuerted and
repent. The ſame perſons not being conuerted nor repentyng, he dooeth more
greeuouſly adiudge them to the greater damnation.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 4.

THE iuſt man, though he be ouertaken with death, yet ſhall he finde reſt.

CHRISOSTO.

THERE is nothing ſo much deceaueth man, as the vayne hope to liue longer.

SENECA.

ƲNcertaine death doth preuent and ſteale vpon many amendementes of miſlyfe
(that are deferred) or euer they be aware.

PSALME. 49.

DEath ſhall feede the euyll men, euen as ſheepe that are throwen into the lake
of hell: they ſhall deſyre to dye, but death ſhall flee from them. &c,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=61)PSALME. 116·

PRecious in the ſyght of the Lorde, is the death of his Saintes.

BOETIVS.

DEath vnto thoſe men is happy and wel­come, when ſhe ſeemeth not to plant more
pleaſure at one time then at an other, and be­ing often called for, he comes
ſodenly to the ſorowfull.

SENECA.

TRuely to dye well, is for men to dye wyl­lingly.

AVGVSTINVS.

THere is nothing more withdrawes man from ſinne, then the often meditating and
thinking of death.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 18.

THE Lorde hath wrought woonderfull thinges in the death of man.

SENECA.

THere is nothing ſhall profit thee ſo much vnto temperance and moderacion of
all worldly thinges, nor cauſe thee ſo much to contemne them, as the dayly
forethincking and meditating of death.

APOCA. CAP. 2.

REmember from whence thou art fallen, and be wylling to repent thee thereof.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=61)ESAI. CAP.
38.

DIſpoſe and ſet in order all thinges within thyne houſe, becauſe thou ſhalt
dye and not line.

And Ezechias turned away his face vnto the wall, and prayed vnto the Lorde.

Sequitur.

And Ezechias wept with bitter teares.

As ſcriptures truely pronounce in ſentence,

Death due to ſinners, impenitent vvhich dye,

In this vvorld, damnation is by conſequence,

VVhen the ſound of Trumpe is hard from on hye,

From death to lyfe, ryſe then ſhall the godly,

VVherfore preuenting duly the fyrſt death,

Repent vve in time vvith purpoſe earneſtly,

To liue for euer vvith Chriſte by fyrme fayth.

¶ FINIS Of the Contemplacion for VVENSDAY.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=62)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=62)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=63)

## 4\. ¶THE AVCTORS Commemoration for THVRSDAY.

Remember the iudgement generall,

How for our liues then pleade we ſhall.

The Tranſlators Application.

Thalmighty in the Firmament, made lightes for to deuide,

The day & night, which lights for ſignes should ſerue eche time and tide,

A greater light, the Sunne to shine by dry, by night, a leſſe,

The Moone and Starres, the ſelf ſame light doth plainly lo expreſſe.

VVhyles we haue lyght, lets walke that way.

That gaynes light at the iudgement day.

AVGVSTINVS.

WE haue this experience, becauſe ye minde of man is more familier and in­vred
with the diuers intiſementes of this world, and ouercome with the
concupiſcen­ces, or luſtes thereof: that therefore ſhe re­fuſeth to be
occupied in well dooing, requi­reth pleaſure: and ſcarcely is ſhe brought to
this poynt, that ſhe ſhalbe able to exclude and reiect from her ſelfe, the
cuſtome of her for­mer
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=63) lyfe. But
when ſhe ſhall once fall in rec­koning howe neceſſary it is to thinke vpon the
latter day, & of the efficacie, of the iudge­ment whiche ſhall then be: being
ſtirred vp and prouoked, eyther with hope of reward, or with feare of
pouniſhment, ſhe proclaymeth wylfull warres againſt her good mocions and
paſſions whiche ſhoulde reſiſt the ſame, and aſſaulteth her auncient former
good de­ſyres, and forecibly as it were ſtriueth with her ſelfe to ſubdude her
ſelfe.

PROVERBES. CAP.

THE wicked and vngodly men haue no mind vppon the day of iudgement: but they
that ſeeke the Lord, doo conſider therof.

IEREMI. CAP. 12.

TRuly Lord thou art righteous, notwith­ſtanding in thy iudgementes, yea, yf I
ſhould diſpute with thee what the cauſe is, that the wicked in their wayes doo
floriſhe.

IOB. CAP. 22.

WHY doo the wicked liue ſtill vppon earth, and are ſo exalted on high? they
leade their liues in wealth, and yet in the end they goe downe into hell.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=64)ECCLESIASTES.
3.

THere are ſome godly perſons, before whoſe faces their owne euils haue come to
light, as though they had offended with the wicked. And there are alſo ſome
vngodly perſons whiche liue with ſuche ſecuritie, and thinke them ſelues ſo
ſafe, as though they had the woorkes of godly diſpoſed perſons with them. And
I haue perceaued, that af all the woorkes that the Lorde hath done, man can
not comprehend and finde out the reaſon.

ROMANS. CAP. 2.

O The woonderfull height of the ritches of the wyſedome of GOD, and of his
knowledge, howe incomprehenſible and in­ſcrutable are the iudgementes of his
way.

The Auctor figuring the generall iudgement,

Hereby admoniſheth both iuſt and vniuſt:

To conſider thereof in this life preſent,

All ſecuritie then abandon we muſt,

Yea all licencious liuyng and carnall luſt,

VVherein the wicked floriſhe at wyll,

For all ſuch as therein doo put their truſt,

Thalmighty Iudge in his wrath ſhall them ſpyll.

ECCLESIAST. CAP.

O What tormentes haue all the elect of GOD ſuffered, that they might ſafely
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=64) come vnto
the obteyned victory, ordeined for martyrs.

ESAI. CAP. 10.

WOe be vnto Aſſur, which is becomr the rod of my fury, and the ſtaffe it ſelfe
of reuenge, in their handes is my heauy diſ­pleaſure. But according to the
opinion of Saint Auguſtine: when the father hath cor­rected the childe in
mercy and iuſtice, he then caſteth the rod into the fyre.

2\. PETER. CAP. 2.

THE Lorde dooeth knowe when in due time to take hence thoſe that are godly:
but as for the wicked, he leaueth them for the day of iudgement, to pouniſhe
them then ac­cording to their deſertes.

PSALME. 76.

LOrde, I haue been mindfull of thy iudge­mentes, and I am comforted.

Were it not but that my meditation is in thy lawe, then ſhoulde I perhaps haue
peri­ſhed euen in myne owne humilitie. &c.

1\. PETER. CAP. 2.

CHriſte hath ſuffered for vs, leauing vs an example, that we ſhoulde all
folowe his ſteppes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=65)LVKE. CAP.
24.

OVght not Chriſte to haue ſuffered death, and  [...]hat he ſhoulde ſo enter
thereby into his glory?

Ad Hebreos. CAP. 11.

THE holy ones and elect of God by faith, haue co [...]quered vnto them
kyngdomes, haue wrought the woorkes of equitie and righteouſneſſe▪ & haue
purchaſed them ſelues newe promiſes of ſa [...]yng health: But ſome others
hauing tryed the ſcornefull diſpites and ſcourges of this worlde, and mo
[...]eouer the b [...]n [...]es and impriſonment, haue been ſto­ned to death,
haue been d [...]ſmembred, haue been tempted, and haue been put to death with
the ſwoord.

ISIDORVS.

ADuerſities are meanes to reclayme and remedy the diſeaſes of the ſoule.
Sicknes woundeth the fleſhe, but cureth the defect of the mind.

As God ſuffereth the wicked a time to lyue here,

Though it be for a ſcourge vnto his elect,

So to ſtrengthen their pacience when they forbeare,

Too to many iniuries, yet hath he reſpect,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=65)His choſen
quite out of mind not reiect,

But for better tryall of their fyrme fayth,

VVhen he ſeeth time he wyll detect,

Their foes of miſcheefe with ſentence of dearh.

ESAI. CAP. 30.

THE Lorde looketh for vs, to the ende he would haue mercie vpon vs.

IVDITH.

BVT becauſe the Lorde is pacient, euen for this purpoſe let vs repent the
more, and let vs with teares craue his pardon.

ESAI. CAP. 26.

HE had compaſſion of the obſtinate and wicked perſon, and he hath not learned
to feare our righteouſnes.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 5.

SAY not thou with thy ſelf, I haue ſinned, and what miſhap hath chaunced vnto
me, by meanes of forgeueneſſe of thy ſinnes, be thou not therefore the more
without feare: for mercy and diſpleaſure ſoone paſſeth away from him, and his
wrath dooth beholde thoſe that ſinne.

Ad Romanos. CAP. 2.

THOV art vtterly ignorant, that the great good wyll of God bringeth thee to
repentance: but according to the hardnes of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=66) thy hart,
and as thou art impenitent, thou heapeſt vp wrath vnto thee in the day of
wrath, and when the iudgement of the iuſt God ſhalbe reauealed, whiche
rendreth to euery man according to his woorkes.

Idem ad Romanos.

AND dooeſt thou deſpiſe the ritches of his goodnes, of his pacience, and
longa­nimitie? Thou dooeſt then heape vppon thee his wrath againſt the day of
wrath.

PSALME. 22.

FOrſake me not Lord in the day of my tri­bulation.

Idem.

I Wyll not feare any euyll thinges, becauſe thou Oh Lord art with me.

DEVTERONO CAP. 31.

TRuely becauſe the Lorde was not with me, therefore haue theſe euils and
miſ­cheefes come vpon me.

2\. PARALIPO. CAP. 15.

THE Lord is with you to helpe you, be­cauſe you are abiding with him: yf you
ſhall ſeeke him, you ſhall finde him, but yf you forſake him, he ſhall forſake
you.

ROMANS. CAP. 8.

IF God be on our ſide, who ſhall be agaynſt vs.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=66)GENES. CAP.
12.

MY ſoule liueth, euen becauſe of thy lo­uing fauour.

PSALME. 84.

THE Lorde ſhall geue vnto his choſen both grace and woorſhip.

PROVERBES. CAP. 3.

HE ſhall geue grace to the humble and lowly in hart.

PROVERBES. CAP. 14.

GRace ſhall remaine amongſt the iuſt and vpright in hart.

Oh mankind, rue on thy miſerable eſtate,

VVhen ſleeping in ſinne of liberty thou liueſt,

A more lothſome life then brute beaſt create,

The nearer grace is offred thee, the furder of thou ge­ueſt,

Thy conſent with ſecurity, and ſo thou thriueſt,

For abuſyng Gods grace and offered mercy,

One miſcheefe vpon an other thou driueſt,

Tyll all to late it is to repent thy folly.

APOCAL. CAP. 20.

THere ſhall be ordeyned a iudgement of euery ſoule, according as he hath done
in this lyfe time.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 38.

O Man remember thou my iudgement, for euen ſo ſhall thine be: with me it was
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=67) yeſterday,
and with thee ſhal it be to morow.

LEVITICVS. CAP. 14.

LET him ſprinckle him ſeuen times: that is, to be cleanſed from his offences,
that he may be purged by the lawe.

Idem.

NEyther let him enter into the Sanctua­rie, vntyll ſuche time as the dayes of
his cleanſing ſhalbe fulfylled.

1\. CORINTH. CAP. 3.

BVT euery man ſhall receaue his owne reward, according to his labour and
tra­uayle.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 25.

THere ſhall be alſo apyointed a meaſure of puniſhment, according to the
meaſure of the offence and ſinne committed.

APOCAL. CAP. 14.

FOr their woorkes ſhall folowe them when they are gone hence.

PSALME. 28.

THou ſhalt render vnto euery one accor­ding to his woorkes.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 11.

HOwe becommeſt thou ignorant what the way of the ſpirite is? Dooeſt thou ſo
not vnderſtand the woorkes of God, which is the woorkemaſter of all thinges?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=67)SAPIENCE.
CAP. 11.

FOR who is he that can vnderſtand the myſteries of God.

ESAI. CAP. 47.

THere ſhall ſodenly come a plague vppon thee, which thou knoweſt not of.

Actuum Apoſtolorum. CAP. 15.

WE beleeue to be ſaued by the grace and fauour of God.

AVGVSTINVS.

IF ſo be that I knewe my reward were laid vp for me in hell, I would pray no
more for it, then I would doo for the deuill.

SAPIENCIE. CAP. 2.

THere is not any man acknowledged or knowen to haue gone downe into hel, and
haue returned thence againe.

BERNARDVS.

MArke and beholde alwayes this rule, that after the Lorde hath long ſpared
ſinners, he dooeth more greeuouſly ſeeke to be auenged of them.

Be it by example of others imitation,

Or by our ſelfe wyll and ignorance we fall,

Or by Satans ſubtilty and ſuggeſtion,

VVe commit any offences here criminall,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=68)So for the
ſame, anſweare make we ſhall,

And as we haue wrought, ſo awarded we,

Shall receaue at the day of iudgement generall,

Eyther Gods indignation, or milde mercie.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 12.

LET the duſt of mans corrupt nature re­turne vnto ye earth from whence it
came, and let the ſpirite returne againe vnto God, who hath geuen the ſame.

IOB. CAP. 21.

SHall any man take vpon him to teache the Lord knowledge, which iudgeth thy
high­er powers? The ſtrong and luſty men are ſubiect to death, yea the rich &
happy of this world.

Idem ſequitur.

BVT an other man dyeth in the bitternes of his ſoule without any woorkes of
re­pentance: and yet notwithſtandyng they ſhal ſleepe altogeather in the duſt,
& the wormes ſhall couer them.

SENECA.

THE eternal lawe of God hath ordeyned nothing better vnto man, then that we
haue all one kind of enterance geuen vs ther­by into this life, and diuers
maners of death.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=68)OZEA. CAP. 6.

MY iudgementes ſhall paſſe foorth from me, as the light out of the Firmament.

AIERONIMVS.

HOw, many people doo liue in this world, I know not: but of the dayes to come,
it is written, That the Lorde ſhall iudge the ſecrete dooinges, and vnknowen
deal­linges of men, and ſhall geue light euen vnto the dungeons of darkneſſe,
and ſhall diſcloſe the counſels of mens hartes.

TOBIAS. CAP. 3.

ALL thy iudgementes are iuſt, Oh Lord.

PSALME. 119.

FOR I haue been afrayde of thy iudge­mentes, Oh Lorde.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 28.

MAke redy thy righteouſneſſe that thou canſt lay for thy ſelfe, before the
iudge­ment of the Lord be ſummoned.

BERNARDVS.

BRethren, let vs be enflamed vnto repen­tance, let vs examine our conſciences,
let vs be encouraged to take reuenge of our ſinnes by earneſt repentaunce in
Chriſtes bloodſhed, crauing his gracious fauour to eſ­cape the horrible
iudgement of the liuyng GOD. &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=69)

To waye the wickedneſſe of corrupt nature,

In ballance, with Gods deuine iuſtice,

Eyther our good deedes is abſurd and obſcure,

Preſumptuous were ſuch our enterpriſe,

From the earth, the duſt ſhould then aryſe,

VVith Thalmighty creator to diſpute,

Submit we therefore in repenrant wyſe,

Our lyfe and death as he hath conſtitute.

ECCLESIASSTI. CAP. 12.

REmember thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, and before the time of
afflicti­on ſhall approche, and the dayes wherof thou mayſt haue cauſe to ſay,
theſe dayes doo not lyke me.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 7.

REmember the wrath of the Lorde, be­cauſe it ſhall not be foreſlowed.

Idem.

REmember the Lordes wrath in the day of the end of the world, and remember the
time of pouertie, euen whyles thou art in thy wealth.

ECCLESIASTI CAP. 28.

REmember thou the later dayes, and ceaſe of to doo miſcheefe: for there is
bleſſed­neſſe and death approching in the preſcripti­ons thereof.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=69)PSALME. 42.

MY ſoule is in my handes alwayes. &c.

MATTH. GAP. 24.

BVt of that day and houre when the Lord ſhall come to iudge the world, no
neyther Angel, nor the Sonne of man knoweth, but the Father him ſelfe. Take
you heede therefore, watche, and pray.

MATTH. CAP. 25.

WAtche therefore, becauſe you knowe neither the day nor the houre wherein the
ſonne of man wyll come.

GREGORIVS in Homelia.

DOo not you loue the world, which you ſee can not abide for euer, becauſe the
great day of the Lord is neare.

PSALME.

THE day of deſolation draweth neare, and the times of the latter dayes do
ſpee­dely haſten on.

IACOB. CAP. 2.

THere ſhalbe iudgement geuen vpon him without mercie, becauſe he hath not
ſhew­ed mercie. &c.

As lyfe and death from hence vncertaine are,

And our demerites doo deſerue due dome,

So how ſoone the Lord wyll the ſame prepare,

No ſpirite can deuine that day to come,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=70)Though of
ſignes fyfteene wryteth ſaint Ierome,

But yf we wyll credite Chriſtes woordes in ſcripture,

Of ſignes alredy perfourming nowe are ſome,

That that day is not long to, we may be ſure.

HAYMO.

ANtechriſte ſhalbe borne in Babylon, out of the tribe of Dan, according to the
ſay­ing that Iacob mencioneth: Let Dan be made a Snake in the way.

MARCI. 12.

ANd thoſe dayes ſhalbe ſuch, and ſo trou­bleſome, as the like haue not been
from the beginnyng of the creation of man, vntyll nowe: neyther ſhall there be
any more ſuche afterward.

And except the Lorde had ſhortened thoſe dayes for his elect ſake, there
ſhould haue been no ſaluation vnto frayle mankind.

1\. TIMOTHI. CAP. 3.

ALL thoſe that wyll liue godly in Chriſt, muſt ſuffer perſecution.

MARCI. CAP. 13.

BVT who ſo ſhall perſiſt conſtant vnto the end, ſhalbe ſaued.

DANIEL. CAP. 8.

IT ſhalbe deſtroyed (meanyng of Babylon) without force of ſtrength of the
hand.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=70)THESSALO.
CAP. 2.

THen ſhall that wicked Antechriſte be re­ueyled, which the Lorde Ieſus ſhall
de­ſtroy with the breath of his mouth.

1\. IOHN. CAP. 2.

NOw are there many Antechriſtes come into the world, whereby we knowe that we
are in the later dayes.

2\. PETER. CAP. 3.

THere ſhall come deceitfull woorkers of miſchiefe in the later dayes, walking
af­ter their owne luſtes.

ISIDORVS de ſummo bono.

THere haue many members of Antechriſt gone before vs, and their proper workes
doo well agree with the ryngleader of their miſchiefe, according to the
Apoſtles ſaying, which affirmeth: that they haue perfourmed the woorkes of
iniquitie, yea before that their cheefe captaine was manifeſted to the world.

DANIEL. CAP. 8.

ANd in the end of the kingdome, when the wicked are come to the full of their
ini­quitie: that is to ſay, In Gluttony, Lechery, and Couetouſneſſe, a kyng of
a fierce coun­tenance and vnderſtandyng, with hard ſen­tences ſhall ſtand vp.
&c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=71)DANIEL. CAP.
1.

IN the later dayes there ſhall come decea­uers, which ſhall walke after their
owne de­ſyres in wickedneſſe. Theſe are they whiche ſhall aſſemble them ſelues
togeather as li­uing creatures hauing no Soule in them. Theſe are Cloudes
without water, whiche are caried about with the windes. Theſe are Trees
growing ſomewhat before Winter, vnprofitable, whiche being twyce dead, are
plucked vp by the rootes: for whom the myſtes of darkneſſe are to be kept for
euer and euer.

PSALM. 50.

THere ſhall goe before him a conſuming fyre, and it ſhall ſcortche his enimies
round about him.

Idem.

WHyther ſhall I goe from thy ſpirite? and whyther ſhall I flee from thy
pre­ſence?

DEVTERONO. CAP. 32.

THere is a fyre kindled in my fury, and it ſhall burne euen vntill the very
laſt day in Hell.

AMOS. CAP. 9.

THere ſhalbe no time for them to flee a­way which ſhall ſaue them.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=71)LVKE. CAP.
21.

THere ſhalbe ſignes in the Sunne and in the Moone, and in the Starres.

MARCI. 13

IN thoſe dayes after that tribulation, the Sunne ſhalbe darkened, and the
Moone ſhall not geue foorth her light, and the Stars of Heauen ſhall fall from
thence, and the vertues or powers of the Heauens ſhalbe changed, and then
ſhall they ſee the ſonne of man comming in the Cloudes of Heauen with great
power and glory.

VVhen ſinne, the fyre of conflagration,

All men as then vvhich are left on liue,

Shall quite of them make conſummacion,

In vvofull plight, as doctors doo diſcriue,

Theres none by flyght vvhich may be fugitiue,

Then Sunne and Moone obſcured vvith anoyance,

Yea other Planets vvith beames obumbratiue,

Shall in their kinde ſhevve dolorus countenance.

DEVTERO. CAP. 9.

THere ſhall goe before thee a deuouring fyre, and a conſuming flame.

IOEL. CAP. 2.

BLowe vp the Trumpet in Sion, Reioyce you that dwell vpon my holy hill. Let
all the inhabitantes of the earth be troubled and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=72) diſquieted,
becauſe the day of the Lorde is at hand, becauſe the day of darkneſſe and of
ſmoothering heate draweth neare, the cloudy and troubleſome day.

Idem.

BEfore his face ſhall goe a deuouring fire, and after him ſhal folow a burning
flame [...] for the day of the Lord is a mighty day, and a very fearefull day,
and who ſhall abide the ſame: neyther is there any man which ſhall eſcape it.

Eodem IOEL.

BE you therefore conuerted and turne vnto me ſaith the Lorde, with all your
whole hart, in faſting, in mournyng, and in bitter teares, and you ſhalbe
ſaued.

APOCA. CAP. 20.

AND the ſea gaue out from her the dead bodyes that were buried in the bottome
thereof: yea death and hell it ſelfe ſent foorth their dead gohſtes, and there
was ſentence of iudgement pronounced vppon euery one ac­cording to their
woorkes.

IOEL. CAP. 3.

I Wyll geather all nations togeather, and I wyll bring them into the vale of
Ioſaphat, and wyll diſpute with them.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=72)1\. CORINTH.
CAP. 15.

TRuly we ſhall ryſe againe at the iudge­ment day, but we ſhall not all be
immuta­ble or vnchanged, euen in a moment or twinckling of the eye in the laſt
blaſt of the Trumpe.

Ricardus ſuper. 4. diſt. 47.

HOwe or in what maner the Lorde wyll geue iudgement, is not preſently
mani­feſted to the world: neither hath he woorthe­ly rewarded euery man,
neyther hath he pu­niſht them accordingly, but the accompliſh­ment thereof
reſteth behind in his handes, as touching the body and the ſoule, and as
tou­ching the deſert of prayſe or puniſhment.

EPHESI. CHP. 4.

VNtill we ſhall al runne togeather in one courſe, with vnitie of fayth and
woorſhip­ping the ſonne of GOD, growing vp to one perfect man, in meaſure of
the fulneſſe of the aige of Chriſte.

APOCALIPS. 22.

ANd I ſawe as well the great, as ſmal bo­dyes ſtanding openly before the
throne, and the bookes were opened.

Athanaſius in Symbolo.

AGaynſt whoſe comming all men ſhall be warned to aryſe with their bodyes out
of the earth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=73)MALACHI. CAP.
3.

WHO ſhalbe able to conſider of the day of his comming? or who ſhall endure to
behold the ſight of his preſence?

IOB. CAP. 14.

WHO is able to warrant me that thou wylt protect my ſoule in the neather­moſt
hell? and hide me vntill the furie of thy diſpleaſure ſhalbe paſſed: and that
it wyll pleaſe thee to appoint me a time when thou wylt remember me. That day
is the day of wrath and calamitie, yea the great day of mi­ſerie very bitter.

HEBREOS. CAP. 10.

BVT terrible and fearefull is the looking for of the iudgement and feruent
heate of the fire, which ſhall deſtroy all his enimies.

IOB. CAP. 19.

FLee you away from the face of the Lorde becauſe the ſwoord is a reuenger of
iniquities.

All fleſhe ſhall aryſe from death to liue,

In ſoule and body hauyng reſemblance,

Then to receaue ſentence definitiue,

Decreed by Gods deuine ordinance,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=73)Hovv euer it
be in ioy and greeuance,

VVe ſhall addreſſe vs, young, olde, ritche, and pore,

Happy or vnhappy, as it ſhall then chance,

To reſt in payne or pleaſure euermore.

MARCI. CAP. 13.

THen ſhall they ſee the ſonne of man com­ming in the Cloudes of Heauen.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 12.

WHO ſhall ſtand againſt thy iudge­ment, oh Lord? or who ſhall come be­fore thy
preſence as a reuenger vppon the wicked ones of this world.

PROVERBES. CAP. 6.

THE Lord wyll not ſpare any fleſh in the day of reuengement, neither wyll he
be pacified with the entreaty of any perſon, nei­ther wyll he take great
rewardes to redeeme any ſoule.

PSALME. 110.

BEcauſe his mercie is enduring for euer.

HIERONIMVS.

IF only the lawe and iudgement of mortall creature and fraile fleſh, which
ſhalbe tur­ned into duſt, be with ſuch care  [...]hroughly trembled at and
feared. With what carefull feare ought we to prouide for the iudgement of the
deuine maieſtie?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=74)PSALME. 110.

I Wyll ſing of mercy and iudgement vnto thee, oh Lord.

Idem.

O GOD, geue thy iudgement vnto the King. &c.

PSALME. 36.

THY iudgement, oh Lord, is as the light of the mid-day.

APOCA. CAP. 20.

AND behold, the dead were called vp to be iudged (as touching thoſe things
that were written in the bookes) to receaue their reward according to their
woorkes.

NAVM. CAP. 3.

BEholde (ſayth the Lord God of hoſtes) I come vnto thee, and wyll diſcouer thy
ſhamefulneſſe, euen in thine owne face, and wyl ſhewe thy nakedneſſe vnto the
nations, and reproche vnto other kingdomes, and I wyll poure out vpon thee thy
owne abomina­tions, and will ſmite thee with reproches.

Then ſhall our kyng, vvhich iudged vvas, vs iudge,

In glorious forme of deuine humanitie,

From vvhoſe face there may be then no refuge,

No fauour, freendſhip, revvard, parcialitie,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=74)Nor any
reſpect ouer high and lovve degree,

VVhen in tvvo diuers maners he ſhall adminiſtrate,

His iudgement to the godly vvith mylde mercie,

But moſt ſeuere Iuſtice vnto the reprobate.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 5.

BVT the righteous ſhal liue for euermore, their reward alſo is with the Lord,
and the care for them is with the higheſt.

Chriſoſtomus ſuper Mattheum.

IN that day of the Lordes reuenge, we ſhal haue nothing to anſweare for our
ſelues: for the Heauen, the Earth, the Sunne, and the Moone, the Dayes, and
the Nightes, and all the whole Worlde it ſelfe ſhall ſtand a­gainſt vs, to
beare witneſſe againſt vs of our ſinnes and wickedneſſe.

IACOBI. CAP. 5.

YOur ritches are become rotten, and con­ſume [...]: your garmentes are eaten
with the Moth, your golde and your ſiluer is be­come ruſty, and the ruſt
thereof ſhalbe a wit­neſſe againſt you.

ABACVCK. CAP. 2.

THE ſtone in the Walle ſhall crie out a­gainſt you, and the Tymber betweene
the Rooffes of your houſes, ſhall anſwere a­gainſt you.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=75)HVGO de
ſancto victore.

THE conſcience of man is as a booke ſhut, whiche ſhalbe opened in the day of
iudgement.

MICHEAS. CAP. 3.

HEare, O ye Princes of the houſe of Ia­cob, & captaines ouer the houſe of
Iſrael.

Eiuſdem. CAP. 6.

LET the high Hilles heare the iudge­ment of the Lord.

LVKE. CAP. 16.

GEVE a reckonyng of thy Steward­ſhippe.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 6.

THere ſhalbe a moſt ſharpe iudgement or­deyned for ſuch as beare aucthoritie
ouer others.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE Prelates are woorthy to dye ſo ma­ny deathes, as they geue euill examples
of death vnto their people committed in charge vnto them.

ESAI. CAP. 46.

HEare me, oh you of hard hartes, whiche are farre of from dooing iuſtice.

IEREMI. CAP. 15.

MY people is become a diſobedient peo­ple, their Sheepheardes haue led them
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=75) a wrong way.

DANIEL. CAP. 13.

INiquitie is gone out from Babylon, euen from thoſe that were the elder
Iudges, which were ſeene to beare rule ouer the peo­ple, and they haue turned
away their vnder­ſtanding, and haue withdrawen their eyes from beholding the
Heauen, neither would they remember the iudgementes of the iuſt.

This proceſſe of iudgement is ſhort vvithout tarying,

VVhen for our ſinnes ſhall ſerue none excuſe.

But our vnkindneſſe to Chriſte our ſoueraigne king,

Our conſciences eke vvitneſſes ſhall vs accuſe,

VVhen vve his gracious good fauour abuſe,

God graunt therefore by ages tofore paſt,

VVe in this laſt aige ſuch vvarnyng may take.

That cleauing in feare to this our God faſt,

VVe may auoyde the danger of the dreadfull lake.

2\. CORINTH. CAP. 6.

FOR we all muſt needes be manifeſted and openly reuailed before the tribunall
ſeate of Chriſte, that euery man may reape that whiche he hath done in his
body, be it good, or be it bad.

ESAI. CAP. 13.

BEhold the day of the Lord ſhal come, that cruell day and full of indignation,
wrath, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=76) and
furies, to put the earth in feare, and her ſinners to be ouerthrowen by her:
becauſe the Starres of Heauen, and their glit [...]ering hue, ſhall not geue
foorth light vnto them.

EZECHIEL. 6.

THE end commeth, it ſhall ſtand vp as a watchman againſt the: ſorowe ſhal come
vpon thee which dwelleſt vppon the Earth: the time is come, the day of death
is neare at hand, and not of the ioyfull ſound of the Hils. Now euen at hand
foorthwith, wyll I powre out my indignation vppon thee, and wyll ac­compliſhe
the deſire of my fury vppon thee, and wyl iudge thee according to thy wayes,
and wyll lay vppon thee as a burden all thy wickedneſſe, and my eye ſhall haue
no com­paſſion vpon thee, neither wyll I ſhewe thee any mercy, but wyl lay
vpon thee thine owne wicked wayes.

MATTHE. 25.

THen ſhall he ſay to thoſe which ſhal ſtand vpon his left hand, Depart from me
ye curſed into euerlaſting fyre, whiche is prepa­red for the deuil and his
angels.

ORIGEN.

SInners doo lincke them ſelues in amitie with the Deuill, as they which are by
the [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=76)
prouidence of God ſaued, are made coequals with the holy angels: So ſuch as
periſhe, are compared vnto the angels of the Deuil.

Auguſtinus. 21. de ciuitate dei.

HEreby alſo is it manifeſt, that the ſame fire is geuen by ordinance for a
pouniſh­ment vnto men and deuils.

Gregorius. 33. cap. mora.

IT belongeth to the iuſtice of a ſtraight Iudge, neuer to withdrawe
pouniſhment from them, whiche of their owne mindes in this life, would neuer
withdrawe them ſelues from ſinne.

PSALME. 119.

VNderſtand this, you that haue forgotten God, leaſt that at any time he take
you a­way by force, and then there be no man to take you out of his handes.
&c.

Then ſhall Chriſte thus pronounce for concluſion,

From his leaft hand, vvhen he the vvicked ſhal expel,

Depart yee vvofull vvretches vvith my malediction,

To the perpetuall fyre, and tormentes of hell,

In dolorous darkneſſe, vvith deuils there to dvvell,

VVithout recouerie, ſhall be there your reſidence,

Fellovved vvith feendes furious and fell,

And of my perſon, neuer more to haue preſence.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=77)MATTHE. 25.

COme you, the bleſſed of my Father, poſ­ſeſſe you the kingdome prepared for
you from the beginning of the world.

ORIGEN.

FOR the holy ones of God, whiche haue wrought the woorkes of righteouſneſſe,
haue alredy taken for their hyre, the inheri­taunce on the right hand of GOD
(for their woorkes of righteouſneſſe) wherein conſiſtes both reſt and glorious
triumphe.

AVGVSTINVS.

LAbour in worldly matters, will diſcou­rage thee from comming vnto God: but
behold the Heauens whiche haue learned the firſt commaundement, they fulfill
the ſame.

TOBIA. 6.

THE Lorde GOD of Heauen ſhall re­warde thee with ioy and comfort, for ye
weriſome trauel that thou haſt endured.

2\. CORINTH. 1.

FOR this ioye and comfort that we haue conceaued, is a witneſſe of our
conſcience within vs. &c.

PSALME. 100.

BE you glad in the Lord, and be ioyful you that are iuſt. &c. and reioyce you
in the Lord. &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=77)MATTH. CAP.
24.

WAtche therefore, becauſe you know not the houre when the Lord wyll come.

HIERONIMVS.

IT was not requiſite that ye Apoſtles ſhould haue the day of the
foreknowledged com­ming of Chriſte reuealed vnto them, that by reaſon of theyr
earneſt looking for of his com­ming, they not knowing when, yet might al­wayes
beleeue that he would come, whom they knewe not howe ſoone he would come.

GREGORIVS.

WHat man ſeemeth to watche in deede, which to beholde the brightneſſe of the
true light, keepeth open the eyes of his mind. That man watcheth, who
obſerueth that or­der of dooing well, which he beleeueth is ac­ceptable before
God. That man watcheth, which driueth from him the darkneſſe of do­lour and
negligence.

IOHN. CAP. 3.

O Ye generacions of Vipers, who hath taught you to flee from the wrath to ome.
Doo you therefore ſhewe foorth woor­thy fruites of repentance.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=78)PSALME.

EVen as the wounded bodies ſleeping in their graues: that is to ſay, The
ſinners of whom there is no further memory, and thoſe are repulſed out of thy
handes.

PSALME. 36.

DEpart from dooing that is euill, and doo good.

After the firſt ſentence, the ſecond folowe ſhall,

Full of ſolace and conſolation

Saying vnto thoſe on his right hand all,

Come ye chyldren on my benediction,

VVhich haue me loued with true intention,

Receaue you the kingdome of laſting blis,

Reſerued for you from the worldes creation,

God grannt vs thy grace to labour for this.

ESAI. CAP. 46.

REturne and come againe, oh you that haue frowardly walked after your owne
hart.

GREGORIVS.

O How ſtrait ſhall then be the way for the reprobate: aboue in the Heauens,
ſhall ſitte the Iudge full of diſpleaſure: belowe in Hell, ſhalbe an horrible
confuſion: vpon the right hande, ſhall ſtand our ſinnes to accuſe vs: vpon the
leaft hand, infinite numbers of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=78) Deuils,
which ſhall drawe vs to the tormen­ting place: within vs, the gnawing of our
conſcience: and without vs, the Wo [...]ld bur­ning rounde about. Whyther then
ſhall the ſinner flee: To appeare to iudgement, ſhalbe intollerable for him:
and to hyde him ſetfe, ſhalbe impoſſible.

PSALME. 138.

I Haue remembred theſe, and I haue pow­red out myne owne ſoule before me.

HIERONIMVS.

BVT thou diſcreete Reader, marke and conſider, that both the puniſhments which
are ordeyned, are eternall: and that the euer­laſting ioyfull life hath in it
no maner of de­cay or ruine.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 7.

BE mindfull of the wrath of the Higheſt, becauſe he wyll not long foreſlewe
the time.

MATTH. CAP. 10.

FEare not ye thoſe that haue power to ſlay the body onely, but rather feare
you him which is able to deſtroy both body and ſoule, euen in the very Hell.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=79)Auguſtinus de
verbis Domi.

BVT we ſee all ſuch as loue this preſent life temporall, and which is ſoone
ended, ſo to labour for the ſame: that when the paſſi­on of death approcheth
them, they make all the ſhift they can, that they not be taken away with
death, and by all meanes ſeeke to pro­long their life. If then men doo with
ſuche la­bour and ſuch care endeuour th [...]m ſelues, to the ende they would
liue a litle longer: howe and by what meanes ought they to labour and be
carefull for the life euerlaſting. And yf ſuch men be accompted wyſe, which
trye all maner wayes howe they may deferre death, and prolong life for a ſhort
time. How fooliſh are thoſe whiche liue ſo, as thereby they loſe the life
euerlaſting: ſurely ſuch may be cal­led moſt fooles of all other.

Reuolue in mind the great perplexitee,

Of ſinners, ſeeing them ſelues in ſuch aſſay,

VVhen rheir iuſt Iudge aboue them they ſhall ſee,

And vnder them Hell, to ſwalowe them as pray,

All faythfull Chriſtians marke this by the way,

If ſentence geuen for Temporall offence,

Deſerue here a death, with loſſe of goodes alway,

VVhat to offend the higheſt ſhalbe the ſentence?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=79)PSALME. 118.

THey are corrupted, and become abomina­ble in their ſtudies: it is time Lord
to be­ſturre thee: they haue diſperſed and wreſted thy lawe.

IOB. CAP. 5.

I Wyll pray vnto the Lord, who reproueth the wyſe men of this world in their
crafti­neſſe, and dooth diſperſe the counſels of the wicked.

PROVERBES. CAP. 2.

HE hath forſaken the right way, and wal­keth through the darke places.

ESAI. CAP. 1.

THey geue not ſentence in fauour of the Orphane, and the complaint of the
Wy­dowe hath not come in before them.

IOB. CAP 36.

DIſſemblers, and lukewarme worldlings, doo pro [...]re the wrath of God vpon
them.

PSALME. 10.

THE mouth of them that ſpeake miſche­uous thinges, is ſtopped. Let the
deceit­full lips be come dumbe, and not able to vtter their ſpeache.

LVKE. CAP. 16.

THe children of this world are in their ge­neration wyſer, then the children
of light.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=80)Pſalmiſta de
impiis. 8.

THey are troubled as a drunken man, and all their wyſedome is vtterly
conſumed.

ESAI. CAP. 29.

FOR wyſedome ſhall depart and periſhe from the wyſe of this world: that is to
ſay, from ſuch as are reputed wyſe men, and their vnderſtanding ſhall be
darkened, becauſe it is ſaid:

IEREMI. CAP. 4.

THey are wyſe enough to woorke wicked­neſſe: but to doo well, they haue none
vn­derſtanding.

BERNARDVS.

SVrely thou haſt found out wiſdome aright, yf thou canſt eſteeme of all things
as they be, namely of ſinne and vices, as thinges that are vyle, and
altogeather to be ſhunned: Of  [...]emporall thinges, as that whiche is fraile
and tranſitory, and therfore to be ſmaly made accompt of: but of eternall
thinges, as that which is beſt, and therefore aboue all others c [...]eefely
and ſpecially to be deſired and im­braced.

Of worldly witte ſee the furious raige,

How it is daſed in wylfull darckeneſſe,

VVhere ſpirituall wyſedome, graue, godly, and ſaige,

Should reſt in thoſe that Chriſte doo profeſſe,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=80)Some yet
there are, which practize nought leſſe,

But ſubtilty, the ſimple to circumuent,

As wyly VVoolues their deedes them expreſſe,

VVhich dayly deuoureth the Lambes innocent.

SOPHONI. CAP. 1.

THey ſhall walke as the blind in darknes, becauſe they haue ſinned againſt the
lord.

ESAI. CAP. 49.

THus ſayth the Lorde, In an acceptable time haue I heard thee, and in the day
of health, haue I helped thee.

2\. CORINTH. CAP. 6.

WE exhort you brethr [...]n, that you re­ceaue not the grace of God in vaine:
for he ſaith, Behold the acceptable time, Behold now the day of your ſauing
health.

APOCAL. CAP.  [...]0.

ANd he ſwore by the God that liueth for euer, becauſe there ſhal not be any
longer time.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 39.

FOR all things ſhalbe ſought for in their time.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 32. de impiis.

IT is a nation wanting the counſell, & voyde of the wyſedome of the higheſt:
Would to God they would once be wyſe and geather
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=81)
vnderſtanding, and that they would prouide for the later dayes. &c.

PSALME. 2.

HEare this al ye nacions, marke and geue eare, heare this you that inhabite
the world.

SOPHONI, CAP. 1.

THe great day of the Lord is at hand, it is very neare, and too too ſwiftly
comming vpon vs: ye heare tell yt the day of the Lorde ſhalbe bitter:
[...]hen ſhall the ſtrong man be troubled. That day ſhalbe the day of wrath,
the day of tribulation and of ſorowe, the day of calamitie and of trouble, the
day of the Trumpe, and the ſound of the Trumpe vpon the ſtrong defended
cities, and vppon the an­gels on an hie: and I wyll vexe all fleſh, and they
ſhall walke as the blinde doo, becauſe they haue ſinned againſt the Lord.

Sequitur.

BVt their ſiluer and their gold ſhall not de­liuer them in the day of the
wrath of the Lord. All the earth ſhalbe conſumed with the fyre of his
indignation.

HIERONIMVS ſuper Mattheum.

SO oft as I conſider vppon the day of the Lordes iudgement, I quake for feare
in [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=81) euery
part of my body: and whether I eate or drinke, or what thing ſo euer els I
doo, mee thinkes I heare the fearefull Trumpe alwayes ſounding in myne eares,
Aryſe vp you dead, and come to iudgement. &c.

Such worldly wyſe make no prouiſion,

For their ſoules health, that euer ſhall endure,

But runne headlong into the pit of perdition,

VVoorking their wylles at all aduenture.

But ſuch as feare God in euery condition,

VVith ſpirituall wyſedome furniſhed are,

Liuing in feare and harty contrition,

Agaynſt the laſt day, them ſelues to prepare.

PSALME. 47.

THOV ſhalt renue the face of the earth, when the ſinners ſhall periſhe, thou
ſhalt ſee it.

MATTH. CAP. 25.

THeſe ſhall depart into the perpetuall tor­ment.

ESAI. CAP. 3.

THE light of the Moone ſhal ſhine foorth as the Sun doth, and the Sun ſhall
geue foorth his beames as the light of ſeuen dayes together: euen vpon that
day when the Lord ſhall binde vp the woundes of his people, and ſhal heale vp
the ſcarre of the ſtripe: and be­hold,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=82) the name of
the Lord commeth from a farre: whott ſhal be his wrath and indignati­on, and
greeuous to be ſuſteyned.

ECCLESIASTI CAP. 43.

THE Heauens ſhall ſhewe foorth their beauty, in the day when the glory of the
ſonne of man ſhalbe ſeene.

APOCALIPS. CAP. 14.

NOwe in deede is the time when the ſpi­rite ſhall ſay, Let all fleſh reſt from
their labours.

PETER. CAP. 2. cathol.

THE Lorde knoweth beſt times when to take away and deliuer the godly from the
temptations of this world, and to keepe the wicked ones to be tormented at the
day of iudgement.

PROVERBES. CAP. 16.

THe iudgementes of the Lorde are as the ballance and the weightes.

PSALM. 55.

FEare an [...] trembling haue come vpon me, and the darke places haue
enuironed me round about.

AVGVSTINVS.

FALL to repentance whyles thou art i [...] health, and yf thou ſhalt ſo doo, I
ſay vnto [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=82)
thee, that thou ſhalt be ſafe: becauſe thou haſt repented thee, whyles
otherwyſe thou migh­teſt haue treſpaſſed: for yf thou wylt in time repent thee
when thou ſhalt not haue power to ſinne, ſinne ſhall forſake thee before thou
forſake them.

Soone after ſentence of generall iudgement,

The heauens, ſhall royally be renouate,

Then ſhall the wicked to Sathan be ſent,

To make abode with him, for euer exterminate,

Then ſhall the Heauens be clearely clarificate,

The godly ſhall enter with triumph victorious

VVherefore repent you wicked, in time els too late,

Recouer you the damage of that dome dangerous.

GREGORIVS

WHen thou art greeuouſly handled in bo­dyly ſickneſſe, thou canſt ſcarſe
thinke vpon any other thing, then vppon the payne thou feeleſt: for thyther is
the cogitation of the minde caryed, where as is the force of payne and
perplexitie moſt greeuing a man.

IOHN. CAP. 5.

BEhold thou art now made whole & ſound, doo thou not hencefoorth ſinne any
more, leſt ſome other woorſe euill happen vnto thee.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=83)MATTH. CAP.
22.

THere are many called, but fewe are cho­ſen.

MATTH. CAP. 7.

ENter in at the narrowe gate, becauſe brode is the gate, and wyde is the way
that leadeth to deſtruction, and many there are which enter there aub [...]ry
narrowe is the way that i [...]adeth vnto lyfe, and fewe there are which finde
the ſame.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 1.

THE whole fulneſſe and effect of wyſe­dome, is to feare God.

IACOB. CAP. 3.

IN many thinges we all offend.

SENECA.

THE moſt ſafeſt thing for man, is to feare nothing els but God only.

PROVERBES. CAP. 18.

BLeſſed is the man that liueth alwayes in the feare of God.

PSALME. 34.

FEare the Lorde, all his ſaintes: Let all the ſeede of Iſrael feare the Lord.
Bleſſed are all they that feare the Lord.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=83)

To conclude, thinke wee eache one of this caſe,

No man ſhall be iudged but deſeruingly,

Then in this life, whyle wee haue time and ſpace,

Let vs in contemplacion and prayer mortifie,

Our wicked mocions, ſo as continually,

VVe fearing the iudgementes of the iuſt God aboue,

Come death, come dome, for him may be ready,

To reſt with our redeemer, in peace, ioy, and loue.

¶ FINIS Of the Contemplacion for THVRSDAY.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=84)

## 5\. ¶THE AVCTORS Commemoration for FRYDAY.

Christes paſsion print in minde,

Shewe not thy ſelfe to him vnkind.

The Tranſlators Application.

Our Creator commaunded than, the waters foorth to bring,

Both Fishe and Foule for foode of man, with ſondry other thing [...]

And bleſſing them with ſacred mouth, for humane vſe to bee,

He ſayd to them, ye Creatures nowe, increaſe and mult [...]plee.

Gods bleſſing is woonderous great ſhewed heare,

His paſſion yet is to vs moſt deare.

BERNARDVS.

NOthing enflameth ſo the hart of man vnto loue, as the continual remem­bred
paſſion and effabili­tie of our Redeemer: be­cauſe he tooke vpon him therby to
make vs a new creature a freſhe loue, and to haue newe and vnaccuſtomed
conſolations in him, and of conſequence, to taſ [...]e by his death and
paſſi­on a certayne new eſtate of ſweete life, in as much as he ſeemed to be a
fore runner of the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=84) glory
predeſtinate vnto him ſelfe.

APOCAL. CAP 1.

HE hath loued and waſhed vs from our ſinnes in his blood.

BERNARDVS.

WHere is the ſafe and fyrme reſt for our imperfection to be founde, but in the
woundes of our Sauiour: ſo much the ſafer doo I there dwell, how much the more
therby he is of power to ſaue me. The world rageth, the fleſhe keepeth me
vnder, the Deuill lyeth in wayte for me, yet fall I not, becauſe I am
eſtabliſhed vppon the rocke: I haue ſinned, thy conſcince is troubled, but it
ſhal [...] not be tormented, becauſe I haue remembred the death and paſſion of
the Lord.

Bernardus  [...]uper illud Canticorum, Faſciculus mi [...]he dilectus meus.
&c.

EVen from my childehood, becauſe of the huge heape of deſartes (which I know
to be wantyng in me) I haue carefully endeuo­red this little bundle of Mirh to
haue geathe­red, and layde it  [...]p in my broſtes, which is gathered euen of
al the anguiſhes and ſmarts of my Lord God. This (ſaid I) ſhould teache me
wyſedom [...], the perfection of righteouſnes and fulneſſe of knowledge.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=85)CANTICO. CAP.
8.

SET me Lord as a marke or token of re­membrance before thy breſt.

HEBREOS. CAP. 12.

CAll him agayne and agayne vnto your mindes, who hath ſuffered ſuch reproche
done vnto him by the ſinful: for you haue not as yet withſtood touching his
blood ſhed for you, to fight agaynſt ſinne, and you haue for­gotten the
comforter whiche ſpeaketh vnto you, as vnto his children, ſaying, Good
chil­dren, deſpiſe not the correction of the Lorde, nor be thou aweary at
ſuche time as thou art reprehe [...]ded: for whom the Lord loueth, him
chaſteneth he.

This louely leafe as Roſe ſo rubicound

Of Chriſte repo [...]yng th [...] precious paſſion,

The croppe, the roote, the height, and the ground,

The proper price of mans ſaluation,

Deſerues due imprintyng in our cogitation,

Of ghoſtly comfort moſt ſoueraigne ſuffiſance,

Bringing with it the true operation,

Of the medcine agaynſt ſinne and all encombrance.

Barnard [...]s ſupper. HEB. CAP. 2.

YOV ſhal drawe vp waters with ioy out of the ſpringes of your Sauiour: that is
to ſay, all kinde of vertues and graces are to
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=85) be founde in
the precious bloodſhedding of Chriſte.

2\. PETER. CAP. 2.

CHriſte hath ſuffered for vs, leauing vs an example to folowe his ſteppes, who
hath not committed any ſinne, neyther was there any guyle found in his mouth.

1\. PETER. CAP. 4.

ANd none of you haue ſuffered as a mur­derer or robber, for your euyll deedes,
and agaynſt your wylles.

IEREMI. CAP. 31.

IN euerduring good wyl haue I loued thee, therefore haue I drawne thee vnto
me, ta­king compaſſion vpon thee.

BERNARDVS.

WHAT is there ſo much helping thee to doo well, whiche is not more ſaluing thy
ſore in the death of Chriſte.

1\. IOHN. CAP. 3.

HErein knowe we that the loue of God is in vs, becauſe he hath geuen his lyfe
for vs. &c.

BERNARDVS.

PLentifull redemption is geuen vnto vs in the bloodſhedding of our Redeemer:
great abundance of ſweetenes and grace, or rather fulneſſe and perfection of
vertues.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=86)Sequitur.

IN all my aduerſities I finde not any ſuche and ſo effectuall remedie, as I
finde in re­membring the death and paſſion of Chriſte: for out of theſe I
taſte ſometimes the potion of healthfull bitterneſſe: and againe, I feele howe
ſweete and ſupple is this oyle of conſo­lation. Theſe, betweene ioy and
ſadneſſe, ad­miniſter vnto my preſent life (whyther ſoeuer I be toſſed) a ſafe
abidyng and refuge: This is my more profound wyſedome, then any other that I
reioyce in, to knowe Chriſt, and him crucified. Who euer heard of the lyke
thing, or who hath ſeene at any time the lyke of this: he ſuffered death him
ſe [...]f for his eni­mies, and for the ſinfull, rather chooſing to paſſe by
death into the Heauens, to the ende this ſweete freend, wiſe counſellor, and
migh­ty helper, might alſo tranſpaſſe vs into the Heauens.

Here is the fountayne of humane felicitie,

The way to repentance plaine and compendious,

Here is the cheefe charter of charitie,

Surpriſyng our mindes with motions amorous,

And ſalue for vvounded concience gracious,

The hony combe of harty conſolation,

The VVell of vvealth, and ſtorehouſe precious,

Left vs by Chriſtes death and paſſion.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=86)ECCLESIAST.
CAP. 29.

FOrget not thou the frendſhip of thy Sure­tie, for he hath pawned his lyfe for
thee.

BERNARDVS.

SO long as I repoſing my confidence in God, doo vſurpe vnto my ſelfe that
whiche lacketh, by and through the woundes of my Lord Ieſus: becauſe he
aboundeth with mer­cie towardes me, I ought not be voyd of well deſeruing, ſo
long as the Ceſterne of his mer­cies is neuer empty towardes me.

GREGORIVS.

ALL the proude people ſprong of the lin­nage of Adam, laboured by all meanes
to atteyne vnto the proſperous thinges of this world. To ſhonne and eſchewe al
aduerſities, flee from reproches, and folowe after pompe and glory. The Lorde
came amongſt them, chooſing to take vnto him aduerſitie, fleeing vayne pompe
and glory, deſpiſing proſperi­tie, and embracing reproches.

Idem.

YF the paſſion of Chriſte be called of vs rightly into our mindes, there is
nothing ſo greeuous vnto vs, but thereby it ſhalbe to­lerated of vs with
pacient mind.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=87)PHILLIPIANS
CAP. 2.

HE ſhewed him ſelfe humble and lowly, being obedient to death, euen vnto the
death of the croſſe.

Thus the quotidian and fruitefull remembrance,

Of Chriſtes bleſſed paſſion ſo piteous,

Vniting with Chriſte familier acquayntance,

Maketh a vicious man to become vertuous.

And his deuotion both ſweete and ſauerous,

Cauſing temperance in blinde proſperitie,

And as a Chriſtian knight Cheualrious,

To haue glad pacience in great aduerſitie.

GALATH. CAP. 3.

I Liue nowe, yet not I, but Chriſte liueth in me.

ESAI. CAP. 5.

HE is wounded for our iniquities, and torne in peeces for our ſinnes: the
diſci­pline of our peace is vpon him. Lorde there­fore, take from vs our ſtony
hart, and geue vs a fleſhly hart.

HIERONIMVS.

O Good Lord Ieſu, oh that the reproches of thoſe whiche put thee to death,
hadde light vpon me, that they might haue moued my hart vnto compunction and
harty ſorow.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=87)IOHN. CAP.
11.

LET vs alſo goe and dye with him.

ESAI. CAP. 43.

CAll me agayne to thy memorie, and let vs be iudged togeather: Declare thou
for thy part what thou canſt, & then ſee what thou haſt to iuſtifie thy ſelfe
of.

BERNARDVS.

O Sweete Ieſus, the bitter cuppe whereof thou dydſt taſte, hath made me to
loue thee aboue all other thinges: a woorke per­fourmed for our redemption
once for all.

This being oftentimes duely pondered, dooeth eaſely callenge our loue vnto it,
no­thing more delectably allureth our deuotion vnto it, more iuſtly
perfourmeth our duety, more deepely bindeth, nor more vehemently ſurpriſeth
our affectes. He hath taken great paynes for vs, and yet in all the woorkes
that euer he wrought as touching the worlde, this the aucthour of our life,
was neuer in any thing ſo turmoyled: For in that he ſuffered for vs, in ſteade
of ſaying trueth, he was con­trolled with gayn [...]ſayinges: for his good
deedes, he had thoſe that looked nearely vn­to him: when he felt extreame
paynes, he was ſcorned of them: and when he dyed, he
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=88) ſuffered the
reproche of his enimies.

BERNARDVS.

THY paſſion Lorde, is our laſt refuge that we haue to cleaue vnto, and our
ſin­guler remedy.

ESAI. CAP. 3.

THERE is none ende of the treaſures ther [...]of.

GREGORIVS.

THE paſſion of Chriſte, being ſet before our eyes, woorketh all vertue in vs,
both for the time preſent, and to come: and fulfyl­leth all health of ſoule
and body.

And when we receaue the remembrances of the paſſion of Chriſte, ſtreightway
thereby all the deuils in Hell are put to flight, and all our deſerued
puniſhmentes for our offences are diſpenced with, and forgeuen.

BOECIVS. 3. de conſolatione.

HE had brought ſuch weapons vnto thee, which (hadſt thou not firſt reiected)
might haue defended thee with an inuincible ſtrength.

EPHESI. CAP. 6.

BE you comforted in the Lord, and put vp­pon you the armour of God, in the
power of his vertue, that you may be able to with­ſtand
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=88) the
deceiptes of the Deuill.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 7.

YEa, there is an infinite quantitie of trea­ſure hidden for men, wherein who
ſo euer are poſſeſſed, are made partakers of ye freend­ſhip of God.

2\. PARALIPO. CAP. 22.

MAnifeſt therfore and openly, expreſſe vn­to him your hartes and your ſoules,
that you may ſeeke for your Lord God.

2\. PARALIPO. CAP. 15.

IF you ſeeke for him, you ſhal finde him out: but yf you refuſe to ſeeke him,
and forſake him, he wyll forſake you.

Againe and againe within thy mind reuolue,

Howe to be thankfull for Chriſtes pasſion,

Crauing of him thy hard hart to reſolue.

VVith inward dolour and outward lamentation,

Powre foorth thy prayers to finde conſolation,

In that victorious triumph of vertues abundance,

From Sinne, the VVorld, and Satans ſuggeſtion,

VVhich yf thou ſeekeſt, ſhall geue thee deliuerance.

MATTH. CAP. 26.

MY ſoule is heauy, euen vnto death.

AVGVSTINVS.

OH howe bitter is death, whoſe only pre­meditacion cauſed Chriſte to ſweate
wa­ter and blood.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=89)LVKE. CAP.
22.

AND his ſweate became as the drops of blood running downe to the earth: for
his blooddy ſweate doo expreſſe the ſorowes of his hart.

MATTHE. 26.

WHom ſo euer I ſhall kiſſe, the ſame is he, hold him faſt.

MATTH. CAP. 26.

THen all the Diſciples hauing forſaken him, fled from him.

PSALME. 84.

BEhold thy Chriſte in his face.

Auguſtin ſupper MARC. CAP. 15.

HE tooke vp with him, Peter, Iohn, and Iames, and feare and tediouſneſſe came
vppon him, in ſo much as he trauayled with ſorowe, teaching vs by example, or
as it were figuratiuely, what maner companions and diſciples a man ought to
haue with him in ſuch perplexities, as he that wyll then pray, is or ought to
be like affected: for euen as a theefe hearing an outery, preſently taketh his
heeles, and therevppon the neyghbours be­ſturre them to remedy the caſe. Euen
ſo by mans feruent prayer, the Deuil fleeth away, and the holy ſpirite of God
entreth with good
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=89) meditations
to comfort man.

MATTH. CAP. 26.

O Father, yf this cuppe may not paſſe me, except I fyrſt drinke thereof, thy
wyll be done.

LEODIGARIVS.

THis voyce of the head, is the health of the whole body: this voyce hath
inſtructed al the faythfull, hath inflamed all the confeſſors of Chriſte, and
crowned all the Martyrs of Chriſte: for what is he that is able to ouer­come
the hatred of the world, the troubles of temptations, and the terrors of
perſecutors, but only that Chriſte in all, and for all, ſhould ſay vnto his
Father, Thy wyll be done.

VVhat troubles, terrours, and tormentes haue,

Aſſayled Chriſte in any maner wyſe,

Thou oughteſt in prayer dayly of him to craue,

Power to reſiſt thy gohſtly enimies,

VVho wyll not let thee ſuffer iniuries,

But at a pinche thy helper wyll appeare,

As he him ſelfe ſuffered ſmart likewyſe,

And was comforted, ſo ſhalt thou be his deare.

MATTH. CAP. 26.

THen they ſpitted vpon his face, and buffe­ted him.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=90)CHRISOSTOMVS.

THE Euangeliſt expoundeth thoſe moſt reprochefull handlinges, in this maner.
Nothing abaſhed was he to ſuffer them: be­cauſe we might imprint them in our
hartes with continencie, and in them reioyce▪ or take comfort.

BERNARDVS.

HOwe much the poorer he made him ſelfe by his humilitie, ſo muche the ritcher
he ſhewed him ſelf in goodneſſe: and how much more baſe he was in the ſight of
the world, ſo much the more deare beloued is he vnto me.

Idem ſuper canti

OH humble hart, and yet moſt hygh ma­ieſtie, and oh moſt higheſt and laſt ioy
of humane kind: oh reproche of men, and glory of angels: no man more noble,
and yet none more deſpiſed: Who coulde refraine from teares to heare ſuch
wicked handling.

RABANVS.

TO con [...]inue in ſinne, dooth increaſe wic­kedneſſe.

PSALME. 41.

ONE depth calleth vpon an other.

GREGORIVS.

THe ſinne that is not extinguiſhed by ear­neſt and true repentance,
ſtraightway, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=90)
with the efficacie thereof, dooth  [...] more ſinne.

MATTH. CAP. 2 [...].

PEter remembred, and thought vppon the woordes of Chriſte.

CHRISOSTOMVS.

NOthing ſo muche healeth the ſore of ſinne, as when we continually think
vp­pon the Lord in our mindes.

MATTH. CAP. 26.

HE went out, and wept bitterly. &c.

Freendles among his foes in feoble plight,

He ſuffered of them this greeuous tribulation,

They fyled his face with ſpitting in deſpite,

And blinded his eyes in ſcornefull deriſion,

His pacience yet ſurpasſing all imagination,

Peter then fledde: wherefore thou ſinner,

Cleaue to Chriſte in fayth by harty reformacion,

Forſake not thy Sauiour that held thee ſo inteare.

PSALME. 108.

WHAT ſhall I render agayne vnto the Lord, for all that he hath beſtowed vp­pon
me.

PSALME. 35.

THEY haue rewarded me euyll thinges for good.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=91)HIERONIMVS.

IVdas ſinned more in that he diſpayred, then in that he betrayed Chriſte.
Couetouſ­neſſe is the ſnare of the deuill, by meanes whereof he han [...]eth
vp all couetous perſons.

MATTH. CAP. 27.

THey brought him foorth with his handes bound behind him, and deliuered him
vn­to Poncius Pilate the cheefe Iudge.

HIERONIMVS.

I Haue ſeene howe paynefull the prieſtes haue been about miſcheefe: they haue
wat­ched all the nyght long, becauſe they woulde ſpill the blood of the
innocent.

MATTH. CAP. 27.

WHich of theſe two wyll you that I let looſe vnto you: Barabbas, or Ieſus,
which is called Chriſte.

LVKE. CAP. 23.

AND all the whole company cryed out to­geather, Take this man, and let
Barab­bas goe at libertie.

BERNARDVS.

OH fury of mad men, oh blindneſſe of the Iewes: what more peeuiſhly coulde
they haue done, then to ſlay him who hath rayſed vp the dead from their
graues, and to let goe a theefe, whiche after his libertie might doo more
miſcheefe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=91)BEDA.

THE Iewes earneſt requeſt remayneth vntyll this day a memori [...]ll (when
they loſt the kyngdome of Heauen:) becauſe they had leuer haue a ſedicious
Prince to gouerne them: that is to ſay, the Deuil, then the Lord GOD.

Chriſte was accuſed in preſence of Pilate.

The Iewes, they cryed, him to crucify,

A theefe was diſmiſſed, O change infortunate,

And the Sonne of God ſcourged moſt cruelly,

Oh Heauenly flowre of our humanity,

Thy feature faded, thy vnſpotted fleſh wext pale,

VVhen plonged thou waſt in ſuch perplexity,

Both the Earth and Heauens dyd rent theyr vale.

PSALME. 99.

BEcauſe I am prepared for the ſcourge.

ANCELMVS.

THE moſt louely young man, elegant and gracious, of more excellent feature, in
reſpect of the ſonnes of men, was bound to a pi [...]ler and ſcourged with the
greeuous and ſorowfull whippe of moſt vyle perſons. That tender fleſhe of his
moſt vndefiled and fayreſt flowre of all fleſhe, and of all humane kinde moſt
innocently was greeuouſly ſcourged, wounded, and torne in peeces of them.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=92)ANCELMVS.

IT is ſmal to purpoſe, that the Iewes with their miſ [...]heeuous handes ſo
crucified thee: but that thy ſoule before was repleniſht, and with gohſtly
conſolations illuminate. O elect childe of GOD, what haſt thou treſpaſſed,
which deſerued ſuch bitternes and confuſion: Doubtleſſe nothing at all, I
ſilly ſoule that I am, haue been the cauſe of all thy affliction and
perſecution.

AVGVSTINVS.

IF he went not from hence without the ſcourge, who came into the world without
ſinne: Howe doo they deſerue to be ſcourged which haue offended euen tyll this
day.

Idem.

FRom the ſoule of his foote, euen vp to the crowne of his head, was there not
remay­nyng one free ſpot▪

APOCAL. CAP. 1.

HE waſhed vs from our ſinnes, by the ſhed­dyng of his blood.

MATTH. CAP. 27.

AND they makyng a crowne of thorne, put it vppon his head, and gaue him a
Reede in his right hand: and bowyng theyr knees before him, laughed him to
ſcorne, ſaying, HAYLE KING OF THE IEVVES.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=92)

As Chriſte ſhrincked not his p [...]tecious blood to ſhed,

No part of his body without greeuous plight,

From the ſole of his foote, to the crowne of his head,

Neyther yet refuſed any ſcornefull deſpite,

Oh man ſo remember what ſo euer croſſe,

Or trouble, for the tryall of thy true fayth,

Happen thee, of temporall thinges ſuffering loſſe,

In Chriſtes name neuer ſhunne thou to death.

BERNARDVS.

HEare hath our Sauiour powred foorth vpon vs the abundance of all charity, and
plenitude of all his godlineſſe. And here a­gayne hath he powred foorth, the
heauy in­dignation of his inſpeakeable wrath.

LVKE. CAP. 22.

SAyde the Theefe. Lord, rememmber me when thou ſhalt come into thy Kingdome.
Ieſus ſaid vnto him, Verely I ſay vnto thee, This day ſhalt thou be with me in
paradyſe.

GREGORIVS.

O What a fayth, and what a perfect con­uerſion or turnyng to the Lorde had
this Theefe: he had nothing left him at his owne libertie but his hart and his
tongue, whereby he declared his inward r [...]pentance: and (be­ing inſpired
with this good motion towards God) obteyned no doubt, all that he found in
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=93) his owne
free deſyre remayning.

BERNARDVS.

OH moſt godly Ieſus, what haue we treſ­paſſed vnto thee, and thy death, and
thou haſt not mourned for it: what haue we ben in­debted vnto thee, and thou
haſt not thy ſelfe paid it: Thy loue, and our iniquitie, hath ſo made thee
lowly and weake for our ſakes.

MATTH. CAP. 27.

THey ledde him f [...]orth to crucifie him.

Idem.

IF any man wyll come after me, let him take vp his croſſe and folowe me.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE Croſſe of the Lorde is not onely meant that which was of wood, wherevp­pon
he was crucified: but alſo the Croſſe of Chriſte is called that, whiche in all
the tyme of our life is made equall with vertues, ſuffe­ring all maner
corrections.

LVKE. CAP. 23.

FAther, forgeue them, for they knowe not what they doo.

BERNARDVS.

THE Iewes cryed, Crucifie him. And Chriſte cryed, Forgeue them. Lord, how
great is the multitude of thy ſweeteneſſe, Oh
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=93) Lord, howe
ſhalt thou drinke of them in the flood of thy pleaſure whiche delight in thee,
and deſyre thee: which powreſt out ſo abun­dantly the oyle of thy mercy, to
[...]utch as hate thee.

AVGVSTINVS.

BEhold the abundance of charity, and won­derfull pacience in our Sauiour: He
com­maundes vs to pray for our enimies, and ſee­keth no reuenge: why then
ſhould that little creature the Ante, the Moth of the earth, and woorme: that
is to ſay, the hart of man, ſeeke reuengement, and deferre of to forgeue.

Vpon his head they put a crowne of thorne,

For Dyadem. A Croſſe he bore of tree,

As kyng of Iewes, they ſaluted him in ſcorne,

And twyxt two Theeues deputed him to dye,

Thus through his loue, and our iniquity,

He ſuffered, thou ſinnedſt, (O man) moſt freeuolous,

Beare this in mind, and degrade not thy degree,

Though thou be wretched, thy price is precious.

MATTH. CAP. 27.

ABout the ninth houre, Ieſus cryed out with a loude voyce, ſaying, My God, my
God, why haſt thou forſaken me?

AVGVSTINVS.

SVrely theſe were the woordes, ſignifiyng what a carefull and troubled ſpirite
he had [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=94) for
vs, which are beſet with troubles, and in them expreſſeth a certaine
tenderneſſe of bit­ter paſſion and ſorowe, proceeding out of his ſo deepe
ſithes, entire lamentation, and bitter plaint: whiche might ſuffice to molefie
vnto compunction and remorſe, a very iron breſt might cleaue in ſunder, a
ſtony ſtomacke might humble and bowe the hart of wood to­wardes loue, and
finally moyſten a very bra­ſen hart towards contemplacion in this caſe.
Neyther let man marueyle, yf he doo ſuffer tribulations: becauſe he is ſo
comforted in Chriſte, his head and cheefe captaine.

MATTHE. 27.

AND when he had cryed agayne with a loud voyce, he gaue vp the gohſt.

IOHN. CAP. 29.

AND bowing the head, he gaue vp the gohſt.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE Sauiour of the worlde bowed his head at his death, that he might kiſſe his
welbeloued Mother, and the Diſciples then and there preſent. And wee doo ſo
oftentimes kiſſe him, as we are compunct and throughly ſtirred vp to the
hartifull remembraunce of his death.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=94)ANCELMVS·

THE Heauens ſtoode aſtoniſhed at his death, the Earth was amazed: What dooeſt
thou then, oh Man? Neither is it a thing to be marueyled at: yf the ſhinyng
Sunne became perplexed, that thou ſhouldeſt be alſo perplexed: yf els the
Earth became ſadde and penſiue, ſo thou ſhouldeſt likewyſe be ſadde and
penſiue: yf the Stones were rent in ſender, that thy hart be rent in ſonder:
yf thoſe that ſtoode by the Croſſe dyd weepe, thou ſhouldeſt weepe as well as
they.

HIERONIMVS.

BEhold, when Chriſte dyed, euery creature had compaſſion vpon him: but man
alone hath not had any compaſſion at al vpon him, for whom in deede Chriſte
dyed.

His ſpirite commending to his fathers cure▪

VVhen that he cryed, conſummatum eſt,

Both Heauen and Earth, and liueles creature,

On him compasſion tooke, from moſt to leaſt,

O wretched man, why art not thou then preſt,

For loue of thy Redeemer ſweete Ieſus,

To plant compasſion in the faythfull breſt,

Suffering for him all harmes iniurious.

IOHN. CAP. 19.

AND they tooke the body of Ieſus, and wrapped it in linnen clothes, and ſpiced
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=95) it with
Balme and ſweete odours.

BERNARDVS.

MAry, the mother of Chriſte, was the ex­ample of ſorowe and compaſſion, vnto
all thoſe that loue Chriſte.

HVGO, de paſſione Chriſti.

BEhold, oh man, what I ſuffer for thy ſake: ſee the paynes and troubles that I
endure for thee: ſee the nayles wherevnto I am fa­ſtened, and whyle I endure
for thee ſuch out­ward ſorowe: yet notwithſtandyng my in­ward gronyng is more
greeuous, whyle I trye thee and finde thee an vnthankful freend vnto me.

HEBREOS, CAP. 6.

CRucifiyng agayne vnto them ſelues the ſonne of God.

Gloſa Auctoris.

THey crucifie Chriſte, and are found re­prochefull vnto him, which contemnyng
his grace, doo ſleepe in their ſinnes.

Bernardus in perſona anime deuote.

I Knewe not (ſayth he) that Chriſte ſo loued me, I ought not to be therefore
reproche­full vnto my ſelf, which ſo manifeſtly ſee that God was crucified and
ſuffered death for me, which haue been ſo acceptable vnto him, that
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=95) he choſe
rather to dye for me, leaſt that I ſhould otherwyſe periſhe.

Idem.

OH precious Soule, not with gold nor ſil­uer redeemed, but with the blood of
the lambe of God: why wylt thou caſt thy ſelfe ſo into perdition, ſeeing
Chriſte for thee ſhed his precious blood, haue remorſe ouer thyne owne ſoule,
ſeeking to pleaſe God.

Regard (oh man) this wofull diſceuerance,

Behold Mary, behold her ſonne Ieſu,

If ruthe haue roome in thy remembrance,

VVith piteous hart, his paſſion to purſew,

Through which thou mayſt thyne innocencie renew,

O electe veſſell, knowe thy felicitie,

Of thy miſrule, thincke time it were to rew,

Confound not thy ſelfe through thyne iniquitie.

BERNARDVS.

COuld not GOD repare his pretended woorke of grace in Man any other way, but
by this ſo great danger of his owne lyfe? Yes truely he might otherwyſe haue
reme­died this matter: but he had rather woorke this meanes, though it were to
the preiu­dice of his owne perſon: becauſe he woulde not finde any further
hatefull vice of ingrati­tude in man, but that he would make man a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=96) debter vnto
him of manifolde loue that he ought vnto his Sauiour, and hereby ſhoulde
encourage him to be thankfull vnto him, whom the felicitie of his creation had
made leſſe gratefull: when as this our Creator for our ſakes but ſpake the
woord, and al things was done: he commaunded it ſhould be, and they were
created.

ANCELMVS.

THerefore God was able, being a man al­ſo, to ſatiſfie for man: but yet he was
not bound to any man ſo to doo. But man was, and is bounden to ſatiſfye the
wyll of God, and coulde not, nor can not: therefore it was needefull that God
ſhould be a man: that is to ſay, becauſe in that he was Chriſt, he was able to
ſatiſfye as God, and was not boun­den as man.

GREGORIVS.

HE that made vs of nothing, yea yf it had pleaſed him, coulde haue redeemed vs
without his death, or paſſion.

Auguſtinus de ciuitate dei.

THere could not haue been any more fitter meanes wrought to heale our miſerie,
then that Chriſte ſhould dye for vs.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=96)

And though that God by power Omnipotent,

Might vs redeemd without ſuch difficultie,

There was no way more iuſt nor congruent,

Then for to take on him our humanitie,

Reſtoryng vs thereby to higher dignitie,

Man was in thrall, and could him not acquite,

To make amends, of power deuoyde was he,

But God him freed, by fauour infinite.

BERNARDVS.

WHen I ſhall  [...]eepely excogitate what­ſoeuer I am of my ſelfe, &
whatſoeuer I can doo of my ſelf: is it not thincke I with my ſelfe, in reſpect
as a Starre to be compa­red to the Sunne: a ſparcke of fyre, to the heate of a
whole furnace: a droppe of wat [...]r, in compariſon of a flood: a litle
ſtone, in reſ­pect of a hill: a grayne of Corne, to a whole heape: and a
handfull, to all the worlde? Therefore Lord, I haue but two ſmall pow­ers in
me, nay they are very litle that I haue: that is to ſay, the one my body, the
other my ſoule, or rather I haue but one onely litle power: that is to ſay, my
good hart and wyl­lyng mind, whiche thou haſt made and geuen me. And ſhall I
not beſtowe it in recom­pence of thy good wyll, who being ſuch a one as thou
art, haſt beſtowed ſo much for me,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=97) and hath as
it were preuented me at once with ſo great benefites, who hath in thy ſelfe
compriſed me wholy: or otherwyſe yf I ſhall retayne theſe to my ſelfe, and not
beſtowe them of thee, with what countenance, with what eyes, and with what
mind or conſcience doo I goe vnto the bowels of the mercie of my God: and I do
ſee that ſame moſt ſtrong ſafegard or defence of myne, is altogeather gored,
whereby Iſrael is kept: and that his blood, not as droppes, but as flooddes
from the fiue partes of his body, hath been ſhedde for the price of my
redemption. &c.

Trenorum primo.

O All you that paſſe by the way, marke well and ſee, yf there be any ſorowe
like my ſorowe.

BERNARDVS.

BEhold, oh man, with the eye of thy mind, in what duetifull debt of
recompence, thou art bound vnto the Lorde ſuffering death for thee.

It ſhall behoue vs to conſider well,

That this was done for our ſaluation,

Our vnthankfulneſſe let vs then expell,

And gratefull be for our redemption,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=97)VVhich to
frequent in harty deuotion,

Aboue all thinges our mind for to remord,

As mighty medicine and fruitefull confection,

Doth linck one loue with Chriſt our ſoueraigne lord.

BERNARD. Snpee illud canticorum, Faſciculus Mirrhe.

O Howe ſhewed he mercy, more then he ought to haue done, howe thankfull and
tryed loue dyd he expreſſe towards vs: what vnlooked for woorthyneſſe beſtowed
he vpon vs, what admirable ſweeteneſſe, what inuin­cible mildneſſe and
humilitie: in that he be­ing the king of glory, ſhould geue him ſelfe to the
handes of his enimies, for the moſt vy­leſt perſon of the world to ſuffer
death.

ANCELMVS.

THE ſymple ſoule of man ſhall finde in the death and paſſion of Chriſt ſuch
foode and repaſt, as ſhal make ye ſame moſt health­full and ſtrong.

Idem.

AWake thou, oh my ſoule, and more dili­gently behold with the eyes of thy
minde this man, as one borne before the time, and ſo conceaued, as though no
man regarded him, and as one in the ſight of the world, vn­woorthy, deformed,
and leprous.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=98)Trenorum
primo.

HEare me, I beſeeche you all you people, and behold my ſorowe and anguiſhe.

1\. GALATHI. CAP. 6.

GOD forbyd that I ſhoulde glory but in the death of our Lord Ieſus Chriſte, by
whom the world is crucified vnto me, and I am crucifyed vnto the world.

BERNARDVS.

HE that loueth thee from the hart Lord, is wounded for thy ſake, and is
content to ſuffer langwors, and as it were a dead man from the woorkes of the
worlde, is made ſtrange vnto the world: for thy loue is ſtrong as death, and
thy heauy wrath is as the pitte of hell.

VVherefore ſweete Ieſu, our loue and ſoueraine Lord,

Treaſure of treaſures, which may vs moſt auayle,

VVith ruthfull repentance nowe wee record,

Our great vnthanke, and blindneſſe beſtiall,

Of pitie praying thy power imperiall,

To multiply thy mercy ſo vpon vs,

That of thy merites with cares inſpeciall,

Thankfull to thee, wee may be ſtudious.

BERNARDVS.

WHO is not caryed perforce vnto hope and confidence of obteyning his deſire,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=98) which geueth
due and attentiue regard to the diſpoſing of his body. And vouchſafe thou, oh
Lorde, to receaue and accept my ſpirite commended into thy hands: and ſo
ſtrike my body and pearce my hart with the ſwoord of charitie, and print
therein the woundes of thy body, that after the courſe of this lyfe, I may
freely commende into thy handes my ſoule, as baniſhed and mere ſtrange vnto
the worlde.

AVGVSTINVS.

I Beſeeche thee good Lorde, ſo pearce and wounde this my ſoule, with the
ſharpe point of thy accuſtomed feruent loue, for whom thou haſt vouchſafe to
dye, that with the moſt mighty weapon of thy loue, & with the ſtaffe of thy
entyre good wyll, ſhee being chaſtized, may more deepely conſider of thy
mighty vertue, and plentifully yeelde foorth her flooddes of bryniſhe teares
both day and night.

Bernardus ſuper verbo, Pater ignoſcie.

VOuchſafe, oh Lord and heauenly father, to looke downe from out of thy
Sanctua­rie, and from thy heauenly habitation: behold the pledge which thy
ſonne our Lord GOD
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=99) and high
Prieſt Ieſus Chriſt offereth for the ſinnes of his brethren, and be fauourable
to the multitude of our wickedneſſe.

Idem.

REmember nowe, oh Man, and although thou knoweſt thy ſelf to be created of
no­thing, yet notwithſtandyng thou haſt to ac­knowledge, that thou art not
redeemed for or by nothing. The Creator, Redeemer, and Sauiour, in ſixe dayes
made all thinges, and thre amongſt all thinges: but in thirtie yeere ſpace:
that is to ſay, In his liue time vppon earth dyd he woorke thy ſaluation. Oh
what paynes hath he endured then for thy ſake.

Poniſhe not thy people, Lord God in thy greeuance,

Thincke why thy ſonne Chriſte ſuffered his pasſion,

The crowne of thorne, the croſſe, and Longeus launce

Vouchſafe accept our harty gratulation,

Rewyng vpon our ſinfull conuerſation,

Plant in our hartes ſuch reuerent regard,

Towardes thy good graces, by due conſideration,

In ſuffring for thy ſake, may thinke nothing to hard.

¶ FINIS Of the Contemplacion for FRYDAY.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=99)

## 6\. ¶ THE AVCTORS Commemoration for SATVRSDAY.

Here thinke to eſchew the helliſhe payn,

For ſuch as in vyle ſinne remayne.

The Tranſlators Application.

The ſame good God now bids the Earth, of creatures in eche kinde,

To yeeld increaſe, as Cattell, VVoorme, and Beaſtes by him aſsnde.

Man then after his image made, him rule he gaue and ſway,

Creating woman a comfort, to him with mutuall ſtay.

Amids theſe pleaſures mortall man,

Shun hellyſh paynes all that thou can.

IOHM. CAP. 1.

ALL thinges are by him made, and without him, is nothing made.

1\. IOHN. CAP. 3.

HEareby knowe wee the loue of God to­wardes vs, becauſe he hath geuen his life
for vs.

IOHN. CAP. 13.

NO man hath greater loue in him, then he that woulde geue his life for his
freendes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=100)BERNARDVS.

OF trueth ſweete Ieſus, thou haſt hadde greater loue, whiche haſt geuen thy
lyfe, euen for thy perſecuting enemies.

1\. CORINTH. CAP. 6.

FOR you are bought with a great price.

TITVS. CAP. 3.

NOT according to the woorkes of righ­teouſneſſe which we haue done, but
ac­cordyng to his mercie hath he ſaued vs.

APOCALIPS. CAP. 11.

THY wrath is come, and the time of the dead to be iudged, and to render a
reward aſwell vnto thy ſeruantes the prophetes, as to thy holy ones, to thoſe
that feare thy name ſmall and great, and to deſtroy thoſe whiche haue
corrupted thy land.

PSALM. 104.

THOV haſte made all thinges in wyſe­dome.

PSALME. 7.

GOD is a iuſt Iudge, ſtrong and pa­cient.

MATTH. CAP. 15.

DEpart from me ye curſed into euerlaſting fyre, whiche is prepared for the
deuil and his angels.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=100)Sequitur.

AND they ſhall goe to euerlaſtyng pou­niſhment.

IOB. CAP. 7.

WHo ſo ſhall happen to deſcend vnto hel, ſhall not aſcende vnto the heauens.

AVCTOR Herevpon a certayn Gentile, hath this ſentence.

If I had a hundred tongues, and as many mouthes, and a voyce as ſtrong as
Iron, I could not comprehend to declare al the kindes of miſcheefes, and for
the pouniſhmentes thervnto due, they are ſo many, that I might rather ſeeme to
paſſe the names of them with ſcilence, then to reſite them at full.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 32.

I Wyll heape miſcheefes vpon their heades: that is to lay, all kindes of
tormentes: and I wyll fulfyll the number of my arrowes of diſpleaſure vpon
them.

ECCLESIASTI CAP. 29.

FYre, Tempeſt, Famine, and Death, all theſe are ordeyned for a reuenge of the
Lord againſt the vngodly.

PSALME. 11.

IT raigneth ſnares vppon ſinners: Fyre, Brimſtone, and Tempeſt.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=101)Aucthour.

FOr as the droppes of rayne are innumera­ble, ſo are the pouniſhmentes due
vnto the wicked.

After the ſentence of finall damnation,

Then Lucifer with all the helliſh feendes fell,

And with them ſinners without redemption,

All on a heape ſhall headlong haſte to hell,

VVhere in deadly dolour their dome is to dwell,

VVhoſe perillous paynes no ſpeache can expreme,

In heate and colde, yea, and in cares cruell,

So ſhall they exceede, ſurpasſing extreme.

VINCENTIVS.

EVen as the eye of man hath not ſeene, his care hath not heard, neyther hath
it aſcen­ded into the hart of man, what God hath pre­pared for them that loue
him: So vndoubted­ly ought we acknowledge, that mans eye hath neuer ſeene,
neyther hath the eare of any tra­uayler heard, neither hath it aſcended into
the hart of man how many euils there are, which God hath prepared for them
whiche treſpaſſe againſt his deuine Maieſtie.

Idem Vincencius.

ACcordyng to the ſaying of naturall rea­ſon: Euen as the kyng hath a fayre
Hall for his freendes, a Kitchin and Stable for his
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=101) ſeruauntes
and Cattle, and a place of pou­niſhment for guyltye perſons: So God the kyng
of kynges, hath prepared Heauen for his freendes and the elect, the world for
time ſeruers and tranſgreſſors, and hell it ſelfe for thoſe that are dampned.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 5.

THEY ſhall ſtand in great conſtancie a­gainſt thoſe whiche haue moleſted them,
and whiche haue defrauded them of their la­bours: They ſeeing this, ſhalbe
troubled with horrible feare, & ſhall marueile at them in the ſuddennes of an
vnhoped for health, thus ſaying amongſt them ſelues, repenting when it is to
late, and mournyng for very an­guiſh of ſoule, ſaying, Theſe are they whom we
ſometimes deſpiſed and diſdained to beare rule (who being out of our wittes)
eſteemed their life to be madneſſe, and their ende with­out honour. Behold how
they are reckoned amongſt the ſonnes of God, and their lot fal­leth among the
Saintes: therefore haue we erred from the way of trueth, and the light of
righteouſneſſe hath not ſhined vnto vs, and the ſonne of vnderſtandyng hath
not appea­red vnto vs: we haue gone aſtray in the way of iniquitie and
perdition, and haue walked
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=102) difficult
wayes, but the way of the Lorde haue we not knowen. In our malignitie are we
therefore conſumed: ſuche thinges ſhall they ſay in hell which haue ſinned.

O hart of man moſt hard and incenſible,

VVhich haſt no dreade of this damnation:

Blind as brutall beaſt irracionable,

VVhy falleſt thou thus to finall confuſion,

Haſt thou no pitie of thy perdition,

Be warned in time to eſchew Thalmightyes ire,

Pray, and repent thee with true contrition,

To flee the flame of that infernall fire.

PSALME. 72.

SInners ſhalbe conuerted vnto hell: that is to ſay, ſhall feele the tormentes
thereof.

IOB. CAP. 23.

THE Lorde hath mollefied my hart, and the Omnipotent hath layd troubles vpon
me.

PROSPER.

LET the vexed mind fyrſt behold the pu­niſhment due for ſinne, before ſhe doo
of­fend: and let her ſet before her eyes the ſo­rowes, in reſpect of carnall
concupiſcences, which were woont to folowe the ſinner at the hard heeles, and
there ſhall no ſinne delight her, neither ſhal any carnall delectation moue
her to offend God.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=102)Pſalmiſta de
impijs. 2.

LET vs breake the bondes of them in ſunder, and caſt from vs their yoke.

Idem.

LET his ſorowe returne vpon his owne head, and let his iniquitie lyght vpon
his owne pate.

APOCAL. CAP. 2.

HE that hath eares to heare, let him heare what the ſpirite ſayth to the
congregati­ons.

MATTH. CAP. 22.

BInde him hand and foote, and caſt him in­to the vttermoſt darkneſſe.

ESAI. CAP. 24.

THey ſhalbe geathered togeather, as in a congregation of one ſolempne feaſt,
and ſhall be ſhut in perpetuall priſon.

APOCALIPS. CAP. 12.

THey ſhalbe tormented night and day for euer and euer: Oh howe voyde of
perce­uerance and blind, are the hartes of ſinners, not conſidering theſe
things: for ſinners ſhall there ſay, What hath our pride profited vs, or what
hath our boaſting in our wealth brought vnto vs. They are all vaniſhed as a
ſhadowe, and we are conſumed in our owne malignitie.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=103)

Hell is a place moſt vyle and venemus,

A dongeon darcke for creaturs dampnate:

Perpetuall priſon for feendes furius,

To whom then ſinners ſhalbe aſſociate,

VVhere payne ſhall perſeuer early and late,

VVith eye of reaſon now who this dooth vewe,

VVould liue in Gods feare, and not be ingrate,

But ſeeke all good meanes this miſcheefe to eſchewe

Auguſt. 19. de ciuitate dei.

ORder is a certayne diſpoſition, which di­ſtributeth equalitie & diueſity vnto
euery thing, equall or vnequall.

Ibidem, libro. 5.

GOD hath ſett nothing in the world with­out order, therefore he appoynteth a
con­uenient place for euery thing, accordyng to the meaſure thereof: but that
which is tedi­ous or burdenſome to the body, is delectable, and embraced in
the ſoule, and in reaſonable creatures.

Auguſt. 11. de ciuitate dei.

THE body is euen ſo carried about with tediouſneſſe, as the ſoule is with
delecta­tion.

HIERONIMVS.

THere is nothing hard for them that loue, there is no hard or difficult matter
in loue. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=103)
Let vs then loue Chriſt, and euery thing ſhal ſeeme eaſy vnto vs, which
otherwyze is hard to be atcheeued.

GREGORIVS.

THere is nothing more precious vnto God then the vertue of loue: and nothing
more deſirous vnto the deuil, then the extinguiſhing of loue.

OALATH. CAP. 6.

HE that ſoweth in the fleſh, ſhall reape the corruption of the fleſhe.

ROMANS. CAP. 8.

FOR they that liue after the fleſh, doo ſa­uour of thoſe things which are of
the fleſh: that is to ſay, they eſteeme carnall things to be better then
ſpirituall thinges.

All Saintes are enthronized in the Heauens hye,

Becauſe of their deuine harty affection.

To heauē more then earth, doth ſoule more thē body

As their cheefe comfort and conſolation,

And as accordeth with their good condicion,

Becauſe they vſed ſuch deuine temperance,

VVith Palme of victorie they triumph in renoune,

VVith God and his angels in perpetuall pleſance.

Sanctus Bonauentura.

AS the mercie of God beareth her ſelfe to­wardes good and bad, ſo dooth his
iuſtice [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=104)
likewyſe beare her ſelfe towardes the repro­bate and vngodly. Therefore as
they are the choſen chyldren of heauenly heritage, whiche in their loue haue
preferred heauenly things before earthly thinges: ſo are the reprobate deputed
for hell, becauſe they haue preferred earthly thinges before heauenly thinges,
and thinges carnall, before thinges ſpirituall.

Auguſt. 13. lib. confeſ.

MY loue is my labour, therewith am I carried whether ſo euer I am carried.

GREGORIVS in moribus.

THat ſame burnyng flame reuengeable, hath with it a certayne fierie conſuming
of vices, but hath no light at all: there the fire caſteth no light to comfort
the tormented foules: and yet notwithſtandyng, it geueth light to an other
purpoſe, to the end it might more and more torment the dampned ſoules: for the
followers thereof are plainely to be perceaued therewith ſeene in the torment,
by meanes of whoſe affection they haue treſ­paſſed.

IEREMI. CAP. 9.

YOV ſhall ſerue ſtrange goddes, whiche ſhall not ſuffer you to take any reſt
nyght nor day.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=104)SAPIENCE.
CAP 4.

AND there ſhalbe after theſe thinges, ſeene thoſe that ſhall ſlide away
without  [...]onor, and liue in reproches amongſt the  [...]ead for euer, and
they ſhalbe laid waſte, euen  [...]to the very laſt man.

GREGORIVS in moribus.

THE pouniſhment is by the ordinance of God diſtinguiſhed, according to the
mea­  [...]re of the fault committed.

[...]el is a hole of horrible darknes,

VVhere light is languorus and nothing delectable,

[...]Vhich ſorowfull ſight cauſeth cares to increaſe,

From feendiſh figures foule and terrible,

[...]Vhoſe tragedie to tell, no tongue may be able,

So reſtles is the rage thereof moſt vnquiet,

[...]Vith al miſchiefe abounding, wretched & miſerable▪

In ſoule and body, theyr paynes are ſo complete.

ECCLESIASTI. CAP. 13.

THERE is moſt wicked pouertie in the mouth of the vngodly.

IOB. CAP. 2.

HE ſhall caſt vp agayne the wealth and ritches that he hath ſwalowed vp and
de­uoured.

PSALME. 99.

THey ſhall leaue their ritches for ſtran­gers to poſſes.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=105)APOCALIPS.
CAP. 18.

WIthin one houre are they bereaued of ſuch ſubſtance.

PROVERBES. CAP. 11.

THeir ritches ſhall not auayle the wicked in the day of vengeance: he that
truſteth in them ſhall haue a fall.

IOB. CAP. 2.

ALL ſorowe violently ruſſheth in there vpon him.

SENECA.

THere is no other man more acceptable vnto GOD, then he that contempneth
worldly ritches.

BOECIVS. de conſolatum

OH fooliſh bleſſedneſſe happening vnto man by brittle wealth, which when hee
hath gotten hee then becommeth ſecure and careles therein.

IOB. CAP. 2.

AND there ſhall a fire conſume them, which ſhall not caſt any light.

Iſidorus de ſummo bono.

THE fyre of hell ſhall both geue light vn­to the augmentation of the payne for
the wretched ſoules, to the end they may ſee that ſhalbe to their ſorowe, and
alſo ſhall not geue light to their comfort, becauſe they ſhall not
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=105) ſee that
may be to ther ioy.

ESAI. CAP. 9.

THE people ſhalbe as the foode of fyre.

Gregorios in Dialogo.

THE wicked haue death in hell that ſhall neuer dye, want without want, ende
with­out end (becauſe death there) is immortall penurie neuer fayling, and the
ende of their paines infinite.

PSALME. 28.

EVilles haue compaſſed me rounde about, whereof I am not able to reſite the
num­ber.

In hell of flaming fyre is horrible heate,

VVhich fire without fayle, or diſtance ſhall endure,

Greeuouſly tormenting with furie to freate,

Both body and ſoule in payne pasſing meaſure:

O liuing death, euerlaſting in languor,

O deadly lyfe of endles mortalitie,

Sowſſed in ſadnes and ſorowe euermore,

Should not man than reſtraine from all peruerſitie?

DEVTERONO. CAP. 28.

GOD ſhall ſtrike thee with neede, or pe­nurie, ſickneſſe, and colde, with
heate and drought, with corrupt ayre, and with ruſt of the earth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=106)ESAI. CAP.
33.

WHich of you ſhalbe able to dwell where the deuouring fyre hath his force.

PSALME. 94.

BVT yet ſhalt thou conſider before thyne eyes, and ſhalt ſee the reward that
ſhalbe geuen ſinners: I wyll remember and beare in mind theſe thinges, and my
ſpirite waxeth faint therefore.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 1.

MY ſonne, remember thy ende, and thou ſhalt not ſinne for euer.

PSALME. 90.

BEcauſe a thouſand yeeres are before thine eyes as yeſterday, which is paſſed.

IEREMI. CAP. 17.

THou ſhalt be caſt out alſo from the heri­tage that I gaue thee, and I wyll
ſubdue thee vnder the heauie bondage of thyne ene­mies, in a land that ye know
not: for ye haue miniſtred fyre to myne indignation which ſhall burne
euermore.

PROSPERVS.

IN this preſent life, temporall pleaſures are counted ſweete, and troubles are
coumpted bitter: but who is he that deſpiſeth not the voluptuouſneſſe of this
worlde, thirſting or longing after the felicitie of the life euerla­ſting:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=106) or who
would not willingly drinke the cup of tribulation for Chriſte in this world,
fearing the euerduring torment of the fyre in hell.

Robertus in quali.

IF it be a tedious thing for the healthfull man to lye waltering in his bed
all day and all night long, and in the ſoftneſſe thereof to wallowe him ſelfe
at wyll: ſo vnto a young diſſolute perſon, it happeneth likewyſe a thing
irckſome to keepe company long tyme with fayre Women. Theſe and ſuche other
like, which were woont to be doone for ſport and pleaſure, doo with continuall
vſe thereof bring lothſomenes. Alacke therefore, why do ſuch ſinners ſlumber
in ſinne, why rather doo they not awake, and why doo they not conſi­der
before, that horrible tormentes in hell are prepared for them which ſhall
endure a thou­ſand thouſand yeres after, yea for euerlaſting.

Man in thy mind make a reſemblance,

Of furious fyre and paynes infernall,

VVhich are enduring without diſtance,

Forget not the tormentes thereof eternall:

But deepely print them in thy memoriall,

So ſhalt thou eſchewe all ſnares of ſinne,

And inconuenience by vice preiudiciall,

VVhich is more greeuous then man may eſteeme.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=107)HIERONIMVS
ad Palma.

AND thincke we then brethren, that the power of God haue foreſhewed vs theſe
thinges in ſport? or that the Apoſtl [...]s haue told vs of theſe things in a
laughing m [...]ode? that the iudg [...]ment of the deuine Maieſtie is newly
begun and determined without diſcre­tion? But theſe are no ſporting plaies,
when paynes doo paſſe herevpon, yf they haue ſuf­fered pouniſhment in midſt of
their ioy, they are yet notwithſtandyng beleeued of vs to haue ſpoken theſe
thinges but in ieſt, and not in earneſt.

ESAIAS.

SAra was ſawen in peeces, Danyel was throwen amongſt the Lyons, Paul was
beheaded with the ſwoord, Peter was han­ged vppon the Croſſe, after the ſame
manner that Chriſte was: and all this tendeth to that ende, that with their
doctrine and good lyfe, they might reuoke and withdrawe vs from our ſinnes.

AVCTOR.

WHerefore (ſayth the ſayde Robart) Oh wicked, oh peruerſe, oh deceitfull, and
oh deueliſhe cogitation of them, which doo e­ſteeme and ſuppoſe that there is
no hel at all.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=107) Oh thou
hard and ſtony molded ſoule, oh thou bewitched, oh thou vicious ſoule: what
dooeſt thou? or whyther wandreſt thou? why dooeſt thou make ſuch haſte to hell
wardes, wheras thou ſhalt liue moſt miſerable for euer. Nowe therfore returne
thou vnto the Lord thy God which ſhal deliuer thee▪ and graunt thee both grace
and glory in Heauen.

Thincke wee the Prophetes ſpent their time in ſport,

Or the Apoſtles ſhewing infernall payne,

The people from their ſinnes for to exhort,

Theit wayghty woords we ſhould not take in vaine:

VVhich were content of tyrantes to be ſlaine,

To obteyne Heauen, and helliſh payne eſchewe

Their fayth in Chriſte, ſo firme was and certayne,

By their examples let vs our life renewe.

ISIDORVS.

PO [...]der well in thy mind, what ſo euer ſo­rowes or vexations of torments
are ordey­ned for ſinners, what ſo euer pouniſhmentes of this world, or els
whatſoeuer bitter gripes of ſorowes aſſayle thee: yf thou compareſt ſuch like
altogeather vnto the ſtate of hell, all that thou ſuffereſt ſhall ſeeme light
and eaſie vnto thee.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=108)BERNARDVS.

FEare to breake the appoynted feaſtes, and the ſolempne feaſtes of the ſoule
from ſin, and refraine the wicked labors of thy hands: but theſe thinges are
thought eaſie to be done or accompliſhed, by him that hath mind vpon the
euerlaſting fyre in hell.

PSALME. 89.

WHAT man is he that liueth, and ſhall not taſte death, or ſhall ſaue his ſoule
from the neathermoſt hell.

CIRHSOSTOMVS.

DOthe not all the tyme of this our lyfe▪ (wherin we ſeeme to take our
pleaſures) manifeſtly appeare a mainteyner of pleaſure and luſt, as the ſleepe
of one onely night, in reſpect of the felicitie in the lyfe eternall.

ANCELMVS.

ALL the good thinges, or euill thynges which we enioy in this world, are
enter­mixed with their contraries, neyther haue they any fyrme or certayne
degree of their perfection, but eyther may they be encreaſed or diminiſhed:
eyther els may they be enioy­ed or had of vs ſomewhat more or leſſe, as it is
euident in euery vertue & vice, and as well in eury good or euyll part of the
body, as in [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=108)
euery good or euyll cogitation or affect of the ſoule. Neyther is there ioy
found here with­out feare, nor ſorowe or ſadneſſe with conſo­lation: neyther
perfect health without diſea­ſes, or ſome hurtfull harme: neyther yet vali­ant
courage of body and mind, without debili­tie or feeblenes of nature. But in
heauen are all good things, not mixed with contrarietie, and thoſe are
certayne to truſt vnto with moſt perfect conſolation: in hell likewyſe are all
euyll thinges quite contrary.

GREGORIVS

CErtaynely there is one onely fyre of tor­ment in hell, which we ought to
beleeue is ordeyned for the wicked, but all ſhall not be tormented alike in
one maner: for euery one, accordyng as the qualitie of his treſpaſſes hath
required, ſhall there feele the ſmart of the pouniſhment due for the ſame.

And in this torment which hath no temperance,

Shall be no maner of relaxation,

Neyther ſhall preuayle any prayer of inſtance,

In any wyſe to empayre the paines or paſſion:

Yet though this payne paſſe all eſtimation,

The fury thereof ordeyned by Gods wyll,

As euery ſinner deſerued hy tranſgresſion,

Shall them moleſt, deſtroy, conſume, and ſpill.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=109)AVGVSTINVS.

THE world paſſeth away, and the concu­piſcence thereof: oh man, what wouldeſt
thou haue. Whether hadſt thou leuer to loue temporall thinges, and ſo ſlide
away with time tranſitory, or loue Chriſte, and with him liue for euer.

Idem.

THis world is more dangerous when ſhe flattereth vs, then when ſhe loureth
vpon vs. There can be no greater madnes then for momentany pleaſures to looſe
eternal ioyes, and to euthrall thy ſoule vnto perpetuall tor­ment. Oh how
happy is that man that hath not walked after the glory of this world, and the
diſſembling madnes of the ſame.

1\. CORINTH. CAP. 1.

THE wyſedome of this world, is counted meare fooliſhneſſe before God.

EZECIEL. CAP. 28.

IN the multitude of thy worldly affares, when thou art occupied, the very
inwarde partes of the body are replete with iniquitie.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE poyſon againſt loue and charitie moſt pernicious, is the luſt after
temporal pleaſures.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=109)BERNARDVS.

OH my ſoule, what feare ſhall then take hold of thee when all theſe thinges
haue forſaken thee, whoſe preſence are ſo pleaſant vnto thee, ſo acceptable in
ſight, and ſo fami­lier to dwell togeather. Altogeather fearefull and
trembling, thou alone ſhalt enter into a ſtrange countrey, when as thoſe moſt
vglye and fearefull monſters all vpon an heape ſhal runne vpon thee.

GREGORIVS.

THoſe eyes which the offence hath ſhut vp and made to wincke at, the ſame
ſhall the due pouniſhment for ſuche offence, open and make to ſee plainely.

IOB. CAP. 17.

IF I ſhall endure this vexation, hell it ſelfe is my houſe ordeyned, and in
the darckneſſe haue I made my bed: I haue ſayde vnto cor­ruption, thou art my
father, and my mother: and to the woormes, thou art my ſiſter. Where is then
my recouerie and helpe be­come: all that I haue in poſſeſſion, ſhall goe downe
into the deepe pit of hell. Therefore geue me leaue to depart, that I may
bewayle my ſorowe, before I ſhall goe hence, and not returne vnto the darke
land couered with the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=110) heate of
death: the land of miſerie and dark­neſſe, whereas is the ſhadowe of death,
and no order of lyfe, to ſay euerlaſting horror in­habiting there.

Oh amazed witte, O ſoule congeled in ſinne,

Frozzen through affection of fooliſhe felicitie,

VVhereunto retchles ryot doth at no time linne,

To offend thy Creator, thou art ſo foole hardy:

Thy ſight is blinded ſo with ſenſuality,

That the loue of God cauſeth no correction,

Nor yet of heauenly ioy no cupidity,

May make thee leaue ſinne, for dread of damnation.

INNOCENTIVS.

HE that feareth onely for a ſmall tyme to put his finger in the fyre, why
rather fea­reth he not both in ſoule and body to be tor­mented. Oh howe great
is this madnes of man for theſe frayle and tranſitory things, to ſuffer
perpetuall pouniſhment both in ſoule and body.

Chriſoſtomus dereparacione lapſi.

DEclare thou howe many, and what ages haue been, or are ſpent in ryot and carn
i [...] pleaſures: what times and ſeaſons paſſed in vayne delightes, whiche
are to be compared vnto the euerlaſtyng paynes of hell. If thee lyſt, beſtowe
thou an hundred yeeres in ſuche
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=110)
delectacions, yea adde there vnto an hundred yeeres moe, or rather tenne
hundred yeeres moe, what ſhall this or that be in reſpect of the lyfe
euerlaſtyng.

EPHESI. CAP. 5.

AWake thou that ſleepeſt, and ryſe vp from the dead, and Chriſte ſhall lighten
thy ſteppes.

ECCLESIAST. CAP. 29.

FOR all thinges are had, by ſeekyng for them in their due tyme.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 4.

KEepe thee therefore within thy bondes, and eſtabliſh thy ſoule: ſtand to thy
tack­ling with a good courage, and thou ſhalt ſee the helpe of God vpon thee.

AVGVSTINVS.

HE that dyeth, and dooeth not repent him of his ſinnes eare he depart out of
this lyfe, dyeth not at all, but liueth in eternall torment.

PSALME. 77.

MY Soule is alwayes before me.

AVGVSTINVS.

HE ſhall geue victory to him that conten­deth for victorie, who hath emboldned
the wraſtler.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=111)DEVTERONO.
CAP. 32.

WOulde God they once in their dayes would be wyſe, and haue vnderſtan­dyng, yt
they might prouide for the laſt day.

LVKE. CAP. 6.

WOe be vnto you riche men, which haue all your conſolation in your riches here
vpon earth.

MATTHE. 5.

BLeſſed are they whiche doo mourne after godlines in this life, becauſe they
ſhall be comforted.

Idem CAP. 16.

WHat ſhall it preuayle man yf he gayne vnto him ſelfe all the world, and looſe
his owne ſoule.

Awake out of thy dreame, and ſpeedely addres,

Thee to beware in tyme, eare thou feele woe,

Though blinded thou liue here with thy ritches,

Yet thincke thou ſhalt this lyfe and them forgoe▪

VVhere in the end yf thou this race runne ſo,

That ſinne and vice by thee may be ſubdued,

Thou ſhalt no doubt vanquiſhe eche feendiſhe ſo,

And with eternall blesſing be endued.

BERNARDVS.

FOoles doo eſteeme of greateſt thinges, leaſt in value to be cared for, & haue
grea­teſt [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=111)
regard vnto very ſmall thinges. They take more care howe to keepe and cheriſhe
their diſeaſed corrupt body, then howe to fo­ſter and cheriſh the precious
ſoule. Yea, they are more carefull howe to batten and  [...]eede the fleſh
with fatneſſe and good likyng: but the kirnell of the ſoule, or the hart of
the ſpirituall man, they doo oftentimes deſtroy.

Idem ſuper Cantica

THey ſurely that are not diligent in their vocations (as men ought to be) are
par­takers of the deuils them ſelues in their tra­uayles.

HIERONIMVS.

THere can be no labour deemed tedious: neither any time ſeeme long vnto vs,
wherein the euerlaſting glory is obteyned.

AVGVSTINVS.

NO doubt, ſinners doo dayly heare the ſcriptures, promiſing as well vnto thoſe
that loue God, the moſt bleſſed graces of his good prouidence: and
contrariwyſe they heare the ſcriptures, which doo threaten vnto ſuch as care
not for GOD, the plagues and pouniſhmentes by him for them ordeyned. And yet
geue they no regard therevnto, ney­ther wyllingly do they heare God thus
ſpea­king [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=112)
vnto them, when he gently entreateth them, nor when he ſeuerely threatneth
them, but rather doo reſiſt him with their euyll and wicked dooinges.

PSALME. 49.

THE wyſe man alſo, as well as the foole, ſhall goe to the graue.

LEOPOLDVS.

MEN doo more wyllingly toyle them ſelues for the deſire they haue vnto
plea­ſure, then for the loue that they beare to ver­tue. Moſt men are
naturally geuen to be feareful and timerus in paines taking in ſuſ­tayning
troubles, pouertie, and other daun­gers, wherewith humane kind was wonte to be
moleſted. But yf they were wyſe in deede, and vnderſtoode the exceſſiue
calamities or­deyne [...] for ſinners without ende, they woulde then be farre
more fearefull to offend in this lyfe.

IOB. CAP. 6.

THey that feare a froſt vpon them, ſhall haue a ſnowe come to them.

Sythen wee ſee in ſickneſſe corporall,

Health to recouer, and death for to decline.

Men wyll abſteyne from luſtes ſenſuall,

And their deſyres ſubmit to medecine:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=112)All for this
frayle fleſh that runneth to ruine,

How much more ſhould eche man with buſy cure,

Seeke for the ſoules health, repentyng in time,

VVherby he may obteyne ſuch ioyes as ſhalendure.

1\. THESSALO. CAP. 5.

WHen they ſhall ſay, Peace and ſecurity is with vs, then by and by ſhall a
ſo­dayne deſtruction come vppon them, as the pange of a woman trauayling with
chylde, and they ſhall not eſcape away.

ECGLESIASTI. CAP. 5.

MAke thou no tarying to turne vnto the Lorde, and prolong not of from day to
day: for ſodaynely ſhall his wrath come, and in time of reuenge he ſhall
deſtroy thee.

ESAI. CAP. 18.

FOr you haue ſaid, We haue made a league with death, and with hell we haue
made a couenant.

GALATH. CAP. 6.

BE you not deceaued in your owne doo­inges, God is not mocked withall: what
thing ſo euer a man ſhall ſowe, the ſame ſhall he alſo reape agayne.

IEREMI. CAP. 8.

THey haue rather choſen death then lyfe·

PSALME. 69.

THey haue drawen neare, euen vnto the gates of death.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=113)Idem.

THere is a moſt vyle death ordayned for ſinners.

ECCLESIASTI. 7.

REmember to dye, becauſe death wyll not tary long.

BERNARDVS.

I Tremble and quake for feare of the iawes of the infernall beaſt, yea tyl
[...] I be deliue­red from the body of hell, from the roaring feendes prepared
to their meate. Alacke, oh my mother, why haſt thou conceyued me the child of
ſorowe, the childe of bitter bale, in­dignation, & eu [...]rlaſting
lamentation? Why was I l [...]lled in thy lappe? why was I foſte­red with thy
dugges: I was borne the meate for woormes, and foode of the fyre.

IACOB. CAP. 4.

YOur laughter ſh [...]ll turne into mournyng and your ioy into ſorowe.

APOCAL. CAP. 18.

SO much as he hath vaunted and reioyced him ſelfe in his ritches: ſo much
torment and mournyng let him haue adminiſtred vn­to him.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 25.

THere ſhalbe a certayne preſcribed rate of pouniſhment, according to the
meaſure of [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=113)
the offence that euery man hath done.

BERNARDVS.

BReethren, let vs be enflamed to repen­tance, let vs examine our conſciences,
and let vs be encouraged to take reuenge of our ſelus, by repentāce to ye end
we may be able to eſcape ye horrible iudgement of y• liuing God.

Slombring in ſinne ſome dreame ſecurity,

VVithout feare or forecaſt of infernall afliction,

Neglecting repentance in this lyfe tranſitory,

That they feare nothing the due correction,

Ordeyned for ſinne by deuine direction,

As thoſe that are not carefull harmes to eſchewe.

Suche feele the ſentence of all malediction,

VVhen repentance come to late their ſorowes to reſcewe.

IEREMI. CAP. 3.

WHY dooeſt thou cry out ſo vppon the contrition of thy ſoule: thy ſorowe is
incurable, by reaſon of the multitude of thine iniquities, and becauſe of thy
greeuous ſins haue I done this, ſayth the Lord.

HIERONIMVS.

THE moderacion of Gods diſpleaſure, the duetie of godlineſſe, ſeeketh onely
for our returne, and deſyreth that we may be ſa­  [...]ed by this long
forbearance of his goodnes:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=114) If we wyll
not be conuerted, yf we be ſtiff [...] necked, and yf we continewe ſtill in
our ſyns vnlawfully, euen tyll our death. Let vs truſt vnto it, God wyl not
ſhewe mercie vnto thoſe that continually perſeuer in their ſinnes.

BERNARDVS.

I Tremble to thincke vppon the gnawyng woorme, and the death that neuer dyeth.
I ſhiuer and quake euery ioynt of me, to fall in­to the handes of that death
that endureth, and of that l [...]fe that dyeth.

GREGORIVS.

THE w [...]cked ſhall dye the death euerla­ſtyng.

PROSPER.

IF at that inſtant, when a man purpoſeth to ſinne, he would with diligent mind
conſider what pouniſhment claymeth to be done to­wards thoſe that are taken in
trappe for their miſcheefts: what torment ſhoulde vexe the conuict ſoules,
what feare would ſhake their members and ioynts in euery part, and what wanne
and pale colour would dumpe theyr hauty countenances: and finally, how
execra­ble reproche and ignominie it ſelfe the ſen­tence denounced vnto ſuche
ſinners woulde duely re [...]der I knowe not whether he would
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=114) take any
ſuch delight, or frame him ſelfe vnto ſuch vices and wickednes yea or no.

MATTH. CAP. 21.

BEholde, the Bridegrome commeth, and they that were prepared to wayte vppon
the Bridegrome, went in with him vnto the wedding.

Vnde Gregorius.

IF thou, oh wicked man wert wyſe and did­deſt vnderſtand what ioye this were,
thou wouldeſt oftentimes conſider herevpon, and ſpeedely run to repentance:
neither wouldeſt thou loſe or forgoe the acceptable time, and the dayes of thy
ſaluation, through thy ban­quetting, dayly ryot, and idleneſſe, without
profiting body or ſoule.

IEREMI. CAP. 9.

WHO ſhall geue water vnto my head, & a fountaine of teares vnto my eyes, that
I may weepe night and day, when I be­hold the children of the people committed
to my charge.

IVDITH. CAP. 8.

LET vs craue his pardon with teares.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE iuſtice of the Omnipotent hauing foreknowledge of thinges to come, let
or­deyne [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=115) to
be made the fyre of hell, euen from the firſt creation of the world: He whiche
is of his owne mercifull goodnes contrary to this fire, who is enflamed with
loue of the heauenly God, he is the fire whiche is neuer extinguiſhed, neither
is he with mans loue conſumed, nor with wood noryſhed.

BERNARDVS.

WHat is more horrible to thinke vpon, then death: what is more feareful▪ then
iudgement: what more intollerable, then the pai [...]es of hell fyre: what
more ioyfull, then the glory of Heauen. &c.

VVith this foreſayd action I reade right erneſtfull,

Repentantly into thy hart imprint,

Lhy ſtate with teares bemone, as moſt wofull.

VVith contrite hart, doo now thy ſinnes lament,

And wheretofore euyll cuſtome by conſent,

Of ſelfewyll, dyd cauſe wickedneſſe abound,

Let hencefoorth grace amend thy lyfe preſent,

That lyfe to come with ioyes may thee redound.

¶ FINIS Of the Contemplacion for SATVRSDAY.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=115)

## 7\. ¶ THE AVCTORS Commemoration for SONDAY.

Remember here the ioyes of Heauen,

The principall bliſfull state of ſeuen.

The Tranſlators Application.

Thalmighty woorkeman ended now, hi [...] worke which he dyd frame▪

Reſting from woorke he bleſt this day, and ſanctified the ſame.

As one that greatly dyd reioyce, to ſee all thinges ſo well,

VVith glory infinite he reſtes, where Saintes and Angels dwell.

This Sabbothes reſt to keeps let vs.

To enioy Heauens ioyes moſt precious.

AVGVSTINVS.

MAN dooth not compre­hend in faith or beleeue, what God hath prepa­red for
them that loue him: neither is it a thing that can be hoped ſuffi­cient, nor
deſired as it ought to be, yet may it be obteyned: but it can be ſufficiently
eſteemed, valued, or dee­med, according to the due value thereof.

PSALME. 132.

HOW dearely beloued thy tabernacles of vertues are: Oh Lorde my ſoule hath
de­ſiered [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=116)
to knowe within thy Courtes, and yet hath it fayled thereof.

MATTH. CAP. 25.

ENter tho [...] into the ioy of thy Lord.

AVGVSTINE.

EVery man is made bleſſed in the country of the heauenly kingdome, as well
within doores, as without: within, that is to ſay, in the contemplac [...]on
of the diuinitie of the Cre­ator: without, to ſay, in the incarnation and
beholdyng in Heauen his Sauiour.

PSALME. 84.

BLeſſed are they which dwell in thy houſe, oh Lorde, they ſhall praiſe thee
worlde without end.

PSALME 49.

THere are glorius ſayings of thee, oh thou Citie of God.

Idem.

O Lorde, I haue loued the beautie of thy houſe, and the place of thy
habitation.

THOBIA. CAP. 13.

BLeſſed ſhall I be, yf the reſt of my ſeede might hereafter ſee the bright
cleareneſſe of the Citie Hieruſalem. The gates of Hie­ruſalem are builded of
the Saphir and Sma­ragd ſtone, and of diuers precious ſtones:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=116) yea, of
precious ſtones is the compaſſe of the walles thereof.

APOCALIPS. CAP. 21.

THe heauenly Hieruſalem hath the walles thereof in meaſure, an hundred and
foure and fourty cubites, after the meaſure of man, which is of the angel that
meaſured the ſame, hauing twelue foundacions: that is to ſay, all beautified
with eache kinde of moſt precious ſtones. And the firſt fundacion was of
Iaſ­per ſtone: the ſecond, of Saphire: the third, of Calcedony: the fourth, of
Emerald: the fifth, of Sardonix: the ſixth, of Sardius: the ſe­uenth, of
Cryſolity: the eight, of Berill: the ninth, of Topas: the tenth, of
Cryſophraſus: the eleuenth, of Iacinth: and the twelfth and laſt fundacion, of
an Amethiſt.

Sequitur.

AND the ſtreetes of the Citie reſembled a golden world, ſhining clearly as
bright as glaſſe. And the Temple thereof, dyd I not ſee: for the Lorde God,
euen the Almighty, he is the Temple thereof, and the Lambe. And the Citie
neyther wanted Sunne nor Moone to geue light therein: for the beauty of the
liuing God hath illuminated the ſame, and the light thereof is the Lambe. And
the [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=117) gates
thereof are n [...]t ſhutt by day time: for there ſhall no night be ſeene
there. And thy­ther ſhall they bring glory and honor out of the Nacions. There
ſhall nothing that is de­  [...]owled enter in therat, neither any thing that
woorcketh abomination, or maketh leaſings: but ſuch as are written in the
booke of the life of the Lambe.

Auguſti▪ in confesſi,

THere is a ioy that is not geuen vnto the wicked ones, but vnto thoſe thankful
ones whiche honor thee, whoſe ioy thou thy ſelfe art.

Ther is perfection and flowre of al fairenes,

VVhere ſimpleſt ſtuffe is gold and precious ſtone,

There is finall felicitie euermore faultles,

VVhoſe pleaſures there ſurpaſſe all mencion:

There Chriſte our king for the ſaluacion,

Of thoſe that liue in his feare and him loue,

Caeleſtiall ioyes preparde hath many a one,

For ay to dure, in glorious Heauen aboue.

ESAI. CAP. 32.

MY people ſhal reſt them in the Taberna­cle of faithfulneſſe, in the beautiful
court of peace.

ESAI. CAP. 9.

AND there ſhalbe none end of peace.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=117)Auguſt. de
ciuitate dei.

OH heauenly houſe of Hieruſalem, whiche art ful of light: vnto thee breatheth
my peregrination, that he might poſſeſſe me in thee, which hath made both thee
and me.

AVGVSTINVS.

ETernall bleſſedneſſe conſiſteth in two pointes: to ſay, in the neceſſarie
abſence of all euyl, and in the neceſſarie preſence of al good. If we aſke
what good, there is at all to be found: otherwyſe it may not be anſwe­red, but
what ſo euer good thing may be, is there to be found, and what ſo euer euyl
there is, or may be in any place, is not at al to be found there.

PSALM. 84.

ONE day in thy Courtes, is better then a thouſand.

Idem.

A Thouſand yeeres, are in thy ſight but as one day.

GREGORIVS.

FOR who would loue that which he kno­weth not: wherevpon the Pſalmiſt
admo­niſheth vs, ſaying, Taſte, and ſee how ſweete the Lord is. And yf he
manifeſtly declare his ſweetenes, yet you knowe him not, becauſe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=118) you haue
not taſted of him.

AVGVSTINE.

SVch is the beauty of Iuſtice, ſo much is the pleaſauntnes of eternall light:
that al­though we had but one day, and no longer li­mitted vs to tarry there,
euen for this cauſe only (yf there were none other) might in-nu­merable yeeres
of this life be deſpiſed, which are paſſed full of delightes in the abundance
of temporal wealth, and that but of right and with iuſt cauſe.

CHRISOSTOMVS.

PRoſperity, the Stepdame of vertues from the fyrſt beginning of the world,
hath been proffering vnto her gueſtes ſweete things to drincke: that when men
haue been drunke with the dregges of her wine, ſhe might en­termingle them,
her deadly poyſon therewith.

VVho would be carefull, with deuoute diligence,

Digeſtly to thincke on the ioyes celeſtiall,

Might well diſcerne by true intelligence,

That worldly pleaſure is of price but ſmall:

VVhich as deceitfull, would nought eſteeme at all,

VVhen he dooth behold with great ſecurity,

That precious Pallace and place imperiall,

Ordeyned for Chriſtes elect eternally.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=118)SAPIENCE.
CAP 3.

VNhappy and voyde is the hope of them, their labours are without fruite: but
glo­rious is the fruites of the labours of the good men.

AVGVSTINE.

WHat madnes of ſoules is that to loſe life, and take death to gett wealth, and
loſe heauen.

CHRISOSTOME.

IT is better to be compared vnto the brute Cattell, then continually to be
borne into this world: For naturally to be boyde of rea­ſon, is a thyng
intollerable, but for a man that ſhoulde be adorned with reaſon, to liue
without reaſon, is and may be wel counted a treſpaſſing life.

PSALME. 49.

MAN being in honor, hath none vnder­ſtanding, but is compared vnto the brute
beaſt [...]s: yea, vnto the vnwyſe, and is made like vnto them. &c.

GREGORIVS.

THE carnall delectation darkeneth and obſcureth ſo that mind which ſhe doth
in­fect, that ſhe can not ſee the cleareneſſe of the true light, but therevpon
is more deuiliſhly
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=119) delighted,
ſo as thencefoorth ſhe ſuffereth fie­rie flame, euen aſcending vpward.

HIERONIMVS.

WE all are geuen to be wary in leaſt matters, and negligent in greateſt
thinges.

Iſidorus de ſummo bono.

BEcauſe thou wouldeſt be ſuch one, that no earthly thing delighteth thee at
all: be­leeue me thou ſhalt ſee euen at the ſame mo­ment of time, that thing
which thou deſireſt.

GREGORIVS.

IF we would conſider what and how great benefites theſe be which are promiſed
vs in the heauens, we ſhould thinke in our mindes that all thinges are vyle
and baſe whiche wee enioy vppon earth: for the earthy ſubſtance being compared
vnto the heauenly felicitie, is a burden heauy for vs to beare, and not a
treaſure to enioy. The temporall lyfe, being compared vnto the life eternall,
is rather to be called death then lyfe: for that ſame dayly diſeaze of corrupt
nature, what other thing els is it, then a certaine proloxitie, or
circum­ſtaunce of death.

IOHN. CAP. 6,

THere ſhall no man take away your ioy from you.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=119)BERNARDVS.

OH thou houſe of God, the Citie of the great kyng: what woonderful ioyes are
there in thee: howe much, and what great gladneſſe, how bleſſed are thy
inhabitantes.

VVhen men to things temporall doo beare affection,

They leaſt eſteeme of euerduring bliſſe,

VVherevpon in nature ryſeth ſuch corruption,

That oft who on earth moſt proſperous is:

Of the heauenly beautitude moſt of all mis,

Their carnall luſt a bondage dooth become,

To them ſelues, who then would conſider of this,

For tranſitorie pleaſure ſhould eternall paines ſhone.

PSALME. 101.

I Wyll ſing of mercy and trueth vnto thee, oh Lord.

PSALME.  [...]8.

FOR what is there for me in heauen, and what would I haue of thee vpon earth:
I am delighted in the way of thy teſtimonies, as in all my ritches: my hart
hath refuſed to be comforted in worldly thinges.

Sequitur.

I Haue been mindfull of my God, and I am comforted.

PSALME. 76.

THY conſolacious, oh Lorde, haue made my ſoule glad.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=120)BERNARDVS.

FOR vnto the image and ſimilitude o [...] God, is eu [...]ry reaſonable ſoule
made. It may be better exerciſed, then all other crea­tures: but in very deede
it can not be ſatiſfy­ed at all.

PSALME. 34.

I Shall be ſatiſfyed when thy glory ſhall ap­peare.

AVGVSTINVS.

THE ſoule that is entrenched with the flowres of vertues, and with the deawe
of heauenly grace, is called the Paradiſe of the Lorde.

GREGORIVS.

THE v [...]permoſt trenche poſſeſſeth the ſoule, when ſhe is afflitted with
the deſire of the heauenly kingdome, euen with ſalte teares: but the
neathermoſt trenche doth ſhe enioy when ſhe throughly feareth, by her ſo­rowe
and teares, the tormentes of the pitt of hell.

Secundus Bonauentura.

FOR our naturall bodyes are compa [...]t of foure Elementes, wherevpon with
foure fould qualities ſhall they be remunerate: for the Earthy Elament ſhal be
turned to eter­nall
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=120)
immortalitie: the Watry Elament, in­to al maner of vnabilitie in ſuffering:
the Ay­rie Elament, into a ſpeciall agillity or ſwift­nes: and the Fyry
Elament, into moſt bright clearenes. And then ſhall theſe ſhine as the Sunne,
and as the ſparckes out of a flaming Furnace, ſhall they diſperſe them ſelues
a­brode, becauſe the Lorde ſhall wipe away all ſorowe from their eyes.

AVGVSTINE.

WHere ſo euer the ſpirite deſireth to be then, there altogeather ſhall the
body be alſo. &c.

VVe ſhall in the heauens, of God haue inſpection,

In ſoule and body endowred with dignity,

Yea and in this bodyly ſhape ſhall we haue cognition,

Eche one of other, before Gods great maieſty:

VVhen as thus glorified in ſoule and eke in body,

Such ioyes ſhall we taſte, and endles conſolation,

That in the midſt, our ſauiour triumphing with victory

VVe ſhall ſhine ſeuen times more dearer then the ſon.

VINCENCIVS.

AND there is a fruition of bliſſe, whiche ſhall endure for euer, and that in
diuers [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=121)
maner: not vpon the behalfe of euery perti­culer ſoule which ſhall enioy the
ſame, but on the behalfe of ſuch as ſhal poſſes them ſoules: for the bleſ
[...]ed and elect of God, howe muche the more perfectly they are enobled with
the light of glory, and by the ſame il [...]uſtration or nobleneſſe, the more
conformable made: So muche the more ſharpe contemplacion haue they of the
deuine eſſence, and in the ſame contemplacion the more are they delighted.

1\. CORINTH. CAP. 15.

THere is one light of the Sunne, an other light of the Moone, and an other
lyght of the Starres: but euery Starre differeth in hrightneſſe eche from
other, and ſo ſhall the reſurrection of the dead differ one ſoule from an
other.

AVGVSTINVS.

NO inferior, ſhall enuie his ſuperior, euen as now, no other angel inferior,
doo not enuie their ſuperior in heauen: for ſome one ſhall haue a larger gift
of bleſſing, and ſome other a leſſe. So as notwithſtanding what ſo euer gyft,
eyther of them haue in the bliſfull ſtate of heauenly ioy, he ſhall hold him
ſelfe content therewith, and ſhal not at any tyme wyſhe or deſyre for more.
&c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=121)GREGORIVS.

LEt therfore the greatnes of the rewards▪ layd vp for thee in heauen,
encourage t [...]y  [...]oule: but let not the force of the conflict in
Chriſtes fayth terrifie thee: for no one man ſhal be c [...]owned with the ga
[...]l [...]nd of victory, but he that hath rightfully  [...]ought it out to
the vttermoſt.

BERNARDVS.

THat is, y• alone true, and only ioy which is not conceaued of the Creature,
but of the Creator, whiche when a man poſſeſſeth, there is no man ſhal take
the ſame away  [...]rō him. Whereunto, yf we compare all other ſweeteneſſe,
the ſame may be co [...]mpted to a mindful p [...]rſon: al ſweetenes a ſorr
[...]we, eue­ry bit [...]er thing ſweete euery comely thing fil­thy: and fina
[...]ly, whatſoeuer other may ſeeme to delight vs, the ſame in deede is but
gree­uous and intollerable.

PAVLVS.

I Deſire to be diſſolued, and to be with Chriſte.

ORIGEN.

ALL my comforters ſeeme vnto me  [...]e [...]i­ous and burdenſome: They vex
[...] me, but comfort me not: I ſeeke for my Creator, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=122) it is
greefe to me to behold euery Creature.

PSALME. 56.

THis is my reſt, for euer and euer wyll I dwell here, becauſe I haue choſen
the ſame.

Nathles in reſpect of that eternall glory,

All worldly ioy is but fond ianglyng,

And beauty braue is but deformity,

Sweete thinges are ſowre, myrth, very mournyng,

Or what ſo euer other delectable thyng,

All is re [...]uted but payne in compariſon,

And worldly wealth is very vomentyng,

In reſpect of heauenly ſtore of graces many one.

AVGVSTINVS.

COnſider wel, thou faythful ſoule, what in­eſtimab [...]e honor it ſhalbe for
thee to be crowned of the cheefe King of Kinges with his owne handes, and to
be adurned with the Dyadem of eternal glory, not in the doung­hill of this
world, but in the Pallace of Hea­uen, in the ſight of innumerable Ang [...]ls,
and of al the Sainc [...]es, in your ſtoole of immorta­litie, and with
ſplendant royal ornamentes to be inueſted.

Vnde Sapi. CAP. 5.

LTT them receaue the kyngdome of ho­nor, and the Dyadem of dignity, euen at
the handes of the Lord.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=122)AVGVSTINVS.

OH thou my ſoule, yf it be ſo that we muſt needes ſuffer tormentes euery day:
yea, to ſuffer the very horrible hel it ſelfe a long time, ſo that we might
afterwards ſee Chriſt our ſauiour in his glory, and with his ſaintes euermore
accompanied: ſhould we not onely ſuffer all ſorrowe and paine, to be made
par­takers of ſuch glory and good graces?

VINCENCIVS.

BEloued brethren, in the perplexity of this worldly pilgrimage, we ſuffering
the ſo­rowes of our exile, as it were with want of all goodnes are defiled,
and ſuffer the diſpo­ſing of all incombrances, the ſnares of ſinnes laide for
vs in euery place, fearing the ſubtel deceiptes of our enimies: but not
ſufficient, watchfully, or diligently preuenting them as we ought, forbearing
detrimentes and vexa­tions, and not able to ſhake from vs calami­ties,
ſwelling in vices, enclined to vanitie in ſteade of veritie, enduring exile
for our coun­trey, taſte pouertie in ſteade of abundance, vyle thinges for
want of glorious thinges: and doo ſo loue this world with a miſerable
blindnes, or rather fooliſhe madnes, that we are vtterly ignorant of that ſame
glory of the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=123) holy ones
of God: whervnto lyfting the face of our mind and inward man, we then behold
the ioyes of eternal lyfe, that we might ſome what ſurely ſauour in our hartes
the ſweete­neſſe thereof.

AVGVST.

OH that I knew what I my ſelfe am, and what thou art, oh Lorde. Oh yf a man
knewe what him ſelfe were, and what GOD were, he would ſuffer a thouſand
deaths yf it wer. &c.

SAPIENCE. CAP. 3.

BEholde the perpetuall goodnes of the re­ward for ſuch as feare God.

ECCLESIASTI. vltimo.

BEhold wt your eies [...] foraſmuch as I haue laboured a little, and I haue
found great reſt vnto my ſelfe: Let your hart reioyce in his mercie. Be dooing
what you can before the time, and he ſhall geue you your reward in due time.

VVhen humane ſoule her ſelfe ſo dooth demene,

That ſhe loues death, and leaues lyfe ſpirituall,

Both God ſhe then forgetteth quite and cleane,

Vertue diſpiſde, ſhe flowes in ſinnes ſenſuall,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=123)Contemning
Chriſte, obayes to Belyall,

And what her ſelfe is, eke forgetting ſhe,

For heauenly ioy, feeles ſorowes infernall,

For life ſhe taſtes death then perpetually.

Actum Apoſto. CAP. 5.

THE Apoſtles went from out of ſight of the people which gaue counſell, becauſe
they were coumpted woorthy for the name of Chriſte, or in his behalfe to
ſuffer reproches.

AVGVSTINVS.

WE wyll reioyce with the elect of God, and we wyll ſuffer tribulations of the
world with them: for ſurely they that would not imitate the holy ones in this
manner, ſhoulde not attaine vnto their renowne and glory.

1\. CORINTH. CAP. 3.

FOR euery one ſhall receiue his owne re­ward, according to his labour and
trauell: but many for the moſt, not meanyng to liue well, deſire to dye well,
knowyng how preci­ous in the ſight of the Lorde, is the death of his ſainctes.

Is he the God of the Iewes onely? is he not alſo of the Gentiles? yes of the
Gentiles alſo.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=124)CIRHSOSTOMVS
.

IF any man ſhal thincke the way paynefull to liue wel, ſuch a one is the
excuſer of his owne ſlouth and negligence: for yf Mari­ners, and Seafaring men
ſoppoſe the raging floods of the Sea to be threatninges of dan­ger vnto them:
yf the ſeaſon of Winter be thought a hinderance vnto huſbandmen: yf woundes
and ſlaughter of Souldyers ſeeme a thyng tollerable: and yf moſt greeuous
ſtripes and blowes ſeeme thinges eaſie to be borne withal of very champions
them ſelues, for the hope of temporall thinges and tranſi­tory commodities:
much more when heauen is prepared for a rewarde, of the godly we ought not
once to thincke any thing of theſe preſent calamities, neither ought a man to
looke that this way is ſtreyt, but whyther it bringes a man: neyther ought we
to ſeeke for any other beeauſe it is brode, but where the ſame finiſheth.

LVKE. CAP. 9.

AND being bidden to the ſupper, they be­gun euery man to excuſe them ſelues.

BERNARDVS.

FOrgeue vs Lorde, forgeue vs, we excuſe our ſelues, we woorke al againſt ye
graine: [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=124) ſo
as there is ſcarce any man whiche wyl be made practized (as he may w [...]ll
be) in thoſe thynges which parteyne vnto thee. They all ſauour earthly
thinges, they ſeeke that which is theirs, and not that which is partei­nyng
vnto Ieſus Chriſte. They embrace vi­ces, they flee vertues, and they waxe v
[...]le to­geather as the brute beaſt, through filthyneſſe of their ſinnes.

MICHEA. CAP. 7.

THe godly man periſheth vpon the earth, and there is not any one amongſt
menne, that liueth aright. &c.

Reſume thy ſtrength nowe as a knight ſpirituall,

Fyght for the heauen, winne it with diligence,

The  [...]ende, the fleſhe, and vyces mundyall,

Quite to ſubuert, by deuyne ſapience,

If weake thou be, craue God for thy defence,

Hauing good hope by Gods prouiſion,

Through watchfull care, and humble pacience,

VVith tryumph thou ſhalt win an heauenly crowne.

AVGVSTINE.

THere ſhal be the cheefe ſecuri [...]ie, the ſafe tranquility, the tranqiul or
ſafe ſweetenes, the ſweete felicitie, the happy eternitie, the eternall
bleſſedneſſe·

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=125)BERNARDVS.

OH heauenly Citie, thou ſafe M [...]nſion place, a countrey fully c [...]n
[...]eyning wh [...] ſo euer may be delightful▪ a people without murmuring,
quiet inhabitance, men hauyng no neede of any thing.

ORIGEN.

THE deuine bountie of the moſt higheſt, ſhal repleniſhe all the receptacle of
the ſoule with all goodneſſe: that is to ſay, the angry and irefull ſoule with
power and dig­nitie: the greedy and couetous ſoule, wi [...]h de­lightes: and
the reaſonable ſoule, with wyſ­dome, that there may therein appeare pow­er
without contradict [...]on, dignity without compariſon.

PROVERBIORVM. CAP. 1.

THE feare of the Lorde, is the Well of lyfe.

AVGVSTINE.

LET the loue of this preſent Wo [...]lde de­part from thee, wherein no man is
ſo borne that he may not dye, and let the loue of the worlde to come take
place in thee, wherein al men are made liuing, ſo as thence foorth they ſhall
not dye, where no aduerſitie
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=125) ſhall
trouble thee, and no gree [...]es diſquiet thee, but whereas euerlaſtyng ioy
and glad­neſſe raigneth for thy perpetual comfort.

ESAI. CAP. 6.

THe [...] ſayd I, Lorde how lon [...], H [...] anſwered, vntyl the Cities be
vtterly waſted without inhabitantes. &c.

ESAI. CAP. 35.

THey ſhall obteyne ioy and gladneſſe, and ſorowe and lamenta [...]ion ſhall
flee from them.

PSALME. 119.

OH howe good is the God of Iſrael vnto ſuch as are true of hart.

Remember man this ſolace ſhalbe ſure,

Altogeather voyde of worldly variaunce,

It ſhall without dreade or diſtance ay endure,

But in this lyfe is no continuance:

Ritches, pouertie, lyfe, and death, are but a traunce,

VVherefore in this worldly mutable eſtate,

Let vs ſeeke to liue after God his ordinaunce,

Leaſt of that laſting blis, we make our ſelues fruſtrate.

DEVTERONO. CAP. 3.

MOYSES ſayd vnto the chyldren of Iſrael. Conſider, that this day I haue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=126) ſet before
thee in thy ſight, both lyfe and good: and of the contrary part, death and
euyll.

Sequitur.

I Take this day, Heauen and Earth to witneſſe, that I haue ſet before you
lyfe, and good, bleſſing, and curſing: chooſe you therefore lyfe, that you may
lyue.

I marueyle, and greatly marueyle, that man (whiche aboue others is a creature
en­dued with reaſon) dooeth not in any thyng followe the iu [...]gement of
reaſon, deſpi [...]yng wholeſome thynges, and embraſing daunge­rous thinges,
ſeekyng and deſyring deadly and hurtfull thinges.

OH eternall GOD, what is the cauſe of ſuche dotyng foudneſſe in man: what
reaſon is there of ſuch fooliſhneſſe and mad­neſſe: Why dooeth he deſyre the
death of the ſoule with ſo wicked a hart. &c.

Nowe Heauens and Earth for witnes in I call,

How God diſpoſeth for mans direction,

Perpetuall payne, and ioy celeſtiall,

Vertue, vice, health, and perdition:

Put to our choyſe by free election,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=126)VVherefore
our hartes and eyes lets eleuate,

To God, the geuer of all grace deuine,

Of him to craue, that he the fyrme eſtate,

Of laſtyng bliſſe would graunt vs all in fine,

¶ FINIS Of the Contemplacion for SONDAY.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=127)

## 8\. Per Authorem.

Namque huius mundi fallacis gaudia vitae,

Et quibus exuere ſe debet omnis homo,

Sunt miſerand [...]a ni [...]is, vexant mortalia corda▪

Virtutum faciunt quemlibet immemorem.

Quos igitur Chricti baptiſma ſacrū renouauit,

Librum hunc perlegite, qui facit eſse ſacros:

Quid Iusto prodest, aut quid peccator egebit,

Si Libet inſpicere, vos docet istud opus.

> Soli Deo Gloria.

## Appendix A

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=20425&page=127)

Here endeth this woorke of Contemplacion, fyrſt printed in Latine at
Weſtminſter, the yeere of our Lord God. 1499. and nowe newly engliſhed and
prin­ted at London, by H [...]gh Singleton, dwelling in Creede Lane, at the
ſigne of the gyl­den Tunne. Neare vnto Ludgate. Anno. 1578.

_[figure]_

[Home](/)

Date: 1578  

