## (unknown project)

# Arisbas, Euphues amidst his slumbers: or Cupids iourney to hell Decyphering
a myrror of constancie, a touch-stone of tried affection, begun in chaste
desires, ended in choise delights: and emblasoning beauties glorie, adorned by
natures bountie. VVith the triumph of true loue, in the foyle of false
fortune. By I.D.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=1)

ARISBAS, Euphues amidſt his ſlumbers: Or Cupids Iourney to Hell.

DECYPHERING A MYRROR of Conſtancie, a Touch-ſtone of tried affection, begun in
chaſte deſires, ended in choiſe delights: And emblaſoning Beauties glorie,
adorned by Natures bountie.

VVITH THE TRIVMPH OF TRVE Loue, in the foyle of falſe Fortune.

By I. D.

Eſt aliquid leuibus depingere ſeria  [...]gis.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Creede, for Thomas Woodcocke, and are to be ſold
at his ſhop in Paules Church-yard. 1594.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=2)

## TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIP­full Maiſter Edward Dyer Eſquire, the Maecenas of
worth, and mirror of all admi­red perfections.

WEll might Telamonian Aiax (Right worſhipfull) a Peere of the peerleſſe
Iliade, and owner of the ſeuen-fold target, ſtout­ly oppoſe himſelfe to
inuading Hector, that vaunted his drea­ded proweſſe, backed by ſuccor of the
gods, and ſtrongly repulſe the thick-darted Troian fires from their
endaungered nauy, the ſole ſtaie of their then-doubted return, hauing for his
vigo­rous arme ſo maſſy a bulwarke, & for his valiant heart ſo man-like a
bodie. And (ſi magnis com­ponere parua licebit) in like ſort I, ſhrouded
vn­der the ſhadow of your worſhips winges, haue therfore the more boldly
aduentured to thruſt into the open light, this mine abortiue iſſue, the frute
of ſome fewe idle houres, ſith after many thoughts, I could not excogitate any
more plea­ſing [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=3)
recreatiō wheron I might beſtow times of leaſure, hoping that for the common
good li­king which all men conceiue of you, and for the generall good ſpeeches
which all men vſe of you, they will the better cenſure of my dooing, when they
ſee your worſhippes name to whoſe worth this worthleſſe Pamphlet is entitled,
ſtā ­ding in the front as a ſtrong fort of defence, to ſhield me from the
deſcanting verdites of ſuch vnfriendly readers, which conceiting the Au­thors
entent amiſſe, may wreſt his meaning by wrōg cōiectures, & frō the ſowre
cēſures of the ouer-curious Moraliſts of our age, which glory to be termed
the new-vprearers of the lōg ago confuted Stoical Apathy, although theſe
harſh enſuing lines merit no ſuch high protectiō, ſith they are not ouer-
curiouſly labored: for I deem it mere folly to make a trifle a labor, or my
plea­ſure my paine: and they may be tearmed the worke of a ſlumbring, rather
then of a wakefull Muſe: yet I haue obſerued that Poetical method in my
diſcourſe, which the beſt & moſt appro­ued Authors of the ancienteſt and moſt
famous languages haue alwaies vſed & allowed, begin­ning in Medio, & afterward
at occaſions, vnfol­ding former accidents. Howſoeuer, if theſe the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=3) ſapleſſe
frutes of greene youth, & pithleſſe bloſ­ſomes of a ſimple Authors vnripe wit,
purchaſe ſuch fauor & acceptance as I deſire, though they deſerue not, I ſhall
be emboldened to raiſe my Muſes note that now yeelds harſh Muſick, to an
higher key, a fairer frute of my better ordred va­cant houres, & manifeſt my
dutie to your wor­ſhip in ſome matter of greater import, then a ſu­perficiall
toye: for I iudge it the extremitie of folly to trouble the worlde with heapes
of tri­fles. But fearing to grow offenſiue through te­dious interrupting of
your worſhippes ſerious affaires, and humbly crauing pardon of mine audacious
enterpriſe, I ende, wiſhing to your worſhip manie daies of happineſſe in this
life, and heauen in the other life.

Your Worſhips moſt firmely deuoted in all dutie and ſeruice, Iohn Dickenſon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=4)

## To the Gentlemen-Readers.

LEarned and curteous Gentlemen, Al­though the whiteſt Swanne & ſweeteſt of
Apolloes muſicall birdes, hath put an endleſſe periode to his euer-liuing
lines, being preuented by vntimely death the Herauld of ouer-haſtie deſtiny,
though he the honour of Art & hope of Armes, Mineruaes nourſe-childe, and
beloued Secretary to the ſacred Muſes, was in the ſpring-time of his glorie,
raiſed from below to reigne aboue: yet as his heroique ſpirit diſrobed of the
periſhing habit of mortalitie, ſwiftly paſſing through the inferior orbes,
hath aſcended to the Em­pyre heauen, participating eternall ioyes in the
habitation of the bleſſed, and doth with happier eyes view the glorious light
of the Deitie, and reſting in that blisfull ſeate of his re­poſe, wōders at
heauens huge frame, wherto his high thoghts did alwaies honourably aſpire: So
his Fame winged with de­ſert, ſuted in robes of immortalitie, vanquiſhing
death, try­umphing ouer time, and nothing ſtaied by triuiall ſtoppes, towres
to the cloudes, and not comprehended in ſmal limits, fils the eares of all men
with oft-rebounded ecchoes of his praiſe, & ouerſpreading Europe, nay the
worldes wide conti­nent, as did the flouriſhing vine which ſeemed to diſmaid
A­ſtyages in his ill-preſaging dreame, to couer Aſia with a ſpa­tious ſhade.

If you demaund whom I meane, euen he it is to whom I wil aſcribe no other
titles, thē the world hath allotted, though I cannot duly affoord them as he
deſerues them, yet take thē as I haue placed them in this Engliſh diſtich, a
teſtimonie of [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=4)
the reuerent affection which I beare to the memorie of ſuch a famous Worthie.

Sweet Aſtrophil the ſolace of my pen,

Wonder of worth, and Peere of peerleſſe men.

But who can adde to that which is infinite? or what pen can ſufficiently
expreſſe his praiſe which exceeds the praiſes of al pens, eſpecially of mine,
whoſe ſlender wit treating ſuch an ample ſubiect, feeles want in plentie,
raunging in a large field of copious matter, and being engulfed in an Ocean of
conceit, lies there ouerwhelmed? But ſome may demaund wherto this tendes, to
whom I anſwere thus briefly, framing mine owne Apologie▪ I hope that it ſhall
not miniſter iuſt occaſion of offence to any, that my bluſhing Muſe
reueren­cing the ſteps wherein he traced, and houering aloofe with awe-full
dread, doth yet at laſt warily approach, and carefully obſerue the directiōs
of ſo worthie a guide, & in part, glance at the vnmatchable height of his
heroique humor.

Did not Statius charge his Thebaide to attend with like reuerence, on the
loftie foote-ſteps of the royall Aeneide? But to conclude, I ſhall be full
heire of mine hope, and ſhall eſteeme it no ſmall good hap, if you grace mine
endeuours with fauourable doome, and accept my good-will in lieu of currant
performance. Thus Gentlemen, committing my Pamphlet to your friendly view, and
ſubmitting my ſelfe to your curteous cenſures, I end, wiſhing to you al,
ſeueral good fortunes, and concluding my reſolution in this harſh Epi­gramme,
hatched in codde humour:

Quaeris delicias, faeetiaſque,

Feſtiuoſque iocos? habes quod optas,

Faecunda Aſtrophili petens fluenta,

Late mellifluis referta  [...]iuis.

Quaeris dulce melos, ſales; & omnes

Verborum veneres? habes quod optas,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=5)Foecunda
Aſtrophili petens fluenta,

Paſſim nectareis adaucta lymphis.

Quaeris ſuauiculi nouos lepores,

Gazas ingeni▪ tenes quod optas

Faecunda Aſtrophili petens fluenta,

Lauro & littorea ſuperba myrto.

Illi Pierides fuere curae:

Illum Pierideſque Gratiaeque

Curant. Quin petis illius fluenta,

Queis tot lacteoli canunt olores?

At me ſaeuior, inſidere terrae

Cogit Calliope, negatque vela:

Exemit tamen infimo illa vulgo,

Et ſperare dedit placere poſſe.

I. D.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIPfull Maiſter Edward Dyer Eſquire, the Maecenas of worth, and mirror of all admired perfections.
  * To the Gentlemen-Readers.
  * 1\. Ariſbas, Euphues amidſt his ſlumbers, or Cupids Iourney to Hell.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=5)

## 1\. Ariſbas, Euphues amidſt his ſlumbers, or Cupids Iour­ney to Hell.

THe Sunne ſoiourning in his winter manſion, had diſrobed Arcadia of all her
pleaſures, & diſgarniſhed Veſtaes man­tle of delightes variable choiſe,
where­with Flora had in plentie poudred the freſhneſſe of her earſt-gréen hue.
Night ſuted in a duſkie robe of pitchie darke­neſſe, beſieged the globe with
long ſhadowes, while Phoe­bus wanting wonted vigor, did by darting his ſcarce
reflec­ted beames affoord ſmal comfort to the earths encreaſe. So that Arcadia
earſt the ſouereigne ſeate of all content, and ſole place of worlds
perfections, ſéemed now a patterne of the auncient Chaos, wherin all things
(if things) were con­founded. Feldes floureleſſe, trées leaueleſſe, ground
heate­leſſe, brookes ſtreameleſſe, ſprings vnhanted, groues vnha­lowed,
augmented this hue of horror, blemiſh of Europes Paradiſe. The mayden
huntreſſe Arcadiaes patroneſſe, did ſildome trace the plaines guarded with her
troupe of vir­gin-knights, to fixe ſhafts on the flying beaſts, whoſe wont was
in time of heauens more milde aſpect, to grace the fields with her daily
preſence, and when her brothers ſcortching heat tirde her limbs with
faintneſſe, to bath her chaſte bodie in ſome pleaſant brooke. Nor did the
wanton Satyres lightly ſkipping on the painted meades, painted I meane by
Natures workemanſhip, vaunt their bodies agilitie to the Fairy wood-Nymphs.
Pan Arcadiaes Preſi­dent, pent vp himſelfe in his winter-lodging, and the
other [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=6) rurall
powers, ſéeing their glories date ended for that yeare, ſhrouded himſelfe in
the place of his wonted repoſe. In this ſeaſon, a ſeaſon wel fitting his
melancholy thoghts diſtracted with moodie paſſions, Arisbas the mappe of
For­tunes mutabilitie hauing loſt his deareſt Ladie, left his Country,
abandoning the ſtate of a Prince, the hope of a Crowne, the ſucceſſion of a
kingdome, wandred in middeſt of winters rage, ſurcharged with ſorrowe,
lamenting his loſſe, ſéeking his loue, loathing his life, ſince liues ſolace,
loues ſwéetneſſe, had but one and that an hopeleſſe obiect, whoſe want made
him an hapleſſe abiect: while rough Bo­reas winters Hench-man muſtering
legions of ſtormes, ſcourged the plaines with a troupe of tempeſts, and aimed
his violent blaſts at the talleſt trées to loppe their heights pride, and
combatting with his companions, filled the aire with dreadfull noiſe of their
tumultuous encounter, the in­fortunate Prince in whoſe minde Loue martialled
milli­ons of ſtriuing paſſions, wandring alone, (if he be alone) whom Fancie
toſſeth in a boundleſſe Ocean of perplexing thoughts, ceaſed not his trauaile
till the weathers intem­perate furie calmed by heuens milder influence, tooke
truce with Tyme, & ſealed the attonemēt with a ſodain change. But when
Phoebus renuing his yéerely taſke, and denying longer reſidence to ſtormy
winter, had pierced earthes en­trailes with comfortable warmth, opening a
fruitfull paſ­ſage for the iſſue of her wombe, to cloath Pomonaes bran­ches
with Natures bountie, and diapre her owne mantle with Floraes ſenſe-alluring
pomp. Arisbas entred the fron­tiers of Arcadiaes maine continent, where ſéeing
the late hue of horror turned to an heauen of eies happineſſe, he re­doubled
many ſighes drawne from the depth of his wofull hearts centre: for remembring
that Tellus was erſt diſ­mantled, the trées bereaued of their bloſſomes
beautie, earthes naturall defects anatomized by Time, in the place where
froſtie Hyems had diſplaied her ycie trophies, he la­mented to thinke that
theſe the tokens of worlds mutabi­litie,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=6) had recouered
their former flouriſh by ye yeres timely alteration, but his deſperate fortune
had no hope of an hap­pie ſpring to calme the winter of his woe. Drowned in
this déepe meditation, he procéeded penſiue, but he had not walked farre, when
he eſpied a faire broade Oake, whoſe ſpatious branches enuirond the ground
lying vnderneath with a ſhady circle. There hée determined to reſt awhile his
bodie wearied by long iourneyes, and ſomewhat diſ­burthen his ſoule by
diſplaying his ſorrowes. Thether he came, downe he ſate, and fixing his eyes
on the ſtarrie con­caue, began thus to vtter paſſionate complaints, not
limi­ting his laments with diſtinct clauſes, for his mone admit­ted no
methode.

INiurious heauens (quoth hée) hath your influence effec­ted this miſfortune?
Iniuſt Gods, haue you enuying earth ſo rare an ornament, beautified the ſeate
of your a­bode with worlds wonder? Vngentle Cupid, haſt thou déeming my
Timoclea fairer then thy Pſyche, renewed thy doting humor? if ſo, then wert
thou cruell in thy change, but more in thy choiſe, enforcing mée to loue whome
thy ſelfe didſt like. I haue wandered through the earth, aug­menting the
ſprings with ſtreames of my teares, filling the woods with rebounding Ecchoes
of my woes, tracing the plaines with reſtleſſe ſteps, yet haue I miſt
Timoclea, and not finding her, haue loſt my ſelfe. I haue blamed heauen,
ſearched earth, accuſde the Gods, and ſhall Hell excéede the ſcope of my
paſſions impatience? May I not ſurmiſe that Pluto affecting a ſecond wonder,
hath perfor­med a ſecond rape? If ſo, then moſt cruell Monarch of the Ghoſts,
be thy Proſerpine as iealous as I am ioy-leſſe. Doeſt thou triumph in the
poſſeſſion of ſo péereleſſe a pray, and may not I lament the loſſe of ſo
matchleſſe a myrror? Should I excuſe thy fury, or accuſe thy folly? (if it be
folly to be blinded by ſo faire an obiect, the worth of whoſe per­fections
words can not vtter, and thoughts ſcarce compre­hend.)
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=7) O that I might
equall Orpheus in arte as I excéede him in anguiſh: the powerfull vertue of
his heauenly tunes, amaſed furious beaſtes, ſtayed fluent ſtreames, rayſed
ſtones, aſſembled trées, mouing ſenſe in ſenſeleſſe things. Deſcending to the
ſilent vauts of Acheron, hee cauſed ghoſts to grone, ſhadowes to ſighe,
effecting relen­ting thoughts in hels remorſeleſſe iudges: but were I his
péere in that profeſſion, I would do more, enforcing the tyrant not touched
then with ſuch a ſympathy, to leaue his luſt, and graunt me my loue. Tuſh
Arisbas, theſe are fancies, and therefore follies. Timoclea is yet loſt, and
if not found in Arcadia, then for euer loſt. But aye me, what comfort can
Arcadia affoord, from whoſe coaſts the windes fury did violently driue her?
Hath then the Sea gréedie of ſuch rare gaine ſwallowed her, not ſatiſfied with
Helle, nor glutted with Hero? No, but Neptune deſirous of change, hath
receyued her into his watrie Palace, and crowned her Empreſſe of his liquide
Monarchy, com­maunding the Sea-Nymphs to attend on her, the Sy­rens to delight
her with the ſwéeteneſſe of their enchaun­ting harmonie, Dolphins to wafte her
Chariot, Phocae to gard her, and the Tritons to ſound her Maieſtie. Whe­ther
doe I wander? Is this to reſt? Leaue Arisbas, nay, procéede Arisbas, ceaſe to
ſuppoſe, begin to ſorrow, aye me, wretched me, hapleſſe, hopeleſſe, what
meanes may I now conceite, what deuiſe may now be plotted? Héereat hée ſtopt,
and opening the floud-gates of his eyes, diſtilled a ſhowre of teares,
ſupplying his ſpeaches with déepe ſighes. But reſoluing to procéede, hee
behelde as hee loo­ked aſide, one ſomewhat neere him, which was by birth an
Arcadian, and by his habit ſeemed a Shepheard, who ouerhearing the laſt wordes
of the Princes complaints, and ayming (though amiſſe) at the occaſion of his
ſor­rowes, thought that béeing a ſtranger hée lamented the loſſe of his way,
to which imagination applying his words, hée began thus:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=7)Friend, (for ſo
I may tearme you without offence) the day is almoſt ſpent, and the night
dangerous for ſuch as you are, or at leaſt ſeeme to bée, I meane a ſtran­ger,
Accept then a ſimple lodging in my Cottage, with ſuch homely fare, as
Shepheards houſes yeelde, and when to morrowes Sunne ſhall diſplay his faire
(though late forceleſſe) beames, you may proſecute your enten­ded iourney,
wherein, if my directions may further you, you ſhall finde me ready to afford
them.

Arisbas wondering at ſuch rare humanitie harbou­red in thoſe contemptible
wéedes, made a long pauſe as if he had enioynde his mouth to perpetuall
ſilence, at laſt ſhapt this reply.

Friend, (for ſo your proffered courteſie bindes me to tearme you) muſe not
that ſobs interrupt my wordes, or ſorrowes ſeaſon my diſcourſe, which onely
comfort my fates haue aſſignde mée. What I was, I liſt not now repeate: what I
am, you ſée, I grieue. A lodging in your Cottage I gladly accept: your
countrey fare ile thanke­fully receiue. Your directions will be as néedefull
as my diſtreſſe is notable. My bodie wearied much through tra­uaile, requires
longer reſt then one nightes repoſe. My minde wrapped in a Chaos of
confuſions, expects eaſe by earneſt conference. I haue a ſecret to diſcloſe, a
ſorrowe to diſciphre, which while I ſmother in priuate paſſions, I ſhall in
ſtead of comfort reape diſcontent, but by diſcoue­ring my fortune, I may
diſcharge my fancie. And if this double fauour doe procéede from you, then in
requitall of your courteſie, firſt, I beſéech Iupiter Xenius, the patrone of
hoſpitalitie, and protector of ſtrangers, to bleſſe your la­bors, proſper your
attempts, & enrich your ſtore with hea­ped plentie. Next, I vowe by that
bright lampe heauens ornament, that if fortune (as ſhe is neuer ſtable) rayſe
me from ſo lowe an ebbe to the wonted height of my good hap, I will remunerate
your kindneſſe with moſt ample re­compence. For knowe, that I can by birth
challenge what [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=8)
may beſéeme a Prince to clayme. Euery Shepheard is not a Swayne, nor all
priuate that ſéeme poore.

Damon (ſuch was the Shepheards name) ſéeing maie­ſtie in his lookes, grauitie
ſeated in diſguiſe, royaltie ſuted in baſe attire, gathered by theſe probable
coniectures, that he could be of no meane degrée: mooued therefore with a
déeper remorſe, he curteouſly intreated him to repaire to his ſimple lodging,
and remayne there till fortune ſhould conuert her frowns into fauors,
proteſting, that though he could not entertaine him as the qualitie of his
condition required, yet he would ſupply in good will the diſabling defects of
his lowe eſtate. Which wordes wrought ſuch chéerefulneſſe in the heart of
Arisbas, that he yéelded him millions of thanks, and accompanyed him to his
houſe: which, when he entred, he found not gorgeouſly emboſt, yet gayly
trimmed, not courtly, yet comely, though home­ly, yet handſome, and he was
kindly welcommed by Da­mons wife, who gréeted him with a merry countenance,
being by her huſband certified of his fortune. Soiourning there ſome ſmall
time, he ſought by ſundry meanes to a­boliſh the impreſſion of his ſorrowe,
but being vnable to finde eaſe in eaſe, he reſolued to depart, and finiſh his
ſearch by finding his loue, or ending his life. Thus ready to effect his
reſolution, he determined to enforme Damon at full of his eſtate, knowing that
he being both borne and brought vp in Arcadia, could not be ignorant of ſuch
acci­dents as fortune there had acted. As they walked together on a day
through Damons ground conferring of ſundry matters, the heate growing
exceſſiue, they haſted to a coole ſhade, & there ſate downe. Arisbas loth to
omit ſo méete oc­caſion, ſéeing opportunitie friend to his deſire, began thus.

Friend Damon, ſith many reſpects ſhorten my intended reſidence, I haue
reſolued with ſpeede to leaue you, though for euer bound to loue you, my
fortune enforceth the one, your courteſie cauſeth the other. But before my
departure, I will diſcloſe to you a ſecret, which may moue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=8) you to
meruaile, and me to melancholy. A ſecret ſo rare, ſo ruthfull, that euery
periode may effect a paſſion, each clauſe a corroſiue, wherein you ſhall ſée a
world of wonders plotted by loue, and perfourmed by fortune. For know, that
you haue lodged a Prince, whoſe maieſtie maſking in diſguiſe of miſerie,
droupt in a lower ebbe then might ſéeme a decorum in my former dignitie. If
you muſe at this, then marke the reſt, and lend attentiue eare to my tale.

Cyprus of all neighbour Iles the nobleſt, is my fathers Kingdome, the
ſucceſſion of whoſe eſtate, right of birth, and title of inheritance, will by
due claime after his deceaſe, tranſferre to mée. But what auailes it to be
inueſted with a diademe & want delight? When the date of my nonage was
expired, hee deſirous to linke me in ſome honou­rable alliance, determined to
prouide a wife with an ample dowrie, and large hopes of future good haps. Many
Prin­ces of Ionia, and Péeres of Europe, deſirous to inſert them­ſelues into
ſo royall a kinred, and to haue intereſt in ſo noble a Familie, offered their
daughters with large por­tions. But onely the Prince of Lemnos ſped in his
ſuite, whoſe allyance my Father accepted, ſhadowing his pre­tence which was
aymed at hoped profit, for the match was concluded with this condition, that
if the Prince dyed without heire Male (as he then had none, nor may by any
likelihoode hope of any) then the enioying of his eſtate, and poſſeſſion of
his Crowne, ſhould in right of his daugh­ter deſcend to mée. This compact thus
ſubtilly contriued, was by agréement of both our Parents confirmed, ſo that
nothing wanted to finiſh the bargaine and ſtrengthen the contract, but my
conſent, whereof my Father ſeeming to conceiue no doubt, made me priuie to his
proceedings, commanding me to deliuer my reſolution in briefe and playne
tearmes. I, who miſliking his choiſe, would not conforme my thoughts to an
others direction, perceiuing the old mans drift, yet diſſembling my intent,
anſwered [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=9) in
effect thus, that my yeares were fewe, my experience ſmall, my affections
frée, a ſole life beſt fitting my fancie. Yet did I in humilitie ſubmit me to
his diſpoſing, onely crauing a little reſpit to ſummon my ſenſes, and conceite
a change, deſiring him to impute the not liking of ſo ho­nourable an eſtate,
to the imperfections of my youth. He ſuſpecting no fraude in theſe faire
ſpeaches, thought it ſufficient that I was ſo flexible, and referd the times
appointment to mine owne choiſe. But I déeming nothing more diſhonourable then
to meaſure affection by money, or leuell the eye, fancies herault, at a
gainefull, though inglorious obiect, pronounced lucre an hereſie in loue, and
eſtéeming ſuch mercenary thoughts méeter for a pea­ſant than a Prince, would
rather neuer marry then ſo marre. For ſhould I wed mine owne woe? Should I
ac­cept her a ſpouſe, whoſe beautie I beheld not, whoſe beha­uiour I knewe
not, of whoſe worth I was vncertaine, be­cauſe it was vnſéene? How could that
loue be conſtant, that affection permanent, which had no déeper roote then the
parents naked conſent, no ſurer ſeale then a bare ſalu­ting at the firſt
fight? Yet, (ſuch was the inclination of my youth) I earneſtly deſired to fixe
my fancy on ſome fortunate obiecte worthie of a Princes fauour. Many both
gorgeous and gallant Dames attended in my Fathers Court, yet none fit, though
all faire. While fancy com­menced ſuch tumults in my thoughts, there arriued
in Cyprus a noble Epirote, ſurnamed Ariſtophon, a man noble in déede, graced
with all ornaments which nature might afford, or vertue challenge. He was
baniſhed from his natiue ſoyle by tyrannous doome of his vnnaturall
Souereigne, being falſely accuſed to attempt an innoua­tion in the State, and
plot ſome treacherous practiſe with the King of Macedon. For it was vniuſtly
ſurmiſed by ſome, and beléeued by all, that he had conſpired to betray to him
the countrey of Ambracia, whereof he was Preſi­dent, and had annexed it by
force of Armes to the Crowne
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=9) of Epirus.
Although his integritie ſhould haue cleared him from ſuch a crime, yet, (as it
commonly happens) in­nocencie oppreſſed by iniurie could not preuaile: leauing
therefore his vnkinde countrey, deſpairing of returne, yet bearing with
manlike patience the burthen of his exile, he repaired to my Fathers Court,
who reléeued him with princely liberalitie, allowing him an honourable penſion
for maintenance of his eſtate: for hauing oft employd him in weightie
affaires, and finding him fortunate in at­chieuements, he perceiued by theſe
experiments that he was garniſhed with all glories of nobilitie, graue in
coun­ſell, valiant armes: of dauntleſſe courage, ſpotleſſe truth. But leauing
this digreſſion, I will returne to the propo­ſed entent of my diſcourſe. Hée
brought with him his daughter and onely childe named Timoclea, a creature
endued with ſuch ornaments of the bodie, graced with ſuch qualities of the
minde, that it ſeemed nature and ver­tue concurring in one, had conſpired to
make her a péere­leſſe proofe-péece of their vnited perfections: and though
fortune fretting at their fauours ſo largely beſtowed ſought to croſſe their
courteſies with her cruelties, yet could ſhe not blemiſh the bright-ſhining
worth of ſo fa­mous a wonder. But as a ſmall cloude in a cleare day may
ſomewhat ſtayne, not wholy ſtop the Sunnes light, ſo fortunes malice did
rather darken then drowne her merits, in whoſe Iuory browes Chaſtitie ſate
enthronizde as gardian of her lookes, Modeſtie teinting her chéekes with a
vermilian dye of Virgin-red maiden-bluſhes, em­blaſond her a map of mirrors.
Maieſtie whiche beautie claymed, birth challenged, loue commaunded, guided her
geſtures with ſuch decent proportion, as Iuno wanted in the pride of her
glorie, or Minerua in the prime of her pompe. Theſe gifts theſe glories did ſo
enchaunt, enthrall, enforce me, that hauing ſcarce viewde her, I vowde her
mine, or my ſelfe not mine owne, ſuch déepe impreſſions were wrought in mine
affections. Loue hauing wonne
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=10) and wounded
me with mine owne weapons, finding an eaſy entrance into mine heart through
mine eyes, the au­thors of my diſeaſe, and diſcouerers of my deſire,
diſgari­ſond my thoughts of wonted fancies, conuerting my ſo­lace into ſobs,
my delights into deſpaire. I vnable to ſu­ſteine ſo grieuous a burthen,
perceiuing that the more I ſtroue to allay the heate, the more thoſe ſmothered
cinders reuiude in quenchleſſe flames, Flames which Aetna-like boild in my
breſt, reſembling the horrors of Mount Ghi­belloes firie rage, which vomits
millions of vapors, and darts heapes of ſulphur from the glowing centre, being
I ſay torturde with troubles, I reſolued to finde eaſe for my loue, or end for
my life, ſuing to her bountie which had vn­done me by her beautie. I am ſo
briefe in relating my for­tunes, as I was then loth to defer the execution of
mine enterpriſe that ſo highly concernd the hope of my good hap. Finding her
on a time in company with other, I ſingled her from the reſt, my intent not
ſuſpected by any. When we were alone, I hauing awhile dallyed with common
deuiſes to enterteine her with varietie of talke, in the end though I could
not Orator-like paynt my paſſions in figu­ratiue tearmes, nor contriue them
with rhetoricall con­ceipts, yet did I playnely diſcouer my affection,
proteſting my preſent loue, vowing my future loyaltie, producing cauſes,
deſiring comfort, alleadging her worth, my wants, ſeaſoning my words with many
ſighes. She in a cho­lerike humor (but it was a pretty choler) framde a
cour­teous yet cruell anſwere, courteous in her words, enterla­ced with
reuerent ſpeaches, cruell in that vnkinde repulſe, yet kinde rebukes, not
omitting to inſert the reſpect of her owne honor, and the regard of her
fathers ſafetie: but concluding her friendly anger in a calmer veine, ſhe
prof­fered in ſubmiſſion all ſeruice loue excepted and her ho­nour reſerued.
Although the laſt clauſe afforded ſufficient matter for a freſh reply, yet did
her conſtancie ſo confound me, that being vnable to vtter one word, I brake
off our [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=10) parle
abruptly, and ſummoning my fancies to a retreate, I reſolued to attempt a
ſecond onſet, wherein being like­wiſe vanquiſhed by her vertues, yet rather
animated then amated (theſe kinde conflicts kindling not quenching my flaming
paſſions) I attached a third onſet: but hauing therein receiued a ſharper
foyle, I proceeded to a fourth, of all moſt fatall, for ſhe taunted me with
contemptuous tearmes, and yéelding a full denyall, ſealed with a ſtorme of
frownes, ſhe departed, leauing me amid my diſcon­tent plunged in a ſea of
dangerous conceipts, muſing on my miſhaps, meditating on her rigor, deſperate
of all hope, deſtitute of all delights: but my paſſions were ſuch that I could
not conceale them vndiſcouered: ſuch my ſorrows, that I could not ſmother them
in ſilence: thus therefore I vtt [...]red part of my griefe in an extemporall
Sonet.

### 1.1. Arisbas his Sonet.

SHould I accuſe mine eyes that boldly gazed

On that fayre obiect not to be obteyned,

Or blame the worth in Europes wonder blazed,

That them to looke and me to loue conſtreyned?

Eyes for excuſe alleadgde preuailing reaſon,

Heart in extreames on fancies wrong exclaymed:

Hopes ſun-ſhine clowded like obſcureſt ſeaſon,

Yeelds to deſpeire at my misfortunes aymed.

Nature too lauiſh outward graces planted,

Vertue too friendly inward bounties ſowed:

Yet thoſe faire eyes of courteous looks are ſcanted,

And angels hue on tygres thoughts beſtowed.

Tuſh, loue which not alike did wound vs both,

Is cauſe, that I my death-like life doe loath.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=11)But not
ſatiſfyed thus to haue expreſſed my ſorrowe, I did in an odder veine pen an
Elegie without methode or good matter, but as it was I will rehearſe it.

### 1.1. Arisbas his Elegie.

FAint wel I may for I feele enfeebling faintnes about me,

faintnes vpon my lims heart to beſet to beſot.

Loue is a God but a cruell God but a boy but a wanton

blinde but boldly triumphs, proud to be tearmd a tyran.

What ſhal I do? ſhal I ſue to the gods that lodge in Olympus?

there loue ſeated aloft vaunts to be Lord ouer all.

Heau'n yeelds ſmall comfort: him, they do tremble obeying,

and themſelues enthralde cannot alas me releaſe.

What ſhal I doe? ſhal I ſue to the pow'r whome Cyprus adoreth,

loues loue-worthy mother though not a friend to Cupid?

Her doth he wound and ſmiles when her hap Cytherea be­waileth,

how then will he for her yeeld to releeue another?

What ſhal I then? ſhal I ſue to the boyiſh God that hath hurt mee,

hurt and harmd me ſo, that little is my reliefe?

Then wil he vexe mee more til heart more heauily languiſh,

torne as Prometheus fruteful vnhappy liuer.

What ſhal I then? ile ſue to the ſaint whoſe lookes me be­reaued

of liues bliſſe through loue, loue the decayer of hope,

O that beautie ſo rare (but I bluſh to blame ſuch a bountie)

ſhould ſtaine faireſt hue with ſuch a blot ſuch a blur.

Yet wil I try, to the ſaint wil I pray and ſue to be ſuccord,

in whoſe choiſe it reſt mee to relieue to releaſe.

If you miſlike eyther of them, or both of them (as well you may) accept this
for a currāt excuſe, that troubled thoughts
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=11) thwarted with
ſorrowe, can hatch no pleaſant conceipts ſeaſoned with ſwéetneſſe, and where
ſadneſſe houers, no Muſes harbour, but to our purpoſe. This melancholy
(whereof I ſpake before) procured a grieuous maladie, which ſhe at the firſt
ſuppoſed feigned, knowing that I would plot all ſleights, and leaue no
ſubtilties vnaſſaide to circumuent her, but when the Phyſicions report, my
Fathers ſorrowe, the generall rumor bruted through the Courte had aſſured her
of mine eſtate, ſhe thinking it enough to cauſe but too much to continue my
danger, came with her Father to viſit me. How then I was affected, I refer to
their cenſures whoſe fortunes haue reſembled mine. All the powers of my bodie
being tranſferd into mine eyes the contriuers of my then-ſéeing diſcontent,
were employed in viewing her outward glories, and va­luing her inward graces.
When I remembred her laſt tearmes, I trembled at each thought, but weighing
that being endued with all vertues, ſhe could not want that of clemency hauing
the other of courteſie nor be voide of gentleneſſe being garniſhed with far-
deriued gentilitie, I ſuppoſed this the fitteſt time to ſpéede if now I ſpake.
When her father tooke leaue, I craude his daughters longer preſence vnder
pretence of paſſing away the time, ſhe not vnwillingly aſſented though
ſmelling the drift of my demaund, and he both accepted and ratified my
re­queſt, commaunding her to tarrie. When we were alone, I pleaded in effect
thus, though not ſo boldly as before, Firſt, I alleadged that my preſent
ſickneſſe ſo dangerous, my former vowes ſo ſerious, might warrant the truth of
mine vnfeigned paſſions. Next, that I meant not to diſho­nour her by affecting
her, ſith I craude onely to make her my lawfull ſpouſe, which fauor if ſhe
would vouchſafe to afforde, I vowed to incurre all hazards for the preſeruing
of her honor, proteſting to leaue Cyprus, to fruſtrate the pretended mariage
with the Prince of Lemnus his daugh­ter, and liue with her the onely
bliſſefull heauen of my
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=12) life, and
ſtay of mine happineſſe, as baniſht in ſome other countrey till my Fathers
anger were appeaſed and his conſent obteyned, whoſe royall eſtate to me as
eldeſt by right belonging, when I ſhould by ſucceſſion in that farre-renowned
Kingdome fully enioy, I promiſed to inueſt her with a Diademe, and Crowne her
Quéene of my coun­trey, as ſhe was already ſouereigne of my content. I en­ded
my plaints with an humble petition, deſiring her to pittie mine eſtate, accept
my ſeruice, and compaſſionate my ſorrowes, ſith in loue-diſeaſes they onely
can heale which cauſde the hurt. She ſhowring a ſtreame of ſiluer-teares from
thoſe chriſtall fountaines bright lamps of loues light, ſuch as might beſeeme
Venus to ſhead on her déere Adonis, Aurora on her Sonne Memnon, ſhapt this
anſwere.

Pardon (deareſt Lord) the follies of a ſelly mayde, or rather weigh with
indifference the cauſes of her coyneſſe, for ſo you tearme my denyall, which
if folly had effected, or diſdeigne cauſed, I had merited more blame then a
world of puniſhments might expiate. But ſith the reſpect of my Fathers
ſafetie, and the regard of mine owne ho­nour moued me to be ſo rigorous in my
replyes, I hope to finde the more fauour in the offer of my ſatiſfaction,
which with all ſubmiſſion I humbly preſent. As it grieues me to be the author
of your preſent danger, ſo it glads me not a little that in me it reſts (as
you affirme) to cure your diſcontent, and be the happy author of your health,
wherein if mine endeuors may further you, I will not faile in diligence, nor
be ſlacke in my deuoire, but with this condition, that you obſerue your
promiſe of preſer­uing mine honour from all preiudice: then leauing all, and
onely louing you, I will for euer liue with you, but if you violate that vowed
couenant, then is the bargaine cancelled by ſo heinous a forfeit.

Theſe words conteining ſuch comfort, affoording ſuch content to my halfe-
withered hope, did ſo relieue my fain­ting
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=12) ſpirits, that
they recouered their wonted vigor, and I my former ſtrength, being within
ſhort time reſtored to mine health by this good hap. I foorthwith conceiued
meanes for our eſcape, hauing before decréed to paſſe into your Arcadia, and
to remayne there vntill my Fathers anger were appeaſed, knowing that in ſuch
affaires de­layes import more then ordinarie dangers, fearing my Fathers too
haſtie pracéeding in that ill-pleaſing match with the Lemnian Princes
daughter. Being loth to defer time, or dally with fortune, I obſerued this
order in per­fourmance of my plotted enterpriſe. Diſguiſing my ſelfe, I went
on an euening t [...] [...]he Hauen (for the Court was then kept at Famagoſta)
there I met with a Rhodian, which hauing ſhipt his fraught, was readie to
hoiſe ſayle, and determined to touch in the maine of Greece before his
arriuall at Rhodes. Conferring with him a while of triuiall matters, in the
end I diſcloſed my purpoſe, fei­ning my ſelfe an Arcadian, and that my Father
enforced to flye his countrey, had long liued in Cyprus, ſpending the remnant
of his life in baniſhment with mée and my poore ſiſter (for ſo I tearmed
Timoclea) his vnhappy chil­dren, the hopeleſſe companions of his exile, that
being now dead, he left vs ſéely Orphanes, and to vs ſuch ſmall ſubſtance as
hée had, that wée bereaued by death of our deareſt comforte, not knowing howe
to mainteine our ſelues in a ſtrange place with ſo ſmall a portion, were
deſirous to reuiewe our natiue ſoyle, and returne to our deceaſſed fathers
friends. Procéeding, I tolde him that I knewe none fitter to tranſport vs then
himſelfe, prote­ſting to pay whatſoeuer he would reaſonably demaund, if he
would vndertake it as well he might, hauing occa­ſions to touch in the maine
of Greece, ſith in what part ſoeuer of the continent wée were ſet on lande,
wée might haue eaſy paſſage thence into Arcadia. Hée beléeuing my feined tale,
ſéeming to pittie each clauſe of my diſcourſe, or perhaps tickled with deſire
of gaine, offered himſelfe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=13) moſt
willingly to vndertake it, but requeſted a round ſumme, which I granting, gaue
him part in hand, with ſufficient aſſurance for the reſt. Thus the bargaine
being ſolemnly knit betwéene vs, hée wilde mée that I ſhould come with my
ſuppoſed Siſter the next night very late, béeing the time prefixed for his
departure, and tolde me ſecretly in friendly ſort, as one ſtranger to an
other, that hée had aboord certayne vnlawfull and vncuſtomed wares, the ſale
whereof would be very gaynefull to him, but if it were reuealed, would worke
his vtter vndoing, which cauſed him attempt meanes to launch thence by
ſtealth. Nothing could chance more  [...]eſpondent to my wiſh, who deſired to
depart priuily. Leauing him therefore and returning to the Court, I repaired
to Timoclea, certified her of my procéedings in all points, willed her to
remem­ber her vowed promiſe and plighted faith, enfourmed her of all things
néedefull to be done. She not failing mine expectation, promiſed her
readineſſe at the appointed time. I leauing her, packt ſuch treaſure as I
could gather in haſte, and attended the aſſigned houre, which being come,
taking her with me, I came to the Hauen, and béeing ſpéedily conueyed aboord,
found all things ready, anchors weighed, ſayles ſpread at our comming: within
ſhort ſpace we got out of the Hauen, and before morning were farre enough from
the coaſt of Cyprus. Foure dayes wée ſayled merrily, hauing a luſty gale in
the poope, which draue vs gallantly forward. On the fift day towards eue­ning
we deſcryed land, the ſhores delightfull hue affoor­ding vs a pleaſant
proſpect. Our maiſter iudging it ſome part of Greece, ſuppoſing that I which
had feinde my ſelfe natiue in the continent, could not be ignorant of the
coaſt, deſired me to goe on ſhore, ſearch the land, and bring him word whether
I knewe the countrey. I of all moſt deſi­rous to leaue the ſea, fearing
purſuite of my fathers po­wer, condeſcended to his requeſt. Being ſet on land,
pa­cing vp and downe a while, I was drowned in viewe of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=13) thoſe
delights which that fertile ſoyle yéelded, déeming that it was Arcadia, or
ſome place bordering on it, partici­pating like pleaſures with it. Then began
I to conceit varieties of imagined bliſſe, iudging this a fit place for mée
and my Timoclea to reſt in a while, till ſhe had reco­uered her health, being
much impaired by her ſea-iour­ney. Hetherto Fortune ſéemed friendly to mine
attempts, but now, leaſt ſhe ſhould be vnlike her ſelfe, ſhe obſcurde the ſun-
ſhine of my happineſſe with clouds of her incon­ſtancie, for the wauering
Goddeſſe doomd my ſolace to be thwarted with eternall ſorrowes. In a moment
the windes rayſing the Sea in billowes, ſecluded mée from returne. He which
attended my comming in the Boate, fearing to be intercepted by the ſtorme,
rowed backe in haſte, leauing me, yet did hée hardly eſcape drowning. I though
too late weighing the weathers change, haſted backe, but miſſed the Boate, and
him that guided it. Then I beheld the Ship toſſed amid thoſe tempeſtuous
waues, ſometimes hoiſed to heauen, preſently plunged in the Oceans deapth.
Accurſed eyes the vnhappy beholders of my deareſt Timocleas troubles whereof
ſhe was vn­worthy, I too worthy which brought her to this perill, for whoſe
danger drouping more then dreading mine owne, I made ſignes to them aboord,
which anſwered me with the like, intimating as I did gueſſe their deſire and
readi­neſſe to take me in when the ſtorme ſhould ceaſſe. I ſomewhat comforted
with this colde hope, ſate downe néere the ſhore looking for a calme. Dayes
light decli­ning, nights darkeneſſe ſhadowed the earth, but in this obſcuritie
of all things I continued my abode, expecting dayes returne. But when Phoebus
poſting from the An­tipodes had remounted the Eaſterne hill, and burniſhed
heauen with his glittering beames, I hoping to ſee my wiſhed obiect, viewed
onely the voyd Sea. What ſhould I then do? exclaime? I did it: accuſe? whome?
the Gods? I would not: Fortune? I durſt not, for I hoped her fa­uour
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=14) might be
regayned. But ay me, my hope was force­leſſe, becauſe fruteleſſe. The windes
fury was aſſwaged, but no Ship ſéene, no hope of returne. I ſpent the ſecond
night in this booteleſſe expectation, which being paſt, and day reſtored, I
ſummond my thoughts to conſult, and de­termind ſith vaine ſorrowe without
ſearch could not a­uayle, to ſéeke her my loſt loue, and finde her if the
earth affoorded her. Riſing in this reſolution, and haſting by the coaſt,
hauing mine eyes alwayes towards the Sea, I came to a deſolate and almoſt
diſpeopled Hauen, where finding a Cretan Pinneſſe ready rigd, and furniſhed
for departure, I ſpéedily embarqued my ſelfe therein, but neither in my
paſſage at Sea, nor in my ſearch on land after my arriuall, could I finde any
certaintie of my de­ſire. Paſſing thence by Ship to Rhodes, I had like
ſuc­ceſſe, for expecting there moſt comfort, I found leaſt con­tent. Though
there diſcouraged, yet I drouped not, but proceeded: no Ile in the Ionian or
Aegaean Seas was by me vnſéene or vnſearched. Failing in theſe, I came by Sea
to Helleſpont, thence to Epirus, thence to Ma­cedon, then forward into
Theſſaly, from Theſſaly to Thrace, enquiring diligently in all the Port townes
of theſe Prouinces, and not finding any comfort, not hea­ring any newes of
what I moſt deſired, I entred into Arcadia, and met happily with you amid my
laments. Thus haue you heard the ſumme of my ſorrowes briefe­ly related,
whereto if you can affoord ſuch eaſe as I expect, you ſhall not onely ſaue the
life and ſalue the ho­nour of a diſtreſſed Prince, but make him of all moſt
fortunate. Héere words melted into teares, teares that made a periode to his
plaints. Damon halfe in a paſſion after ſome pauſe replyed thus.

The ſtrangenes of your diſcourſe hath ſo amazed me, that I ſcarce knowe howe
to anſwere. I ſhould deriue my beginning from crauing pardon for ſo homely
en­terteyning ſo great a perſonage: but the ignorance of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=14) your eſtate
affoords ſufficient matter of excuſe to ſhield mée from reproach. Yet if the
ſequele of my report doe in any ſort ſatiſfye you, I requeſt that the ſolace
which you get thereby, may in part recompence thoſe former defects.

When our laſt Autumne the yeares moſt deſired ſea­ſon, had rendered Earths
tribute with heaped plentie of encreaſe, Aegon and Damaetas, both Arcadians,
by pro­feſſion Shepheards as I am, walking on the downes not farre from the
Sea, while Titan poſting to plunge his firie Chariot in Thetis lappe had
gladded Oceanus with his returne, walking I ſay and ouerlooking their Swaynes
that gathered the flockes to pen them in the foldes, they ſawe a farre off one
running towards them, ſéeming by ſignes to requeſt their tarriance. At his
approach they behelde him a goodly youth of comely feature, and endued with
ſuch rare beautie, as is ſéel­dome ſéene in any of our ſexe. The ſelly lad
breathleſſe with running, ſpeachleſſe, and almoſt heartleſſe through feare,
fell downe at their féete. They hauing graunted him ſome reſpit to ſettle and
recouer himſelfe, gently tooke him vp and courteouſly demaunded his eſtate,
and the cauſe of his ill hap. He which panting for breath ſtop­ped oft in his
tale, and could not make a long diſcourſe, briefely told them, that hauing by
hard fortune left his Countrey, he was taken by Pirats, amongſt whome he had
long led a miſerable life, being moſt barbarouſly handled, they ſometimes
alluring him with faire promi­ſes, ſometimes terrifying him with ſharpe
menaces, but no way able to winne him to their wills, or moue him to ſatiſfye
their beaſtly luſt. Oft he curſed his worthleſſe beautie, ſo he tearmed it,
that had cauſed that wretched bondage, wherein he had endured ſo many
troubles, con­tinuing reſolutely in his chaſt conſtancie. Thus much he
diſcouered, and deſired them to queſtion no farther of his eſtate, but
earneſtly beſought one of them, whome
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=15) it ſhould ſo
pleaſe, to enterteyne him as his ſeruant, and promiſed to doe his duetie with
all deuoire of dili­gence. Aegon the wealthier of the two, a man of ap­prooued
honeſtie enterteined him, tooke him home, and ſince that time hath vſde him
not as a ſeruant but a ſonne, for hauing no childe he purpoſeth to make him
his heire. When the fame of this wonder, and the fortune of his arriuall was
bruted through the countrey, Aegons houſe was frequented with troupes of
Arcadians luſty Gal­lants, and dainty Girles. Raniſhed with the viewe of ſo
rare a creature, they all ſayde that eyther Hyalus béeing retranſformed, had
returned to grace Arcadia, or Cupid ſhrowded in diſguiſe of mortall ſhape, was
come to fire their hearts with newe flames. Thus was this wonder admired of
all, loued of Shepheards, and liked of Laſſes. Happy ſéemed the Swayne that
could enioy his company, prowde was the Girle that could for a louers glaunce
receiue a friendly looke. Among the reſt, Dorylus an Heard-man, doting more
déepely then became a Neateheard, aſſaying all meanes poſſible, yet finding no
meanes poſſible to compaſſe his deſire, at laſt reſolued to woe him with
offers, try him with preſents, and tempt him with gifts: for déeming loue a
couetous humor, hée thought this the onely point for his purpoſe. Béeing in ſo
odde a veyne, preſuming to fore­ſée his owne ſucceſſe, he plotted his ſuppoſed
fortune in a Poeme, which béeing common in euery Shepheards mouth, I will nowe
recite, that you may iudge howe cunningly he could contriue his fancy in a
fiction.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=15)

### 1.1. Cupids iourney to Hell.

LOue leauing heau'n gan poſt to Stygian lake,

And being landed on the farther ſhore,

For Plutoes palace did his iourney make,

To view his vncles Court and royal ſtore.

Thus hauing crept from mothers ſight by ſtealth,

He welcom'd is with pompe by bloodleſſe ghoaſts:

And hels grim tyran greeting him with health,

His royalties to powre-full nephew boaſts.

Hauing viewd each ſtrange hue of monſtrous ſhape,

They feaſted with great iollitie in hell:

And ſawc'd their meate with ſtore of preſſed grape,

Till wine did wit and ſenſe from them expell.

Sleepe cauſde by fumes to their ore-charged braines,

Did ſeaze on both: firſt Pluto tooke a nap:

Next, Cupid (thus his quaffing moode conſtraines)

Laie downe to reſt him, dreading no miſhap.

In haſt the fondling from his ſhoulders threw,

His deare bought quiuer and his fatall bowe:

Faire Proſerpine came in and at the view,

Forthwith exclaimde, theſe, theſe haue wrought my woe.

Theſe, theſe cauſde me depriude of wonted ioy,

T'inhabit Hell theſe firde the leachers luſt:

But ſith they are miſguided by a boy,

I will commit them to an others truſt.

This ſaid, came Plutus headlong tumbling in,

Plutus the god of Coyne blinde as the other:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=16)Whom with
faire words the guilefull queene did win,

T'vſurpe thoſe gifts and ſeeme loues ſecond brother:

At firſt he fearde, at laſt he was delighted,

With vſing them and ſmiled oft to thinke:

How mens affections by thoſe ſhafts excited,

Obeide his doome which loue with gold did linke.

Cupid awaking miſſ'd the dreaded ſignes

Of godheads might: ſtrange paſſions did him toſſe:

He wreathes his armes in folds and them vntwines,

Thus childiſhly he mones his hapleſſe loſſe.

He wept, he fled, in hell he durſt not hide him,

Grieude with the murmure of ſo many ſoules,

Neere heau'n he dares not come leaſt Venus chide him.

What ſhould he do whom Fortune thus controules?

Foule fall the wagge that loſt ſo rare a iewell

Long may he lurke that could no better gard

His fathers toile, his mothers pride, the fewell,

Which for hearts wracke, eyes glaunſes haue preparde.

Sith then the god of gaine vſurps loues roome,

I will with gifts make ſute for gracious doome.

You may perhaps doubt the coherence of this deuiſe, thinking it ſtraunge that
Plutus ſtumbled in headlong at that inſtant, no former cauſe of his haſtie
comming being pretended: but marke my briefe report, which being heard, his
inuention may ſéeme plauſible.

In this the laſt and worſt time wherein men carry gol­den thoughts though it
be an iron age, Plutus perceiuing the generall deſire of wealth ſetled in all
hearts, thought himſelfe ſo great a god as the beſt, ſince his giftes were ſo
eſtéemed of the moſt. Meaning therefore more benignely
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=16) to expreſſe
his bounties royaltie, he lent the vſe of his chief ſeruants to ſundrie his
well-willers, pretending thoſe the onely acceptable ſacrifice to obtain his
fauour, their names were Couetouſneſſe, Deceit, Periurie, and the Séede of all
miſchiefe, that Arch-ſinne Vſurie. Hauing thus prepared a path-way, he
fancying greater glories due to his diuelliſh deitie, diſcouered himſelf in
the Weſt, ſuppoſing that theſe Coyne-cormorants, theſe Money-mongers his
godheads chiefe pillers, would runne in heapes to adore him, and fill the
earth with Temples erected in honor of his name: But his hope wanted ſucceſſe,
for theſe odde companions hea­ring that his iollitie had aſcended from his
infernall lod­ging to frollike with them, contriued meanes to catch him, and
hauing layd hold on him, they hampred him ſo, euerie one catching a péece,
that he erſt in hell a god, was now on earth a priſoner, mangled and martired
by thoſe his fauou­rites, locked in great cheſts ſtrengthned with yron barres,
kept ſo cloſe that the poore god was almoſt ſtifeled, gaſping oft for breath,
but being blinde, he felt no want of light, though cloſed in darkeneſſe where
the glorie of his former beautie was blemiſhed by ruſt. But when Saturnes
blacke ſonne had ſent his pourſiuant Death to ſeaze on theſe huck­ſters for
whome a ſtately bath was prepared in euer-bur­ning Phlegeton, the children not
liking their fathers cloſe fingring, reſtored Plutus to his libertie but with
his loſſe, for they brought him from priſon to torture, ſetting him on the
racke, ſtretching his ioyntes ſo, that he poſſeſſed more roome then Tityus,
whoſe bodie couered ſo many acres, for they made him reach or rather retch to
the benefites of all thoſe whom they glutted with inordinate giftes, and they
had almoſt diſmembred him, for they drew him ſo  [...]rie and ſucked ye marrow
ſo néere (the quinteſſence of  [...] ſubſtance being beſtowed on the baſeſt
though beſt-ſ [...]ing commo­dities) that the leane god had nothing  [...] but
ſkin & bone. At laſt, winding himſelfe from their, he met in this per­plexitie
with his olde friend Fru [...]itie, which being an
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=17) expert
Chirurgian ſet him togither againe: hauing reco­uered his legs, away he
trotted amaine wingd with feare, dreading euer that ſome of thoſe mad
companions were at his héeles, and neuer thought himſelf ſecure vntill he came
to hell, but he left his ſeruant Treaſure behinde him on the earth, with a
thouſand curſes to them which kept it: Of which one was, that they ſhould
neuer be quiet in minde: Another, that the brats of Vſurers ſhould be alwaies
ſicke of the looſe diſeaſe, neuer able to holde any thing long.

Thus haue you heard the cauſe of his headlong ſtum­bling in, but here I will
preſume to comment on the con­ceit of Dorilus. Plutus did gladly  [...]cept
this offer of Proſer­pina, hoping thereby to recouer his ſeruant Treaſure, for
which purpoſe he vſed to wound louers after Cupids faſhi­on, with the gold-
tipped ſhafts, but he pierced the hearts of their beloued obiects with leaden
headed arrowes, though garniſhed with a thin couerture of golde, which
intimated that they carried Mercinary affectiōs, not vouchſafing them any
fauour which brought them no fée. But belike the god himſelfe ment to ſhare
ſtakes, and by that kinde of tribute which they paied, to recouer in part his
ſeruant Treaſure, through them to whom he had bene the author of ſo
profita­ble a profeſſion. Hereat Arisbas ſmiled, and Damon ending this his
firſt merry digreſſion, procéeded thus on a ſecond.

This was not his firſt experience of repulſed affection and vnregarded
paſſions, for before this wonders arriuall, he extremely doated on Palma a
faire ſhepheardeſſe, which was more delighted with obſeruing Dianaes orders,
then accepting his offers. He halfe in deſpaire, pend a conceit as he thought
perſuaſiue, thinking that could moue her, which did rath [...]r mad her, and
thus it was.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=17)

### 1.1. Dorylus his Ode, in Engliſh Sapphiques.

TEll me thou faireſt of al earthly creatures

Faire by thy vertue, by thy beautie bleſſed,

Tell me what moues thee to refuſe my ſeruice

ſleightly regarded?

Loue of a ſole life to be like Diana

May perhaps moue you, but I wiſh ye would not:

Would not or could not, but I hope ye will not,

ſtil be reſolude ſo.

If to the Forreſts, to the ſhadie thickets,

Fancie doth moue thee to repaire alone thus,

If to the wide woods, to the craggie mountaines,

or to the vallies,

Then wil I ſpeed mee to the groues vnhanted,

Where Satyres ſport them to the Fairie wood-Nymphs▪

Nimbly now skipping, then againe repoſing,

neare to the fountaines.

Like not a ſole life: Venus is reuenging,

Feare ye not frownings of an angrie goddeſſe?

Scorne not her heſts then: be no foe to Nature,

Loue is a pleaſure.

Beautie decaieth, yet is no chiefeſt

Grace of a Virgin, yet it is required:

Life is vncertaine. Who can hold a ſhadow

Loſt in a moment?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=18)Such was his
conceit wherein he ſped not as he expec­ted the iſſue of his fortune, yet loth
to diſgrace himſelfe, to ſalue that ſuſpition which might intimate want of
perfec­tions in him, he thus feined the cauſe of that repulſe.

### 1.1. Dorylus his Ma­drigal.

Loue vowde himſelfe my friend and choſe his time

To wound faire Palma: Cynthia him eſpide,

As wantonly the god did climbe

To fit his aime, and ſware to worke his ſmart,

If he preſum'd to pierce ſo chaſte an heart:

And therewithall from Mayden ſide

She drew a ſhaft: away the god gan flie

With wings faſt wau'd, nor durſt the wanton ſcant

Or ſlacke his courſe amid the skie,

Thus he his will and I my wiſh muſt want.

But let vs returne to his laſt wooing: hauing thus deſcanted  [...]ndeceiuing
hope, hée attempted to effect his deuice, but failing in the execution, being
reiected with ſeuere lookes, finding frownes in ſtead of fauours, he felt ſuch
déepe impreſſion of ſorrow, that ſince that time of his repulſe, he hath led a
diſcontented life, ſpending his daies in penſiue meditations. His fortune or
rather miſfortune not ſo rare as by his laments made ruthfull, is memorized by
vs in a prouerbial byword: for we term il ſucceſſe in loue the deſtinie of
Dorylus. Thus you haue heard, what I can diſcourſe concerning this wonder, a
name well fitting his perfections, modeſtie of behauiour, maieſtie of lookes,
come­lineſſe not common, faireneſſe of face, eyes lyke Starres, browes
ſometimes furrowed with prettie frownes, yet alwayes beauties bowre: frownes
reſembling thoſe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=18) ſiluer
ſteppes in the milke-white way leading to Ioues palace, chéekes cherrie redde,
yet was this louely tincture circled with a mayden white, ſuch neate
proportion of all parts, that I want a world of tearmes to emblaſon their
perticular praiſes, and will therefore ende with this affer­tion, which I dare
auouch againſt all men, that Nature in framing him hath wronged her owne ſexe,
bereauing it of ſo great a glorie.

Arisbas galled to the quicke with Damons wordes, ho­uering betwéene hope and
feare, knew not how to ſurmiſe, what to ſuppoſe, for he felt a worlde of
melancholy moti­ons muſtring tumults in his fancie. Weighing the report of
that wonders beautie, he thought it could be no other then his Timoclea, but
when he remembred the diuerſitie of the ſexe, he was againe diſcouraged, till
hope reſcuing his drouping paſſions with timely ſuccours of happie com­fort,
bad him imagine that as loue doth oft effect rare ſtra­tagems, ſo he might
proue his power miraculous in this one thing, ſhadowing the ſexe for his
auaile. Being in theſe dumpes he held a ſeſſion in his thoughtes, whereto he
aſſembled all his powers, and therein reſolued to ryd himſelfe of this doubt
by a ſpéedie view of that far-renow­med wonder. For this purpoſe hée enquired
of Damon the name and diſtance of the place where hée remained, who anſwered,
that hée dwelt farre of in the Southerne parts of Arcadia, and that it were
[...]lly to wearie himſelfe with a néedeleſſe iourney, ſith if hée woulde
continue his abode but nine dayes, hée might with leſſe trauaile, and in a
full aſſembly view him at eaſe. The Prince demanded how, The ſhepheard after a
long pauſe beganne thus, gracing his relation with an vnexpected diſcourſe.
When our Country was haunted with the almoſt-daily preſence of heauens high
inhabitantes, though now bereaued of ſo great a good through our owne
ingratitude. (For Iupiter courted Caliſto in Dianaes ſhape, robbing her of her
dea­reſt Iewell, and Apollo maſtered or rather martyred by
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=19) Cupid, for
his high contempt purſued ſwift Daphne win­ged with chaſte deſires.)

There liued in Arcadia a moſt faire Ladde famous as the reſt, I may well terme
him faire, a terme too ſlen­der to emblazon his beauties woorth. Much I muſe
(yet I néede not muſe, for Iupiter poſſeſſed Ganimede alreadie) that he made
not him a praie for his pleaſure. But ſith I cannot fully expreſſe his
perfections, I wil rehearſe to you the deſcription of him couched by an
Arcadian pen-man, in a briefe Ode, a conceit wel knowne to all ſhepheards, and
by them oft recited.

### 1.1. The deſcription of Hyalus in an Ode.

GAnimede th'Idaean boy,

Second glorie of the day:

Phrigiaes wonder fathers ioy,

Loues content,  [...]oues wiſhfull pray,

Blith Adonis beauties treaſure,

Venus darling, Fancies fire,

In whoſe lookes were heauens of pleaſure,

Fruite too faire of foule deſire:

Both theſe would, though both were rare,

Both the mirrors of their time:

Bluſh if they ſhould make compare,

With this wonder of our clime.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=19)

In whoſe eyes loue lodgd his darts,

But he did with glaunſes ayme them,

That hee might ſubdue all hearts,

And his owne by conqueſt clayme them.

Such his face ſuch was his ſtature,

Locks reſembling burniſht golde,

That his like, aſtoniſht nature,

Framd not ſince of earthly moulde.

Nature at her ſelfe amazed,

O what influence then did guide her,

Sith in want ſuch worth was blazed,

Worth which heau'ns haue ſince denide her?

May not then this louely boy,

For he was a louely creature,

Well be tearmd Arcadiaes ioy,

Bleſt in bearing ſuch a feature?

Well he may and if not he,

Who ſhould then our wonder be▪

Such and ſo many were his perfections, that he could not fully deſcribe them,
much leſſe I diſcouer them. He was affected by many, admirde by all.
Shepheards doted on him, Laſſes droupt for him, all liked him, for who could
not loue him? It is the cuſtome of Arcadians to reſt in ſome ſhade when
Sommers ſcortching heate annoyes them. Being ſhrowded from the Sunne, they
ſpend the time in diſcourſing on their owne or their fellowes for­tunes,
Shepheards I meane, men of their owne profeſ­ſion, whether natiue in Arcadia
or no: as in memorizing the worth of Aſtrophell, praiſing the perfections of
Phillis, lamenting the loſſe, commending the loyaltie of Amyn­tas, mourning
for the death, yet miſliking the diſdeine
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=20) and pride of
Amaryllis, pitying the diſtreſſe of the forlorne Shepheard, the vnhappy
admirer, though happy herauld o [...] her worth. But if Hyalus by hap came by
(as oft he did) they would abruptly breake off theſe diſcourſes, and fol­low
him gréedily, gazing on ſo glorious an obiect. Nor was this vniformitie of
affections only in humane hearts, for the rurall powers were touched with like
ſimpathy: Pan ſighed to ſée him, remembring by him his Syrinx, though of an
other ſexe. The Hamadryades flocked to view him, wiſhing him one of their
troupe. Faunes, Siluans, Sa­tyres, ſéeldome ſéene before, were oft beheld by
men, while they left the hallowed groues to gaze in the open fields on that
eye-Syren, alluring not with the ſound, but at the ſight. Amongſt other,
Pomona, Goddeſſe and patroneſſe of fruite did ſo deepely affect him, that
Venus could not more dote on her Adonis. She deſirous to winne him with ouer-
cloying kindneſſe, fed him with Apples, gaue him Plums, preſented him Peares.
Hauing made this entrance into her future ſolace, ſhe would vſe oft his
company, kiſſe him, coll him, check him, chuck him, walke with him, wéepe for
him, in the fields, neere the fountaines, ſit with him, ſue to him, omitting
no kindes of dalliance to woe him, winne him, feyning to droupe, to dye for
him. But he which would not liſten to loues lore, nor obey his heſts, nor
abide his lawes, tooke no pleaſure in her paſſions, loathed her embraces,
liked not theſe amorous combats, and oft ſhunning her ſight, would repaire to
the vnhappy Shepheard, diſdaind by Ama­ryllis, and ſit with him and ſing,
tying his angels voyes to the obſeruations of muſick, recording the ſkilfull
Swaines ſwéete ditties in heauenly notes: for he loued him for his pleaſing
grace in paſſionate Sonets. While theſe things chaunced, Zephyrus that glads
Arcadia with friendly gales, ſawe him, and ſighed for him: nor did hée only
ſée him, but by oft breathing coole gales into him, felt the many ſwéetes
lodged in that louely ſubiect. While he
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=20) thought of no
fellowe in his affection, his paſſions were moderate, but when he knew that
Pomona was his riuall, he loath to brooke a partner in his pleaſure, or a
compani­on in his content, reſolued to ſequeſter his delight from hazard of
ſurpazing, and thus effected his reſolution. As on a day Hyalus parched with
ſommers heate, and tyrde with faintneſſe, repoſed his weary lims on a gréene
banke, Zephyrus not omitting this oppertunitie, gently heaued him from the
ground, and ſoftly conueyed him muſing much, into the worlds Weſterne coaſts,
wafting this wonder to the fortunate Ilands, the bleſſed ſoyle not annoyde
with rough blaſts, nor ouerwhelmd with immo­derate raynes, but ſometimes
(though ſeldome) touched with a ſuperficiall moyſture of ſhowres. There he
layde him downe in a medowe on a bed of floures, gathered a­gainſt his comming
by his ayrie ſeruants, to whome be­fore he had intimated his intent. When the
boy was layde, being in a pretie chafe, he ſcolded and exclaymed, though not
knowing whome he might accuſe. Zephyrus which felt freſh coales kindled in his
heart by this louers combat, ſpake thus. Scolde not my wanton with thy friend,
whoſe name if thou deſire, know that it is he which for thy ſake hath oft
mantled Arcadia with Floras pride to delight thine eies, & comforted thée with
a pleaſing coole in extreame heate, to relieue thy faintneſſe, euen Zephyrus,
Lord of the Weſterne blaſts, whome if thou canſt affect, thou ſhalt want
nothing which the world can affoorde: try me, truſt me, employ me, impute to
me thy deſires, thy delights. This ſayd, reſoluing himſelfe into ayre, he
diued into his dearling, on his eyes, on his lips he ſeazd, he ſurfeited: then
rayſing him thence, he carried him to his Palace, a moſt pleaſant coole
edifice. There Hyalus re­ſted long, not wanting his will in any wiſh. He was
ſer­ued by vnſéene att [...]ndants that waited with diligence on their Lords
dearling. Varietie of daintieſt fare, choiſe of wines, change of meates, ſtore
of delicates, were plenti­fully
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=21) brought or
rather blowne in at appointed houres, tables couered, all things furniſhed
with more then princely magnificence, yet no ſeruitour appearing, diuine
melodie on windie inſtruments fild his eares with conti­nuall charmes of
harmonious ſounds. Oft he walked a­broade to viewe the perfections planted in
that ſoyle, and being weary or wanton, roade backe in an ayrie Chariot. But
all this could not content him, who wanting his wonted companions, ſeemed to
leade a life voyde of com­fort. Hée did therefore ſo importune Zephyrus with
chil­diſh complaints, that he vnable to deny him any thing, graunted the boyes
moſt earneſt deſire, and ratified his graunt with ſpéedie performance. Truce
was taken, and the compoſition ſealed with many kiſſes: the ſumme of their
agréement was, that Hyalus after his arriuall in Arcadia, ſhould ſhunne the
ſight of Pomona, and leaue all other that pretended loue. On theſe conditiōs
he was con­ueyd backe, and layd in the place whence he was lifted. The rumor
of his returne being bruted abroade, the Ar­cadians throngd in thicker troupes
then before to ſée him, for meaſuring the worth of his preſence by the griefe
of his abſence, they could not glut themſelues with gazing on him. So ſoone as
Pomona heard theſe happy tidings, ſhe erecting tropheys in her fancy, vowde to
preuent like future miſfortune. Hauing gotten a ſight of him, ſhe ran, he ran,
he fled, ſhe followed, and followed ſo faſt, that ſhe ouertooke him in his
courſe, and ſtayd him from ſtarting: then ſhe began thus. Shun not thy friend
fond wagge which hath ſought thée, ſobd for thée, grieud to looſe thée, glad
to finde thée. At firſt I thought that Iupiter miſliking Ganimede that now
growes ſtale, had taken thée to ſup­ply his roome, or Venus choſen thée her
ſecond Adonis: But when I heard that Zephyrus had done this, I was the leſſe
diſcouraged, knowing my ſelfe able to encoun­ter ſuch an aduerſary, and beard
ſo baſ [...] [...] riuall in the pride of his hope. Now I haue got thée, and
beſhrow me wan­ton
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=21) if I watch
not your wiles, and kéepe you not in a ſurer garde. This ſayd, ſhe tooke him
by the hand, and led the bluſhing boy to her manſion, where ſhe locked him vp
cloſe priſoner, reſtraind his former large libertie, allowed him only to walke
in her Orchards, and féede on her fruites. O beautie nourſe of bondage, faire
ill, ſowre ſwéete. O moſt prepoſterous eſtate of all things, that he ſhould be
captiue to them whome his lookes had conque­red. Vngentle Fortune, what malice
did ſelly Hyalus merite, that hauing perfections worth, he ſhould féele
pleaſures want? was he therefore faire that he ſhould be infortunate? this by
the way, but ile procéede. Zephyrus renewing his olde wont, romde through
Arcadia, and miſſing his choiſe, marueiled at the change. Did he vio­late his
vowe? tuſh, he was a childe that could not value the vertue of an oath. Was he
vrged by others? why not? for he was faire. Did he loue an other? he might,
for he was yong. Thus dreading many doubts, he ſwallowed his diſcontent, but
when he knewe that Hyalus was Po­monaes priſoner, he was ſo enraged with
furious paſſi­ons, that he ruminated on nothing ſaue reuenge, and being vnable
to hurt ſo power-full a riuall, vowd to inflict vengeance on the whole
countrey of Arcadia. In this im­patient humour, he haſted to the Northren
regions, and méeting there with Boreas, ſaluted him thus. Father of ſtormes,
ſalue now the ſorrowes of vnhappy Zephyrus, thy brother in nature, thy equall
in ſubſtance: helpe me, and for euer haue me a friend, a fauourer. I haue in
one in­iurie receiued more wrongs then I can reckon. Vnmind­full, vnthankfull
Arcadia not weighing the many fauours by mée affoorded, withholds from me my
loue, my life, my hope, my heauen: but if thou powre thy plagues on that
vnkinde ſoyle, and oppreſſe the inhabitants with outra­gious furie of thy
blaſts, my riuall may repent her raſh­neſſe, and I recouer my loſſe: Do it
then deare fellowe, and for this courteſie I will for euer reſt at thy
com­maund, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=22)
let thy tryall of affection moue thée to weigh my affliction. Boreas replide
with a rough voyce. Brother Zephyrus, though our blaſts doe oft effect
contrarieties in the ayre, yet are not we contrary in our thoughts. I haue
heard thy cauſe, and will auenge thy quarell, ſcourging the continent with
ſuch a ſtorme of whirle-windes em­battaild againſt themſelues, rayſing in
their tragedies the tropheyes of my mercileſſe fury, that the world hea­ring
report of this ruthfull accident, ſhall repute thy cauſe highly reuenged. I
vowe to thée by the Scepter of our King, not to defer the execution of thy
deſire. Zephyrus comforted with theſe words, yéelded him many thanks, and
returned to the Weſt. Boreas forthwith iſſude from his icy prouince with a
troupe of tempeſts and inuaded Arcadia, where he wrought ſo many miſchieues in
a moment, that no eye could viewe them teareleſſe. Groues were diſgarniſhed of
their ſhrubs, fields diſfurniſhed of their floures: trées, ſome torne, ſome
rent vp by the rootes, cattaile violently carried from the places where they
fed, and tumbled headlong downe the cliffes, men ſtagge­ring, could not ſtay
their ſteps, leauing therefore their wonted walkes they houſed themſelues. The
Arca­dians grieued with ſo many incommodities, imputed theſe afflictions to
the anger of the Gods, whoſe wrath they ſought to appeaſe by Sacrifice.
Repairing for coun­ſell to the Delphi [...]n Oracle, they receyued this
anſwere, that they ſhould ſue to Aeolus, for he onely could eaſe them, whoſe
altars they loaded with many oblations, omitting no vſuall ſolemnities. The
God pitying their diſtreſſe, checked Boreas for his vnruly rage, and limited
his boiſtrous furie with appointed boundes, commaun­ding him not to touch the
pompe of Flora, or the hope of Syluanus, not to wrong the harmeleſſe Huſband-
men, or hurt the ſelly Shepheards, but afflict onely the places of Pomonaes
charge, which thing he did. The amorous Goddeſſe ſéeing a generall
tranquillitie, and all other
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=22) places quiet,
ſaue where ſhe was preſident, was forced to bridle her affection, and releaſe
her priſoner, leaſt for a fickle humor ſhe ſhould looſe her honor. Hyalus ſet
frée, raunged in a childiſh rage, but being weary with wan­dering, he reſted
néere a pleaſant Spring, and hauing wept fréely, ſlept ſoundly. In this
ſléepe, ſtrange ſléepe, the late ſexe was changed, and of a faire boy a fairer
maide faſhioned. Awaking and muſing much at this me­tamorphoſis, ſhe was in
the midſt of her dumps raiſde with a ſtrong gale, & carried to a place néere
the ſtreights of Thermopyles, where was a Temple dedicated to Aeolus, wherein
the louely maide was conſecrated a Prieſt to that God, and continued there the
whole tearme of her life a ſpotleſſe virgin. Our aunceſtors deſirous to
celebrate the remembrance of this rare accident with eternall honor, appointed
the day of her change to be for euer, memorizd in a yearely feaſt called
Parthenia, where­in the Prieſt of Aeolus accompanyed with the faireſt of the
youth of both ſexes, offers a noble Sacrifice, diſpoſing all things with due
Ceremonies. Which done, they compaſſing the aultar in a ring, ſing a ſolemne
Hymne in prayſe of that God. This did our aunceſtors inſtitute, and their
progeny hath by long ſucceſſe of time obſerued their deuoute orders. This
feaſt muſt be ſolemnized nine dayes hence, whereat doubtleſſe you ſhall ſée
this wonder one of that louely Chorus. Arisbas delighted with this talke, and
cheered with hope-full courage, thanked Damon for his diſcourſe, and reſolued
to tarry the néere-appro­ching time, and deſirous in the meane while to rid
him­ſelfe of wonted penſiueneſſe, in a veine halfe rude halfe ready, he
faſhioned theſe thrée fancies, for taking truce with ſorrowe, yet not wholly
ſorrow-leſſe, he felt more comfort, though no full content. But take them as
he wrote them, wherein if all be not currant, impute it to his thoughts which
were not clearde. If this paſſe with fa­uour, the other followe with like
hope.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=23)

### 1.1. The ſtrife of Loue and Beautie.

LOue was arm'd with fatall bowe,

Shafts which mother did beſtowe,

Mother gaue, but Father framde,

Father, Mother, both were blamde.

Wanton Goddeſſe did beguile

Husband with a feigned ſmile:

For a kiſſe ſhe did obtaine

(Labor neuer ſpent in vaine,)

That her Sonne by Vulcanes trade

Might the chiefeſt God be made.

Thus ſhe wonne him to her will,

(Wily worke of womans skill)

But the boy more proude then wiſe,

Waues his wings and foorth he flyes.

Soone as he on earth had lighted,

Thus the fondling was deſpighted.

As he vaunted vncontrolde

Thinking all that gliſterd golde,

Terming in a fooliſh thought

Which his ſelfe-conceipt had wrought,

Heau'n his foote-ſtoole, Gods his marke,

Men his obiects, earth his parke,

Gods and men his hunting game,

Beauty natures deareling came:

Beautie clad in natiue hue,

Whome the Graces did endue

With rich plentie of their gifts,

Beautie cauſe of witty ſhifts:

Beautie with whoſe worth delighted,

Poets haue ſweet hymns endited:

Faire as is the ruddy morne,

Leauing reſtfull bowre forlorne.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=23)Morne dide
with Vermilion red,

Riſing from old Tithones bed.

Thus this faireſt of all faire

Deind to grace the liquide aire:

Paſſing by where loue did ſtand,

Holding powre-full bowe in hand▪

Not ſaluting as ſhe went,

Him that rag'd in diſcontent.

Boyling wrath muſt iſſue finde,

Wrath that boilde in troubled minde▪

For the eaſe of whoſe vnreſt,

Thus his furie was expreſt.

Loue ſaid he was Beauties better:

She ſaid Loue was Natures debter.

Loue exclaimde on Beauties pride,

Which all duties force denide.

She ſaid Loue receiude no wrong,

Where no dutie did belong.

None might craue peculiar right,

Sith they were of equall might.

He ſaid beautie nere preuailed,

But where Loue the heart aſſailed.

Beautie for it ſelfe admired,

His ſhafts cauſde to be deſired.

For where Loue bred no remorſe,

There had beautie litle force.

Pſyche was more faire then any:

Loude of few, though likde of many.

Yet ſo likde that not affected:

Siſters ſped, but ſhe reiected.

Yet, quoth Beautie Pſyche gainde

Cupids heart to her enchainde.

Where was then his wonted might?

Vanquiſhde by a womans ſight?

Thus fell Loue into a trip:

Thus ſhe galde him with a quip.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=24)He ſaid twas
his owne procurement,

She ſaid it was her allurement.

Loue ſaid beautie pleaſde the eie,

But he wrought hearts ſympathie.

She ſaid heart when eye had viewde,

Was by beauties force ſubdude.

He ſaid beautie ſoone decaide:

She ſaid loue no longer ſtaide,

Then while beautie was in prime:

Thus did both giue place to time.

Cupid grieude with theſe replies,

Framde by her in taunting wiſe:

Sware by dreadfull Stygian lake,

(Greateſt vow that gods can make)

That he would no more deſcend,

Till he did this quarrell end:

Vowing by his godheads might,

Beauties darlings to deſpight.

Thus he ſaies, and vp he flies

Swiftly through the Empyre skies.

If men might this ſtrife decide,

As by men it ſhould be tride,

Then would all agree in one,

Beautie can preuaile alone:

Beautie able to enthrall,

Eyes and heart, and thoughts and all:

Yet three powers in one aſſenting

Stroke mine heart, heart ſoone relenting.

Eyes ſaw beautie and admirde it,

Loue ſaw heart, through eyes he firde it,

But faire lookes did firſt conſtraine

Cupids ſhafts to ſhape my paine.

Fairer Vertue beauties iewel,

Bad mee not pronounce Loue cruel.

Loue that forc'd me to affect,

Beauties worth by Vertue deckt:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=24)Then ô three
of all the chiefe,

Eaſe at laſt my loathed griefe.

His ſecond inuention followes thus.

### 1.1. CVPIDS PALACE.

PAphos now a worthleſſe name,

Wants the grace of wonted Fame.

Fiſhie Cnidus not frequented,

Samos highly diſcontented,

Diſcontented with the miſſe,

Of ſo great a former bliſſe,

Where from altars did ariſe,

Odors ſweete, with louers cries:

Breathing ſighes from hearts amaine,

Sad reporters of their paine.

Barraine be Idalian hill,

Vnadornd by Natures skill.

Dry be Acidalian ſpring,

Circled with no euening ring:

Of the Fairy wood-Nymphs tripping,

And on greene graſſe lightly skipping,

Where ſweete Amorets were chaunted,

While it was by goddeſſe haunted:

Be they of all bounties reft,

Sith they are by Venus left.

Loues coy queene forgetting quight,

Iles could yeeld her queint delight,

Deeming earthly manſions droſſe,

Former ſolace, future loſſe,

Haunts the palace of her ſonne,

Worke of wonder lately done:

Daily gueſt ſhe there remaineth,

And of loue to Loue complaineth.

Now no more to rule ſhe deignes,

Yoked Swans with ſiluer reines,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=25)As ſhe did
from earth aſcend,

(Earth which erſt ſhe did commend)

And returnd through liquide aire,

Gliding to Ioues royall chaire.

Vulcan ſtaide from framing thunder,

That he might erect this wonder.

Wanton boy would neuer ceaſe,

Wily mother grant no peace,

Till by this the ſtrife were ended,

Feined ſtrife by them pretended.

Top is cloſe, the fourme is round,

Seated on an azure ground:

No doore ſeene, yet doores each-where,

Entries cloſe, yet many there.

For one colour teinteth all,

Turrets, doores and gyring wall:

Clammy ſtuffe the colour beareth,

(Halfe white, halfe red hue it weareth)

Such as in Aſphaltis lake,

Did Chaldaean workemen take:

For that high-entitled frame,

Honord with firſt Empires name:

On the top with triumphs fild,

Stockdoues mothers birds did build.

Right ſide was with windowes dight,

To receiue th'infuſed light:

Light ſo cleare, ſo bright, ſo faire,

As in cleareſt open aire.

There the roofes are rich emboſt,

Wals adornd with equal coſt:

Workes engraude of queint deuiſe,

And enchaſde with gemmes of price.

There his bow of beaten gold,

Worth a world of wealth vntold:

And ſhafts pointed with like mettle,

Wily wag thought meet to ſettle.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=25)Pleaſure
gardian of this roome,

Author of each happie doome:

Loues Vicegerent on that ſide,

Vaunts the worth of heau'ns chiefe pride.

Fancies on her ſteps attend,

Such as do her fauours ſend,

Or affoord the fruites of pleaſure,

When delight by loue they meaſure.

Theſe ſerue when the god doth ſtrike,

Both hearts with one ſhaft alike.

Not that one ſhould ſue in vaine,

And the other dart diſdaine.

But a mutuall paſſion wrought,

In one ſympathie of thought:

Or when hope of hap vnproued,

Plots the praiſe of things beloued.

Pyrocles ſuch fancie knew,

Fancie giuing Loue his due,

Which did on Philoclea looke,

Bathing in a Chriſtall brooke.

He diſguiſde a virgin ſeemd,

And his name was Zelmane deemd.

O how ſweetly did he praiſe,

In thoſe lines thoſe louely laies,

All perfections in her planted?

For his pen no praiſes wanted.

Treſſes of her Ambre haire,

Wauing in the wanton aire.

Rubie lips and corall chin,

Soft, ſmooth, Alablaſter skin.

Angels  [...]ookes, hands lily white,

Eyes ſubduing at the ſight.

Left ſide hath no windowes made,

Darker then Tartarian ſhade.

There was bowe of fatal yue,

Acting horrors that enſue,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=26)And his
arrowes with leade tipt,

Which in Stygian poole were dipt.

Sorrow keeps this ſeate of terror,

Mirthleſſe hag the whelpe of error.

Fancies do on her attend,

Fancies which deſpaire do ſend:

When one ſhaft poore heart doth ſhiuer,

Drawne from loue-enforcing quiuer:

But a ſecond tipt with lead,

Strikes affections vigor dead:

In an other heart not moued,

With remorſe of paine vnproued.

Theſe do on repulſes muſe,

And Loues rigor oft accuſe.

And ſoft ſounds like minutes breath,

Sighes by turnes from vnderneath.

But ô God the moſt diuine,

Sith Timocleas heart and mine

Were with equall wound oppreſt,

And with faireſt Fancies bleſt:

End theſe ſowres with ſweete concluſion,

Leaſt thy godhead ſeeme illuſion.

His third inuention not treating of loue, but ſhadowing the worth of Poeſie in
a fiction, was thus:

### 1.1. The worth of Poeſie.

IMpute it not prophane impietie,

Dread god of Delos, and chaſte virgin-troupe:

To him that, in vnpitied miſerie

That doth enforce his wearied muſe to ſtoupe,

And him all cheerleſſe abiect-like to droupe,

Reueales thoſe holie ſecrets of your hill,

That do concerne defence of depeſt skill.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=26)

Vnder the couert of a Laurell tree,

Vpon the mount where learned Muſes dwel:

Rare monuments of worth enſhrined bee,

The workes of Laureate pens, workes which excell,

Cheriſh'd by comfort of Caſtalian well:

There reſt they ſafe: though ſafe, yet once aſſailde

By three miſhaped elues, which fled and failde.

There laie enrolde in euerlaſting lines,

Epique records wrapt in heroique ſtile:

There laie encloſde in thoſe eternall ſhrines,

Sweete Hymns and Odes that lyriques did compile,

And Elegies, and Epigrams ſharpe file,

With th'other graces of a laureate quill,

Whence hony ſweets do copiouſly diſtill.

Pale enuy Beldame-like with ſtaffe vpholding

Her curſed limbs, came firſt and tooke a ſitting,

In lothſome ſignes her deadly teene vnfolding,

Neare to that hallowed place how il befitting,

How much annoyd through her contagious ſpitting,

T'infect the tree that did thoſe branches nouriſh,

And kill the roote whoſe moiſture fed their flouriſh?

From depth of poiſnous mawe the monſter fierce

Did belch foule gobbets with an hell of ſnakes,

Wallowing in lothſome filth, that did empierce

The teinted ground: Forthwith the Laurell ſhakes,

For whoſe decaie the hag that vomit makes,

Which ſinking downe corrupted roote and all,

With Chriſtall drops that from the ſpring did fall.

Soone as the erſt-greene began to periſh,

And witherd branches could no longer couer

Thoſe antique rolles, or them with ſafetie cheriſh,

A ſecond hag ſtill darkneſſe ſilent louer:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=27)Obliuion
hight, ſlow hag did ſlily houer,

Suted in duskie robe of pitchie ſtaine,

Like to an hanging cloude that threatens raine.

Well did this name of Lethe her beſeeme,

Which oft forgot her ſelfe and her entent:

Eftſoone ſhe ſtaid, as doubting what to deeme:

Then forth ſhe ſtept: nor long ſhe forward went,

But ſtaid againe, as muſing what was ment.

But being come, ſhe towards her gan rake

Thoſe monuments, that prize her praie to make.

Then Ignorance that doth Arts glory blot,

Ran to the tree to get a Laurell wreath,

Before the branches by that fatal ſpot

Were waſted cleane, that roſe from vnderneath:

Nor would ſhe ſtop, nor did ſhe ſtand to breath,

Till tree was toucht: thus did the ſot deſire,

The higheſt praiſe of laureate Poets hire.

She thought it meete her pupils to inueſt

With laſting bay: and in that faireſt place

To lodge their lines, where worthier workes did reſt,

But when they were repulſt with deepe diſgrace,

She hirde thoſe hags both glories to deface.

Thoſe elues of horror which did yeeld their helpe,

The one deſpaires, the other darkneſſe whelpe.

O bane of bliſſe, gainſt worthieſt wits pretended,

O luckleſſe lot ô iniurie of time:

Foule-fall the hags that ſuch ill hap entended,

And haggiſh brood enuying honors prime:

When high-plum'd Muſe through Empyre skies doth climbe:

And curſes all which holy Poemes hold,

Light on the hags that ſtop thoſe mines of gold.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=27)

O who could harbour ſuch inhumane thought,

Though he Hircanian Tygres milke did ſucke?

Heart more flint-hard then beating waues haue wrought

On ſea-waſht rockes, reward from arte would plucke,

And guerdonize deſert with direſt lucke.

Stand they good Gods dull ſtones ay-vnremoued,

That ſuch deſpight by cenſure fell approued.

Fame gliding from on high did there alight,

Viewde their attempts, and reſted on the tree:

The earth was circled with a glorious light,

(Such light as mortall eye could neuer ſee)

Forcing the elfe which had thoſe hags in fee,

To troth with apiſh pace vnto ſome caue,

The halfe-loſt vſe of daſeled eyes to ſaue.

The winged Goddeſſe moude with high diſdaine,

So ſhrill a note from ſiluer trompet ſounded,

That ſlowe obliuion poſted thence amaine,

Whoſe eares that ſtrange vnwonted noiſe confounded,

Eares where ſmall helpe for memory was grounded.

Pale enuy fled ſurprizde with doubtfull feare,

Whoſe witherd cheekes with wrinckles furrowed were.

The filth boild vp: the leaues wexd greene againe:

The Lawrell flouriſht in her former hue:

Fame bade Deſert for euer there remaine

With light and ſound, to ſhield a Poets due,

By ſafe defence from wrongs that might enſue.

Thus I record that future age may tell,

Loe this is he that wiſht to Poets well.

Although he aymde his conceipt at the merits of Grecian and Romane labors
onely there preſerued in a golden clo­ſure of perpetuitie, vnder that ay-
greene ay-glorious trée, euer faire, becauſe euer freſh, whoſe laſting
flouriſh dated
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=28) with
eternitie, and cheriſhed by the Chriſtal-flowing Ca­ſtalian ſpring, ſuch
labors as either record the worth of thoſe ancient Heroes, marſhalling their
ſtately blaſons in maieſtique methode with ſuch ſucceſſe of acceptance and
admiration, as when an high-pac'd Muſe treading a lofty march, leades honor
enchaind in an Epique pen, grac'd with the furtherance of hiſtorique Clio, or
treate the tra­gical tropheyes of the cothurnate Muſe, vttering clamo­rous
complaints, and enwrapping complotted practiſes of bloud and reuenge in the
ſwelling pompe of hautie Iam­biques, which yéeld matter for the Chorus to
complaine, warbling ſorrowes with variable ſoundes: or the faire bloſſoms of
affection diſplayde in elegies, with the faceti­ous grace of ſharpe-cutting
conceiptfull Epigrams, limi­ting delight in compendious ſwéetneſſe: with
Satiricall reprehenſions, heauenly Hymns, and the pleaſing ſolace of harmonius
Odes, not the leaſt ſtudie of a Lyrique pen-man, with Eclogues, and the
fruites of Thaliaes fauors ſuted in meaneſt robes. Though he I ſay aymde his
con­ceite at theſe onely, yet may I auer with like truth, that the like
moderne taſkes publiſhd ſince by men of ſundry nations eſpecially in the Latin
tongue, abſoluing all parts of poeſie in ſeueral perfections, were likewiſe
regiſtred in that holy refuge of ſuch happy reliques. But the Muſes bluſht,
and Phoebus frownd at the ſtrict bounds of their bounties, whoſe fauors were
limited with theſe two lan­guages. For which reſtraint of their worth they
prouided this remedie, that the diuine Entheos inſpiring ſuch ſap, ſuch
ſwéetneſſe, ſhould be afforded to other nations, which decrée being once
ratified, conceiptfull Italians obteind firſt place of this priuiledge, and
did diuinely abſolue each aboue-named part with ſeuerall perfections: their
names I néede not to relate, being famouſly knowne through Europe to the moſt.
Poeſy wauing thence her golden wings beyond the Alpes, though returning,
eſtabliſht an habit of high humors in France, the happy nourſe of many
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=28) rare ſpirits,
which likewiſe with no leſſe praiſe haue in liuely colours expreſſed all
perfections of Poetry, and theſe being in like ſort famous, néede not to be by
me memorized. To theſe adde the labors of Caſtilian pens. But in Albion the
wonder of Ilands louely Thameſis, faireſt of the faire Nereides loues ſea-
borne Quéene ado­ring, vaunts the glory of her maiden ſtreames, happy harbour
of ſo many Swans, Apollos muſical birds, which warble wonders of worth, and
chaunt pleaſures choiſe in ſeuerall ſounds of ſweetneſſe, pleaſant,
paſſionate, loftie, louely, whoſe matchleſſe notes, the faire Nymph kéeping
tyme with the billowing of her Chryſtall waues, carrying to the Ocean with her
ebbe, doth there echo them to her aſtoniſht ſiſters which aſſemble in thoſe
vaſt flouds by timely confluence. Baetis grac'd with many bounties, Po, and
Arno, garniſhd with many pleaſures, Rhone, and Araris, enriched with many
royalties, yet none of theſe may vaunt more heauens of happineſſe then
Thameſis, in harbouring ſuch Swans, ſuch ſwéet­neſſe. Yet many moſt worthy
monuments of heauenly wits wanted the honor and ſafetie of this ſeate, for
they were drowned in the abyſſe of Lethes ſilence, eſ­pecially of the moſt
ancient Graecian Authors, as Or­pheus, Linus, the firſt Muſaeus, Aratus,
Nicander, Theog­nis, Phocilides, and moſt of all the nine Lyriques, and
Elegiacke and Comicke Poets, and ſome taſkes of tra­gique pens, with the
precious predictions of the tenne Sybills, and many of the Romane Worthies.
Little re­maines of graue Ennius, who vaunted though vaine-gloriouſly the
tranſmigration of great Homers ſoule, ſéeking aduantage by that one poynt of
Pythagorean doctrine to boſiter his owne ambition, but though he were rude in
ſtile (which was the fault of his time) yet was he graue in matter, and in
this meriting praiſe, that being one of thoſe that brake the firſt yee, he
rowſde the following rare ſpirits. But worſe hap befell the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=29) rare Smyrna
of learned Cinna, and ſugred paſſions of ſweete Gallus, and of thoſe other
both Gréeke and Ro­mane workes, many are blemiſhde with ſome blurs: ſo that it
was high time that Phoebus and the Muſes ſhould vndertake their protection,
and become their pa­trones. But leauing this digreſſion, let vs returne to the
matter.

Thus ſpent hée ſome houres in theſe meditati­ons, but when the long-expected
day of his deſire ap­proached, Damon taking his princely gueſt with him,
iourneyed to Sicyone, néere whoſe ſuburbs that ſolem­nitie was euer celebrated
in a faire fielde hallowed for that yearely vſe. At their arriuall in the
Citie, they founde there innumerable Grecians, both natiue of the continent,
and Ilanders, whome awfull zeale of pure deuotion had induced to be preſent at
thoſe holy rites: (ſuch they tearmed them.) The next morning (for their
expectation laſted but one night) Arisbas and his hoſte, leauing their lodging
betimes, went to the place, and there prouided themſelues an eaſy roome
without the rayles: for within them none might ſtand, the Prieſt and his
neceſſary attendants excepted: with them infi­nite troupes of the aſſembled
ſtrangers haſted to pre­uent Titan, who ſhaking his deawy lockes on the
mountaines, poſted from the watry cabbin of Nereus, to be an ea [...]ely
viewer of theſe ſolemnities. But ere he had meaſured a tenth proportion of his
daily pace, the Prieſt ſute [...] in a long ſky-colourde robe, a wreath of
Poplar branches, though conſecrated to Alcides, en­compaſſing his Temples,
came forward, and with him the ordinarie Miniſters, the inferior aſſiſtants to
his office, clad in their Ceremoniall robes, each attending on his ſeuerall
charge. Some caried ſyluer baſons to re­ceiue the bloud, ſome fumigations, one
the knife, an other the hallowed fire, brought from the euer-glowing altar of
Delphos, euery one ſomewhat, and two the chiefe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=29) of them led
the ſacrifice, a yong milke-white Heifar crow­ned with a garland of floures,
whoſe frée necke had not felt the heauie yokes bondage: Next theſe, came the
moſt loue­ly traine, conſiſting of the faireſt of both kinds, flouriſhing in
the prime of their youth, and in the pride of their beau­tie, clad all in long
white robes trailing after them, wea­ring on their heads garlands of
odoriferous floures. They obſerued a rare methode in their comely march,
pacing two and two, a faire boy and a girle.

In one thing the weaker ſexe, thoſe wonders of beau­ties worth excelled, whoſe
amber treſſes waued ſo on their ſhoulders, marſhalled with ſwéet equalitie of
diſtance, that Phoebus féeling contrary paſſions, did both ſigh and ſmile to
ſée them. But in this, the worthier kinde farre ouermat­ched the oth [...], in
the front of whoſe rancke that wonder whereof Damon made late report was
placed the firſt, as of all the  [...]ir [...]ſt, who turned the eies of the
beholders from not [...]ng th [...]e procéeding, to gaze on his perfections.
Ariſ­bas hauing before loſt himſelfe in a deſert of deſpaire, & now finding an
iſſue for hi [...] hope, was ſo rauiſhed with ye ſight, that he could ſcarce
conteine himſelfe from leauing his ſta­tion, and running to embrace (as wel he
might.) For Arca­diaes triumph was his Timoclea. Thus it ſéemed, thus he
ſuppoſed, not geſſing at randon, but gathering by likelihood of his loue: yet
ſtil he doubted becauſe he dreaded. The full triall of this ſéeming truth, was
deferred till the ſolemni­ties were ended, which thus they proſecuted. All the
traine being come within the railes, a general ſilence mixed with reuerence
poſſeſſed all men. The ſacrifice being prepared after the vſuall maner, the
accuſtomed ſprincklings & other ceremonies diſpatched, that noble offering was
layd on the altar & the wood kindled by the conſecrated fire. And forth­with
the faire Chorus caſt into a ring began their hymne. In the ſame moment of
time a ſhril harmony of winde-in­ſtruments, ſounding miraculouſly in ye aire,
not drowning with ouer-loude noiſe, but conſorting with the muſicke of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=30) thoſe well-
agréeing voices in a fit key, made diuine melo­die. And for a ſecond teſtimony
of the gods kind acceptance of their deuotions, a ſtronggale ſnatched vp the
ſacrifice, and ſwift as thought bereaued their eyes of that obiect, be­fore
the Hymne was ended, which I haue here added.

### 1.1. The Hymne ſung to Aeolus.

MOſt iuſt auenger of Arcadiaes wrong,

Dread God, high Regent of the worlds wide frame,

Enricht with titles of adored name,

To thee theſe rites, theſe honors do belong:

At whoſe dire frownes th'amazed earth hath trembled.

Patrone of harmeleſſe men in hapleſſe age,

Reſtrainer of thy furious ſeruants rage,

Accept th'intents of vs in zeale aſſembled.

Worker of wonders in the continent,

Prince of the aire, diſtinguiſher of time:

The calme relieuer of our troubled clime,

To thee theſe duties pure deuotion ſent.

We celebrate as anceſtors before vs,

With yearly thanks beſt fruites of ſwaines degree,

The miracle and mercies ſhewde by thee,

Which Countries natiue plentie didſt reſtore vs.

And our ſucceeding progenie ſhall know

From fathers mouth, the debt which children owe.

Scarce were the accuſtomed ceremonies finiſhed, when Arisbas leauing his
ſtation entred within the railes, & run­ning with haſted ſteps to the louely
leader of that beauti­ous troupe of angel-faced boyes, after many embraces
ſea­ſoned with a mixture of ſwéete kiſſes, began thus aloude: Deare of all the
deareſt, if not miſtaken, luckily met, hap­pily found: thée haue I ſought,
ſucceſſeſſe on ſea, on land, in the groues, on the plaines, in the Iles, on
the maine, wea­rying the world with iteration of my woes. Now haue I
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=30) found thée,
if thée, then am I fortunate: but if eyes deceiue me, hope faile me, then may
I iuſtly impute this miſhap to the extremitie of fortunes malice, which ſéemed
to eaſe me with a ſhadow of not-being ſolace, that ſhe might plunge me in a
déeper ſea of ſorrowes. Wen Timoclea (for ſhée it was) ſawe her Arisbas, and
heard him ſpeake, chiming in her eares charmes of vnthought pleaſure, how ſhe
was af­fected I refer to their cenſures, which after ſowre croſſes enioy
ſwéete comfort: bluſhing at her diſcouerie, yet reioy­cing at this happie
accident, ſhe replied thus, gracing her proeme with a maiden-bluſh. Doubt not
deareſt Lord the aſſurance of your hope, I am that Timoclea ſought by you ſo
much, that haue ſighed for you ſo oft, whoſe truth hath had many tryals in
troubles, yet vanquiſhing all diſtreſſe, ſhe beholds you, ſecure from danger.
Thinke not this diſguiſe of mine attire, and diſſembling of my ſexe, any
reproach to the modeſtie of a maydens behauiour, for I haue plotted this
chaſte pollicie to preuent all perils of luſtfull violence, and preſerue mine
honour inuiolate, that I might reſtore my ſelfe to you with the ſame dowry of
virgins dignitie, for which you at the firſt affected me. This ſayd, they
ſhedding teares, enterchaungeable tokens of their mutuall ioy, re­compenced
the long want of loues delight, with ſwéete kiſ­ſes, and Damon ſupplying the
time of their ſolace, ſtood vp, and in a large diſcourſe dilated the fortunes
of Arisbas, and the ſucceſſe of his loue agréeing in effect of ſenſe, with the
former relations, whoſe tale being ended, Timoclea proſe­cuting the diſcouery
of loues ſtrange aduentures, procéeded thus. Sith thoſe things are reuealed
which I thought that the gods and our ſelues onely had knowne, I will likewiſe
in this aſſembly publikely relate the many changes of ad­uerſe chances, from
ill to worſe by me endured. Thus then deare Lord, and you ſtrangers and
friends, receiue a briefe rehearſall of my troubles, & in hearing my
diſcourſe, dread ſouereigne of my ſoules bliſſe, weigh the many dangers of thy
dear too dearly-bought Timoclea. When that il-boding
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=31) tempeſt firſt
cauſe of our enſuing cares had ſecluded thée from the ſea, mée from the ſhore,
our ſhip was dangerouſly toſſed on the troublous waues, and though within no
ſmall ſpace a timely calme had quieted the waters rage, yet the vngentle
windes, luckleſſe inſtruments of fortunes ſpight, kéeping their wonted
quarters, draue vs far from the con­tinent with continued aduerſe blaſts.
After long tumbling on the floud, we deſcried a litle deſolate Iland, and
packing on all the ſailes, made towards it amaine, when ſodeinly the Pilot
cauſing them to ſtrike the late-ſpred ſailes, kept aloofe from ye coaſt, and
willed the boat-ſwain to ſound the depth, for he vehemently feared to be
driuē on ſome ſhelues in that vnknowne current, but finding all ſure in the
ſafe­tie of a wide chanell, we approached néerer. There was a ſmall créeke on
the South ſide, making ſhew of an harbor, ſeeming then a fitte hauen for our
weather-beaten veſſell. Thereinto we entred, bearing in cloſe with the point,
and hauing anchord, the chiefe gouernour of the ſhip went on land with the
ſtouteſt of his Marriners to ſearch the coun­try, and to finde freſh acates,
but he returned failing in his purpoſe, only ſupplying our want of freſh water
& fewell, and bringing aboord with him a fewe ſtraunge ill-taſting birds which
they had taken among the cliffes: leauing this comfortleſſe coaſt, we made
againe to ſea, & on the ſeuenth night from our departure thence, we were
engulfed amōg the Cyclades by the windes thwarting alteration, fitly
re­ſembling the croſſe courſe of fortunes whéele in peruerting humane actions.
In one of thoſe Ilandes, the Gouernour finding a fit hauen, cauſed his ſhip to
be had into a dock, and there he ſet his men on worke to ſtop leakes, and new
trim her ſore-bruiſed ſides. I vnwilling and vnable through my want to attend
the iſſue of his delaies, left him, reſoluing to embarque in ſome other
veſſell ſailing neare Arcadia. But remembring how many dangers were incidēt
to our ſexe, and to how many perils my beautie though ſmall was ſubiect, I
ſought to procure my ſafetie and preuent al drea­ded
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=31) ils by this
diſguiſe. Haſting to the next port, I found there a Merchant of Helleſpont
readie to hoiſe ſaile for By­zantium: with him I bargained for my paſſage: he
accepted mine offer & taking me with him, after a dayes tariance in ye hauen,
lanched ayded by a proſperous winde. But though heauens fauoured me, yet hard
hap ſtil followed me. Mark an other inſtaunce of fatall ſpight. On a faire
calme day though a foule ſtorme in mine eſtate, the  [...]ilot miſtaking his
courſe, ſtemmed the ſhip on a rock, and  [...]he cruel winds continuall
furtherers of fortunes ſpight, draue her on with ſuch violence, that ſhe was
there ſplit. In this generall ex­tremitie of life, each tooke what was next
his hand to ſu­ſtaine him in that hazard: I nimble through feare, got a great
péece of the maine Maſt, and thereon committed my ſafetie to the ſeas
curteſie, and though euerie ſurge threat­ned ouerwhelming, each waue menaced
death, yet I not daunted in theſe dangers kept mine hold. Oft I beheld the
Dolphins mounting on the waters vneuen ſuperficies, but at my approach they
would ceaſe their ſport, in kind regard of my ruth, not raiſing the billowes
with their tumbling, but gently on either ſide following me thus floating,
ſée­ming to waft me with wary eyes as carefull of my ſafetie. The day being
farre ſpent, I diſcried a ſayle Weſtward, and (ſuch was my hap I know not how
to terme it good or ill) it made toward the coaſt on which I was thus toſſed,
when I ſaw it ſome what néere, I made ſignes to them a­boord, expreſſing my
danger and imploring their aid. They deſirous to ſaue me (for ſometimes
miſcreants féele paſſiōs of pitie) ſent two of their fellowes in the long
boat to fetch mée, who rowing to mée, tooke mee vp (thus one affection wrought
an other) & carried mée aboord with them, where, hoping for ſolace, I found
ſorrow. Being in the ſea, though euer dreading to be ſwalowed by the ſurges,
yet was I free: In the ſhip though ſa [...]e from ſuch perils, yet was I
priſo­ner to wretched Pirats from whoſe remorſleſſe hearts all compaſſion was
exiled.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=32)Yet, me they
ſought to win by allurements, hoping that I deceiued by their pretended
kindneſſe, would ſooner yéeld to their filthie deſires. The ſame night they
frolliked with great iollitie for ioy (as they ſaide) of obteining me: when
the wine had fired their enflamed luſt, they ſollicited thogh ſucceſſeſſe,
their former motions, and ſtroue ſo long for kiſ­ſes but got none, that they
left their kindneſſe towards me and fell to contention among themſelues. Their
Captaine enuying them, the publike poſſeſſion of his priuat pleaſure though
but ſuppoſed, déeming me a praie fitter for himſelfe and iudging a common good
not currant, appeaſed the fraie through his authoritie, & did countermaund
their paſſions, but priuately he would aſſaile me with all the engines of
loue-plotted pollicies, adding cruell threats to kind words, ſometimes
entreating, ſometimes menacing, now ſuing, then ſwearing, to obtaine his will,
or augment my woe: now praying, then proteſting to enioy me, or enioyne me
perpetuall ſlauery. I hearing him in theſe tearmes, fed his humor with vaine
hopes, coining new occaſions of delaies, prefixing a time, promiſing, that
expired, to yéeld to al kinds of dalliance which he would vſe, limiting my
feined profer with  [...]his condition, that till then he ſhould ceaſe from
pro­ſecuting his intended deſires. He accepting this anſwer for an high
fauour, proteſted to obey my doome, and obſerue the propounded conditiō. But
ere time winged with thoughts ſwiftneſſe had touched the prefixed point of my
then-immi­nent perill, I was happily freed from feare of his force, and
deliuered from dread of that danger by Anaxander, a vali­ant Gentleman of
Sparta, who hauing charge of a Galley ſcoured thoſe ſeas, being ſent by the
Ephori, and bounde by ſtrict commandement to execute ſeuere iuſtice on ſuch
ma­lefactors which infeſted the ſeas with piracies, and landing oft on the
coaſt of Laconia, for raged the Country, tooke rich pillage, & committed many
ſpoils. But Anaxander méeting this neaſt of théeues, part of that accurſed
ſocietie, encoun­tred them, and hauing after ſmall fight bourded them, put
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=32) all that crue
of caitiues to the ſword, accounting mercy to ſuch offenders an high blemiſh
of iuſtice. Me onely he ſa­ued, & with gentlemanlike compaſſion pittied my
diſtreſſe. You may perhaps ſuppoſe that now my ſorrowes were en­ded, and I in
protection of this worthie patron, without the compaſſe of fortunes reach: but
if you ſo thinke, your iudge­ments faile: theſe my ſea-fortunes & thoſe
vnſtaied waues, do in moſt liuely ſort expreſſe the vncertaintie of worldes
wauering, as by attending the ſequele, you may eaſily con­ceipt.

When the report of this exploit was bruted to the eares of thoſe other
monſters, (for the minde of man degenerating from the decorum of humanitie
becomes monſtrous, com­plotting miſchiefes excéeding the vildeneſſe of
beaſtes, and the bodie the mindes inſtrument, ſlaue to that tyrannicall
gouernment, wherein affections rule and reaſon obeyes, effects them) they I
ſay hearing this, lamented the ill hap of their fellowes, eſpecially the
Captaines death, whome they affected for his valure, and admired for his
villanies, to them ſéeming vertues. But cōuerting their mones into mad fury,
they confederated themſelues in a bloudy league, vowing extreame reuenge on
that worthie Gentleman whome they opprobriouſly tearmed the proud Iuſticier of
Lacedaemon. They had got togither ſixe veſſels, & Reſicles a Cretan was
Admirall of this accurſed fléete: fortune ſil­dome foe to worſt attemptes,
ſuted their expectation with hoped ſucceſſe. For méeting the Spartan Galley,
they en­compaſſed her, and commencing a bloudie broile, after long fight laid
vs aboord, ſlue them all, and not ſatiſfied with this butchery, exerciſed more
barbarous crueltie, mangling the dead bodies into many péeces. Here againe I
eſcaped death reſerued by fortune, for a ſecond brunt of diſhonour which
likewiſe I preuented, not touched with the leaſt ſpot of re­proach. The
ſouldiers of Reſicles taking me, brought me to their Captaine, who fancying in
his fond thoughts a world of future imagined pleaſures, entertained me kindly,
and [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=33) wooed me
with many curteſies, I filled him with vaine hopes, limiting my conſent with
delaie of time as I vſed the other before, and meane while plotted meanes for
my eſcape, which thus I effected. At the very time wherin the feaſt of
Theſmophoria was celebrated at Eleuſis with my­ſticall obſeruations by the
Prieſts of Ceres, Reſicles hauing left his fellow-Pyrats which diſperſed
themſelues to pur­chaſe booties, tooke a veſſell of Samos returning from
Syria, a rich prize. The day enſuing, he & his accurſed companions applied
themſelues wholly to myrth and belly-chéere for ioy of their good fortune,
ſeeming to celebrate the Baccha­nals in their diſordred dyet, dyet I terme it,
becauſe they oft vſed ſuch exceſſe. When the wine had preuailed, and fumes
aſcending from their ſtomaches had beſieged their ouer­whelmed braines,
ſummoning their diſtempered ſenſes to reſt, they laie as drowned in a ſléepie
charme, without feare or regard, in euery corner ſome. The winde and ſea the
one quiet, the other calme, did fauour them: fortune their com­mon friend did
not annoy them with approach of enemies: for if a tempeſt had bene raiſed, or
the foe aſſailed them, doubtleſſe they had receiued a full reward of their
diſſolute demeanours. I iudging this a fit time for my eſcape, ſlily conueied
my ſelfe into the long boat, and cutting the roape rowed ſo well as I could,
to the ſhore which was not farre off: leaping on land, I left my boat to the
ſeas direction, and running with haſted ſteppes diſcryed two Arcadians, both
which are now preſent, the one a friendly relieuer of my di­ſtreſſe. I
entreated their tariance by ſigns, and being come to them, was kindly
comforted by them. Since which time I haue remained in this Country, where
what fortunes I haue felt, moſt Arcadians can relate.

Thus haue I contriued the rehearſall of my troubles into a briefe diſcourſe.
Timoclea would faine haue procée­ded, but a generall murmure of admiration
raiſed by the whole aſſembly hindred her entended purpoſe. Aegon ſtood vp, &
ſuing for ſilence by ſignes, hauing obtained audience
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=33) ſpake thus.
Country-men and friends, doubtleſſe the diſco­uery of this rare ſecret and due
guerdon of loues long-ſuf­fering patience, was deferred to this time by iuſt
preſci­ence of the immortall powers. For next the rare hap of Hyalus whoſe
memory we now celebrate, what other acci­dent could ſo directly fit the feaſt
of Parthenia? As his ſexe was miraculouſly changed from a faire ladde to the
faireſt girle that euer liued in Arcadia, ſo this lampe of royaltie, the
Paragon of womans perfections, found in this place at this time, the onely
occaſion of diſcloſing of her diſguiſe, and being ſuppoſed by all the mirror
of our ſexe, may now be tearmed the wonder of woman-kinde. The whole aſſem­bly
applauded his words, arguing hereby, that they confir­med his opinion by their
cōſenting cenſures. Many floures were throwne on thoſe two louers, the
floures of true af­fection, and each departing, filled his natiue prouince
with report of this rare accident: ſo that the miraculous meta­morphoſis of
Hyalus was almoſt drowned in obliuion.

Arisbas hauing repoſſeſſed his Loue the ſtaie of his life, thinking it high
time to glad his aged father with his re­turne, whoſe diſcontent (as he not
vainly ſuppoſed) his de­parture had bred, taking with him his deareſt
Timoclea, with Damon and Aegon, tarrying litle in Arcadia, haſted to the next
hauen, and there embarqued for Cyprus, where arriuing in the hauen of
Famagoſta, he found a wonderfull change. For the aged King diſpairing of his
eldeſt ſonnes ſafetie, had matched Anaxilas the ſecond brother of Arisbas,
with the Lemnian Princes daughter, whoſe father decea­ſing immediatly after
the marriage, he in right of his wife reigned Prince of Lemnos. Arisbas
nothing diſcontent with theſe newes, ſent one to certifie his father of his
ar­riuall. The old King repleniſhed with incredible ioy, was tranſported into
a trance: recouering himſelf, he haſted his aged ſteps towardes the hauen and
méeting his ſonne by the way, fel on his necke ſhedding many teares, ſwéete
ar­guments of his high content. Arisbas preparing to craue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=34) pardon of his
departure, was preuented by his oft redou­bled fatherly welcomes and embraces:
with like kindneſſe he entertained trembling and bluſhing Timoclea, & ſpake
curteouſly to Damon and Aegon. Returning to the palace he tooke great delight
in hearing his ſonne relate the trou­bles and daungers with oft changes of
Fortune endured by him and his deareſt Timoclea, and iudging it inex­piable
impietie to hinder the ſucceſſe of ſo rare affection reſolued to giue loue his
right and marrie them honou­rably. For this purpoſe hee ſent Herauldes to all
the Ilandes adiacent, and Prouinces ſcituate in the maine of Greece, which
publiſhed in his name leaue and libertie of acceſſe to all whom ſoeuer,
eſpecially ſtrangers of account which would repaire to his Court, and be
preſent at the nuptiall of his ſon, & honour him in ſuch princelike exerci­ſes
as might beſt beſéeme the worth of that intended ſo­lemnitie, not omitting to
expreſſe the time. Theſe meſſa­ges had ſuch ſucceſſe, that beſides a troupe of
meaner per­ſons, the moſt worthie Heroes of Greece appeared at the appointed
time, & being preſent at the ceremonies of Hy­mens rytes, gaue honourable
teſtimonie of their perfour­mance. The Cyprian Kings ſecond ſonne then
ſoueraigne of Lemnos, and his faire Princeſſe, were part of that royall
aſſembly, whereat the Nobles of Cyprus did gliſter in al­moſt-kingly pompe.
Forthwith many honourable ſportes and déeds of chiualry were exerciſed, in
which Arisbas and Anaxilas were chiefe challengers, ſuted both in pureſt
white, mounted both on milke-white Courſers, richly ca­parraſoned. The old
King entending farther fauour to his ſonne, and deſirous to diſburthen
himſelfe of the heauie charge of gouernment, and inueſt his age with eaſe,
ſur­rendred his eſtate, & reſigned ye regiment to Arisbas, whom he cauſed to
be adorned with the royall Diademe, and he entending like fauour to his
deareſt Timoclea, cauſed her to be likewiſe crowned Queene of Cyprus.

Theſe ſecond ſolemnities thus finiſhed, the princelyke
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=5639&page=34) ſtrangers and
others departed, bruting an honourable re­port of the Cyprian Courts royaltie.
Damon and Aegon hauing receiued rare entertainment and rich rewards for their
former courteſies, ſhipped themſelues for Arcadia. Fortune ending frownes with
fauours, did thus abſolue the cataſtrophe of this roial Comedy, which was yet
imper­fect. The old Cing of Epirus deceaſing, his ſonne Soſtratus a man of
milder diſpoſition, ſuccéeded him in the Crowne, who remembring the former
good ſeruice of baniſhed Ari­ſtophon, and knowing his innocencie, ſent
immediatly af­ter his coronation, an honourable Ambaſſage to conclude a league
with the yoong King of Cyprus, and reduce thence guiltleſſe Ariſtophon from
exile. The Ambaſſadour was royally receiued and entertained in the Court of
Cyprus, and hauing declared the cauſe of his comming, ſped in both his
demands. For the league of amitie betwéene thoſe two mightie Princes was
ſolemnely concluded by oath, and Ariſtophon deſirous to laie his bones in the
mother-ſoyle that brought him forth, was ſoone perſuaded to return. Ta­king
his leaue therfore of ye old prince, the yong King & his daughter raiſed to
ſuch royall eſtate, he returned into his Country, hauing with him the other
Péere of Epyrus, and a noble man of Cyprus ſent by Arisbas, to cauſe King
So­ſtratus to ſweare likewiſe, that the league might be confir­med by their
mutuall othes. Such was the ſucceſſe of this rare oft-thwarted loue which my
ouerbold penne hath pre­ſumed thus rudely to diſcyper, If any decorum be
omitted, or indecorum committed, I can not otherwiſe excuſe it (curteous
Gentlemen) then by your fauours which wil (I hope) beare with ſuch
imperfections, & not impute it to mine owne deſert, which was loth to polliſh
a toy, whereon I neuer beſtowed more la­bour, then ſometimes an idle houre of
recreation.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Dickenson, John, romance writer.. Date: 1594  

