## (unknown project)

# Miscellanies upon the following subjects collected by J. Aubrey, Esq.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=1)

MISCELLANIES, VIZ.

  * I. Day-Fatality.
  * II. Local-Fatality.
  * III. Ostenta.
  * IV. Omens.
  * V. Dreams.
  * VI. Apparitions.
  * VII. Voices.
  * VIII. Impulses.
  * IX. Knockings.
  * X. Blows Invisi­ble.
  * XI. Prophesies.
  * XII. Marvels.
  * XIII. Magick.
  * XIV. Transportation in the Air.
  * XV. Visions in a Beril, or Glass.
  * XVI. Converse with Angels and Spirits.
  * XVII. Corps-Candles in Wales.
  * XVIII. Oracles.
  * XIX. Exstasie.
  * XX. Glances of 
    * Love.
    * Envy.
  * XXI. Second-Sighted-Persons.

Collected by I. Aubrey, Esq

LONDON: Printed for Edward Castle, next Scotland-Yard-Gate by Whitehall. 1696.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=2)

## TO THE Right Honourable JAMES EARL of Abingdon, Lord Chief-Justice in Eire
of all His Majesties Forests and Chaces on this side Trent.

MY LORD,

VVHEN I enjoyed the Contentment of Soli­tude in Your pleasant Walks and
Gardens at Laving­ton the last Summer, I reviewed
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=3) several
scattered Papers which had lain by me for several Years: And then presumed to
think, that if they were put together, they might be somewhat entertaining: I
therefore digested them there in this Order, in which I now pre­sent them to
Your Lordship.

The Matter of this Collection is beyond Humane reach: We be­ing miserably in
the dark, as to the Oeconomie of the Invisible World, which knows what we do,
or incline to, and works upon our Passions, and sometimes is so kind as to
afford us a glimpse of its Praescience.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=3)

MY LORD,

It was my intention to have finished myReposited in the Me­saeum at Oxon.
Description of Wiltshire [half finish'd already] and to have Dedicated it to
Your Lordship: But my Age is now too far spent for such Vndertakings: I have
therefore devolved that Task on my Countrey-man Mr. T. Tanner, who hath Youth
to go through with it, and a Genius proper for such an Vundertak­ing.

Wherefore, I humbly beseech Your Lordship to accept of this small Offering as
a grateful Me­morial of the profound Respect which I have for You, who have
for many Years taken me in­to your Favour and Protection.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=4)

MY LORD,

May the Blessed Angels be Your careful Guardians: Such are the Prayers of

Your Lordships Most Obliged and Humble Servant, IO. AUBREY.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE Right Honourable JAMES EARL of Abingdon, Lord Chief-Justice in Eire of all His Majesties Forests and Chaces on this side Trent.
  * 1\. A COLLECTION OF Hermetick Philosophy.
    * 1.1. Day-Fatality: Or, Some OBSERVATIONS OF Days Lucky and Unlucky. CHAP. I.
    * 1.2. CHAP. II. Of Fatalities of Families, and Places.
    * 1.3. CHAP. III. Ostenta, or Portents.
    * 1.4. CHAP. IV. Omens.
    * 1.5. CHAP. V. Dreams.
    * 1.6. CHAP. VI. Apparitions.
    * 1.7. CHAP. VII. Voices.
      * 1.7.1. Extracts out of the Book, Entituled, Relation de la Noüeille France, 1662, and 1663. 21.
    * 1.8. CHAP. VIII. Impulses.
    * 1.9. CHAP. IX. Knockings.
    * 1.10. CHAP. X. Blows Invisible.
    * 1.11. CHAP. XI. Prophesies.
    * 1.12. CHAP. XII. Miranda.
    * 1.13. CHAP. XIII. Magick.
    * 1.14. CHAP. XIV. Transportation by an Invisible Power.
    * 1.15. CHAP. XV. Visions in a Berill, or Crystall.
    * 1.16. CHAP. XVI. Converse with Angels and Spirits.
    * 1.17. CHAP. XVII. Corps-candles in Wales.
    * 1.18. CHAP. XVIII. Oracles.
    * 1.19. CHAP. XIX. Extasie.
    * 1.20. CHAP. XX. Glances of Love, Malic.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=4)

## 1\. A COLLECTION OF Hermetick Philosophy.

NAtural Philosophy hath been exceed­ingly advanced within Fifty Years last
past; but methinks, 'tis strange that Hermetick Philosophy hath lain so long
un­toucht. It is a Subject worthy of serious Consideration: I have here, for
my own diversion, Collected some few Remarques within my own Remembrance, or
within the Remembrance of some Persons worthy of Belief in the Age before me.
Those who have a desire to know more of Things of this Nature, may be pleased
to peruse Historie Prodigieuse, Writ by Pere Arnault: As also a Book
intituled, Lux è Tenebris, which is a Collection of Modern Visions and
Prophesies in Germany, by several Per­sons; Translated into Latin by Io. Amos
Comenius, Printed at Amsterdam, 1655.

I shall begin with Day-Fatality, of which Mr. Iohn Gibbon [Blew-mantle] made a
Collection Printed in Two Sheets in Folio 1678, which I here Reprint with some
Additions Collected by my self.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=5)

### 1.1. Day-Fatality: Or, Some OBSERVATIONS OF Days Lucky and Unlucky.  
CHAP. I.

Luc. XIX. xlii.‘In hoc Die tuo: In this thy Day.’

THAT there be Good and Evil Times, not only the Sacred Scrip­tures, but
Prophane Authors men­tion: See 1 Sam. 25. 8. Esther 8. 17. and 9\. 19, 22.
Ecclus 14. 14.

The Fourteenth day of the First Month was a Memorable and Blessed Day amongst
the Children of Israel: See Exod. 12. 18, 40, 41, 42, 51. Levit. 23. 5. Numb.
28. 16. Four hundred and thirty Years being expi­red [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=5) of their dwelling
in Egypt, even in the Self-same Day departed they thence.

A thing something parallel to this, we read in the Roman Histories: That that
very day four Years, that the Civil Wars were begun by Pompey the Father,
Caesar made an end of them with his Sons; Cnaeus Pom­peius being then slain,
and it being also the last Battle Caesar was ever in. [Heylyn in the Kingdom
of Corduba.] The Calendar to Ovid's Fastorum says, Aprilis erat menfis Graecis
auspicatissimus, a most auspicious Month among the Grecians.

As to Evil Days and Times; See Amos 5. 13. and 6\. 3. Eccles. 9. 12. Psal. 37.
19. Obad. 12. Ier. 46. 21. And Iob hints it, in cursing his Birth-day. Cap. 3.
v. 1, 10, 11, See Weaver, p. 458.

Early in a Morning

In an Evil Tyming,

Went they from Dunbarr.

Horace, lib. 2. Ode 13. Cursing the Tree that had like to have fallen upon
him, says, Ille nefasto te posuit die; intimating, that it was planted in an
Vnlucky day.

The Romans counted Febr. 13. an Un­lucky day, and therefore then never
at­tempted any Business of Importance; for on that day they were overthrown at
Allia by the Gauls; and the Fabii attacquing the City of the Veii, were all
slain save one. [Heylyn speaking of St. Peter's Patrimony] [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=6) And see the
Calendar annext to Ovid's Fastorum, as to the last Circumstance.

The Iews accounted August 10. an un­fortunate day; for on that Day the Tem­ple
was destroyed by Titus the Son of Ves­pasian; on which day also the first
Temple was consumed with Fire by Nebuchadnezzar. [Heylyn.] The Treasury of the
Times says, the Eighth of Loyon (August) the very same day 679 Years one after
another.

And not only among the Romans, and Iews, but also among Christians, a like
Custom of observing such days is used, es­pecially-Childermas or Innocents-
day. Comi­nus tells us, that Lewis XI. used not to debate any Matter, but
accounted it a sign of great Misfortune towards him, if any Man communed with
him of his Affairs; and would be very angry with those about him, if they
troubled him with any Matter whatsoever upon that day.

But I will descend to more particular In­stances of Lucky and Unlucky Days.

Upon the Sixth of April, Alexander the Great was born. Upon the same day he
con­quered Darius, won a great Victory at Sea, and died the same day.

Neither was this day less fortunate to his Father Philip; for on the same day
he took Potidea; Parmenio his General gave a great Overthrow to the Illyrians;
and his Horse was Victor at the Olympick Games. There­fore [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=6) his Prophets
foretold to him, Filium cujus Natalis, &c. That a Son whose Birth­day was
accompanied with three Victories, should prove Invincible. Pezelius in
Melli­ficio Historico.

Upon the Thirtieth of September, Pom­pey the Great was born: Upon that day he
Triumphed for his Asian Conquest; and on that day he died.

The Nineteenth of August was the day of Augustus his Adoption: On the same day
he began his Consulship: He Conquered the Triumviri, and on the same day he
died. Hitherto out of the Memoirs of King Charles I. Hero's.

If Solomon count The day of ones death bet­ter than the day of ones birth,
there can be no Objection why that also may not be reckon­ed amongst ones
Remarkable and Happy days. And therefore I will insert here, that the Eleventh
of February was the Noted day of Elizabeth Wife to Henry VII. who was born and
died that day. Weaver, p. 476. Brooke in Henry VII. Marriage. Stow in Anno
1466\. 1503.

As also that the Twenty third of Novem­ber was the Observable day of Francis
Duke of Lunenburgh, who was born on that day, and died upon the same 1549, as
says the French Author of the Journal History, who adds, upon particular
Remark and observa­ble Curiosity,

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=7)

Ipa dies vitam contulit, ipsa necem.

The same day Life did give,

And made him cease to Live.

Sir Kenelm Digby, that Renowned Knight, great Linguist, and Magazen of Arts,
was born and died on the Eleventh of Iune, and also fought fortunately at
Scanderoon the same day. Hear his Epi­taph, composed by Mr. Farrar, and
recited in the aforesaid Memoirs:

Vnder this Stone the Matchless Digby lies,

Digby the Great, the Valiant, and the Wise:

This Age's Wonder, for his Noble Parts;

Skill'd in six Tongues, and Learn'd in all the Arts.

Born on the day he died, th' Eleventh of June,

On which he bravely fought at Scanderoon.

'Tis rare, that one and self-same day should be

His day of Birth, of Death, of Victory.

I had a Maternal Uncle, that died the Third of March last 1678, which was the
Anniversary day of his Birth; and (which is a Truth exceeding strange) many
years ago he foretold the day of his Death to be that of his Birth; and he
also averred the same but about the Week before his depar­ture. The Third of
March is the day of St. Eutropius; and as to my Uncle it was significative; it
turn'd well to him, accord­ing to that of Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the Dead,
&c. and that of Ovid Metam. lib. 3.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=7)

—Dicique beatus

Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.

—None happy call

Before their Death, and final Funeral.

The Sixth of Ianuary was five times au­spicious to Charles Duke of Anjou.
Ibid. in the Life of the Earl of Sunderland.

The Twenty fourth of February was happy to Charles V. four times. [Ibid.]
Heylyn speak­ing of the Temple of Ierusalem, hints three of these four; his
Birth; his taking of Fran­cis King of France Prisoner; his receiving the
Imperial Crown at Bononia. And so doth also the Journal History before
men­tioned.

Of the Family of the Trevours, Six suc­cessive principal Branches have been
born the Sixth of Iuly. Same Memoirs.

Sir Humphrey Davenport was born the Seventh of Iuly; and on that day
Anniver­sary his Father and Mother died, within a quarter of an hour one of
another. Same Memoirs.

I have seen an old Romish MSS. Prayer-Book (and shewed the same to that
general Scholar, and great Astrologer E: Ashmole Esq) at the beginning whereof
was a Calendar, wherein were inserted the Unlucky days of each Month, set out
in Verse. I will re­cite them just as they are, sometimes in­fringing the Rule
of Grammar, sometimes of Prosodia; a matter, of which the old [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=8) Monkish Rhymers
were no way scrupu­lous. It was as ancient as Henry the Sixth, or Edward the
Fourths time.

January.

    Prima dies mensis, & septima truncat ut ensis.
February.

    Quarta subit mortem, prosternit tertia fortem.
March.

    Primus mandentem, disrumpit quarta bibentem.
April.

    Denus & undenus est mortis vulnere plenus.
May.

    Tertius occidit, & septimus or a 

Ex re & laedo.

relidit.

June.

    Denus pallescit, quindenus foede­ra nescit.
July.

    Ter-decimus mactat, Iulii denus labefactat.
August.

    Prima necat fortem, prosternit se­cunda cohortem.
September.

    Tertia Septembris, & Denus fert mala membris.
October.

    Tertius & denus est sicut mors alienus.
November.

    Scorpius est quintus, & tertius è nece cinctus.
December.

    Septimus exanguis, virosus denus & anguis.

The Tenth Verse is intolerable, and might be mended thus.

Tertia cum dena sit sicut mors aliena.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=8) If any
object and say, Deni is only the Plural; I excuse my self by that admirable
Chronogram upon King Charles the Mar­tyr.

Ter deno, Iani, Lunae, Rex (Sole cadente)

Carolus exutus Solio, Sceptroque secure.

Neither will I have recourse for refuge to that Old Tetrastich,

Intrat Avaloniam duodena. Caterva virorum

Flos Arimathiae Ioseph, &c.

because I have even now blamed the li­berty of the Ancient Rhymers. He means
by Mors aliena, some strange kind of death; though aliena signifies strange in
quite ano­ther sense than there used.

I shall take particular notice here of the Third of November, both because
'tis my own Birth-day, and also for that I have observed some remarkable
Accidents to have happened thereupon.

Constantius the Emperour, Son of Con­stantine the Great, little inseriour to
his Fa­ther, a worthy Warriour, and good Man, died the Third of November: Ex
veteri Ca­lendario penes me.

Thomas Montacute Earl of Salisbury, that great Man, and Famous Commander under
Henry IV. V. and VI. died this day, by a Wound of a Cannon-shot he received at
Or­leance, E MSS. quodam, & Glovero.

So also Cardinal Borrhomeo, famous for his Sanctity of Life, and therefore
Cano­nized [[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=9)
(Heylyn in his Praecognita, says, He made Milan memorable, by his Residence
there) died 1584. this day, as Possevinus in his Life.

Sir Iohn Perot (Stow corruptly calls him Parrat) a Man very remarkable in his
Time, Lord Deputy of Ireland, Son to Henry VIII. and extreamly like him, died
in the Tower, the Third of November 1592. (as Stow says) Grief, and the
Fatality of this Day killed him. See Nanton's Frag­menta Regalia, concerning
this Man.

Stow in his Annals, says, Anno 1099, November 3. as well in Scotland as
England, the Sea broke in over the Banks of many Rivers, drowning divers
Towns, and much People, with an innumerable number of Oxen and Sheep, at which
time the Lands in Kent, sometimes belonging to Earl God­win, were covered with
Sands, and drown­ed, and to this day are called Godwins Sands.

I had an Estate left me in Kent, of which between thirty and forty Acres was
Marsh-land, very conveniently flanking its Up-land; and in those days this
Marsh-land was usually let for Four Nobles an A­cre. My Father died 1643.
Within a Year and half after his decase, such Charges and Water-scots came
upon this Marsh-land, by the influence of the Sea, that it was never worth one
Farthing to me, but [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=9) very often eat
into the Rents of the Up­land: So that I often think, this day being my Birth-
day, hath the same evil influence upon me, that it had 580 years since upon
Earl Godwin, and others concerned in Low Lands.

The Parliament so fatal to Rome's con­cerns here, in Henry VIII. time, began
the Third of November (26 of his Reign); in which the Pope, with all his
Authority, was clean banished the Realm; he no more to be called otherwise
than Bishop of Rome; the King to be taken and reputed as Su­preme Head of the
Church of England, having full Authority to reform all Errors, Heresies and
Abuses of the same: Also the First-fruits and Tenths of all Spiritual
Pro­motions and Dignities were granted to the King. See Stow's Annals, and
Weaver, page 80.

Not long after which followed the Visi­tation of Abbies, Priories, and
Nunneries; and after that, their final Suppression: This Parliament being the
Door or Entrance thereto.

The Third of November 1640, began that Parliament so direfully fatal to
England, in its Peace, its Wealth, its Religion, its Gen­try, Nobility, nay,
its Kings. So verifying the former Verse of the Calendar.

Scorpius est quintus, & tertius è nece cinctus.

A Killing day to some or other.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=10) The Third
of September was a remarka­ble day to the English Attila, Oliver. 1650, He
obtained a memorable Victory at Dun­bar; another at Worcester, 1651. And that
day he died, 1658.

The first two Occurrences wonderfully accord to the preceeding Verses. ‘Tertia
Septembris, & denus fert mala membris.’ Being fatal to the two Members of
Great Britain, Scotland and England. The third, as happy to them both, as the
same day, 1666, was dismal and unhappy to the City of London, and consequently
to the whole Kingdom, with its immediate preceeding and two succeeding days,
viz. the Second, Fourth, and Fifth of September.

I come now to the Days of the Week.

Tuesday (Dies Martis) was a most re­markable day with Thomas Becket Arch-Bp.
of Canterbury, as Weaver 201, observes from Mat. Paris: Mars, Secundum Poetas,
Deus Belli nuncupatur. Vita Sancti Thomae (se­cundum illud Iob, Vita hominis
militia est super terram) tota fuit contra hostem bellicosa, &c. The Life of
St. Thomas (according to that of Iob, The Life of Man is a Warfare upon Earth)
was a continual Conflict against the Enemy. Upon a Tuesday he suffered; upon a
Tuesday he was translated; upon Tuesday the Peers of the Land sate against him
at Northampton; upon Tuesday he was [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=10) Banished; upon
Tuesday the Lord appear­ed to him at Pontiniac, saying, Thomas, Thomas, My
Church shall be glorified in thy Blood; upon Tuesday he returned from Exile;
upon Tuesday he got the Palm or reward of Martyrdom; upon Tuesday 1220, his
Venerable Body received the Glory and Renown of Translation, Fifty Years after
his Passion. Thus my Author.

One thing I make bold to gloss upon. His Translation is here mentioned twice.
Note, This is no Tautology of the Histo­rian; but the latter Paragraph is a
more particular Recitation of the first, viz. reference to the time when he
was Transla­ted into the number of Saints and Mar­tyrs: Quando in Divorum
numerum relatus, as Camden.

Wednesday is said to have been the for­tunate day of Sixtus Quintus, that Pope
of renowned Merit, that did so great and ex­cellent things in the time of his
Govern­ment. See The just weight of the Scarlet Robe, [pag. 101. his desired
Praises.] On a Wednesday he was born; on that day he was made Monk; on the
same he was made General of his Order; on that also, was he successively
created Cardinal, elected Pope, and also Inaugrated. See Heylyn, speaking of
the Temple of Ierusalem.

Friday was observed to be very fortunate to the Great Renowned Captain
Gonsalvo, [[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=11)
he having on that day given the French ma­ny memorable Defeats.

Saturday was a Lucky Day to Henry VII. Upon that day he atchieved the Victory
up­on Richard III. being August 22. 1485. On that day he entred the City,
being August 29. [Correct Stow, who mistakes the day.] And he himself always
acknowledged, he had ex­perienced it Fortunate. See Bacon in his Life.

Thursday was a fatal day to Henry VIII. [as Stow, 812.] and so also to his
Posterity. He died on Thursday Ian. 28. King Ed­ward VI. on Thursday Iuly 6.
Queen Mary on Thursday November 17. Queen Elizabeth on Thursday March 24.

Saturday (or the Iewish Sabbath) was fa­tal to Ierusalem Temple; for on that
day 'twas taken by Pompey, Herod and Titus, successively. Heylyn.

Hitherto by way of Prologue. And be pleas'd to take notice, as to the Days of
the Month, I have taken such care, that all are according to the Iulian or old
Account, used by us here in England. [See Partridges Almanack, Preface to the
Reader] Pope Gregory XIII. brought in his New Stile (generally used beyond
Sea) Anno 1585. in October, as asserts the Journal History be­fore recited.

An Old Proverb.

When Easter falls in our Ladies Lap,

Then let England beware a Rap.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=11) Easter
falls on March 25. when the Sun­day Letter is G, and the Golden Number 5. 13,
or 16. As in the late Years 1459, 1638, 1649.

1459, King Henry VI. was Deposed and Murthered.

1638, The Scotish Troubles began, on which insued the great Rebellion.

1648/9, King Charles I. Murthered.

I think it will not happen so again till the Year 1991.

Now for Epilogue and Remarkable Re­flection.

Turning over our Annals, I chanced up­on a two-fold Circumstance: I will not
say, that none else hath observed the same; but I protest, (It a me Deus amet,
ut verum loquor) I do not know of any that have; and therefore must justly
claim to be acquitted from the least suspicion of Plagiarism, or plowing with
others Heifers.

The First is, of William the Conquerour. The Second, of Edward III. (I need
not say any thing of the Eminency of these two; every one knows what great
things they did.) And making reflection upon the Au­spicious Birth-day of his
Royal Highness the Duke of YORK, I adventured upon the following Composure. [I
cannot be proud of my Poetry; but I cannot but be glad of my BON HEVR, d'avoir
(en lisant) tombe si fortuemènt sur les evenements d'un si BON IOVR.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=12)

#### 1.1.1. Ad Illustrissimum & Celsissimum Principem, JACOBUM Ducem
EBORACENSEM, de Natali suo Auspicatissimo Octobris XIV. Anno 1633.

—Deus

Anne nefasto te posuit die? Hor. lib. 2\. od. 13.

Octobris Decimo quarto Normannus Haraldum

Dux superavit, & hinc Regia sceptra tulit.

Tertius Edwardus, capto pernice Caleto,

(Gallica quo Regna sunt resarata sibi)

Ire domum tentans, diris turbinibus actus

In pelago, Vitae magna pericla subit.

Octobris Decimo quarto, tamen appulit Oras

Nativas. (His quàm prosperus ille dies!)

Natali laetare tuo, quàm Maxime Princeps;

Fausta velut sunt haec, Omina semper habe.

October's Fourteenth gave the Norman Duke

That Victory,

S [...]ow in An. 1066.

whence he Englands Scepter took.

Third Edward, after he had Calais won,

(The Mean whereby he France did over-run)

Returning home, by raging Tempests tost,

(And near his Life (so fortunes) to have lost)

Arrived safe on Shore the self same Date.

Idem in An. 1347.

(This day to them afforded so fair Fate.)

Great Duke, rejoyce in this your day of Birth;

And may such Omens still encrease your Mirth.

These Verses I presented in Anno 1672, to a most Honourable Peer of the Land,
and of great Place near his Royal Highness.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=12) Since
which time, Old Fabian coming into my hands, from him I got knowledg, that
that advantageous Peace, mentioned by Stow, Anno 1360, (concluded between the
forementioned King Edward III. and the French King) was acted upon the
Four­teenth of October, with grand Solemnity.

The two former Circumstances must needs fall out Providentially: Whether this
last of Anno 1360, was designed by Edward III. or no, (as remembring his
former good hap) may be some question: I am of opi­on not.

Where things are under a Mans peculiar Concern, he may fix a time; but here
was the French King concerned equally with the English, and many other great
Person­ages interested. To have tied them up to his own Auspicious. Conceit of
the Day, had been an unkind Oppression, and would have brought the Judgment of
so Wise a Prince into question: We may conclude then, 'twas meerly fortuitous.
And there­fore to the former Observation concerning this Famous Edward, give
me leave to add,

Insuper hoc ipso die (sibi commoda) Grandis

Rex cum Galligenis, foeder a fecit idem.

An advantageous Peace, on day self-same,

This mighty Prince did with the Frenchmen frame.

A memorable Peace (foretold by Nostreda­mus) much conducing to the saving of
Chri­stian [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=13) Blood, was made
upon the Fourteenth of October 1557. between Pope Paul IV. Henry II. of
France, and Philip II. of Spain. Nostredamus says, These great Princes were
frappèz du Ciel, moved from Heaven to make this Peace. See Garenciers Comment
on Nostredamus, page 76.

A Lucky day this, not only to the Prin­ces of England; but Auspicious to the
Wel­fare of Europe.

Iohn Gibbons, 1678.

Thus far Mr. Iohn Gibbon. The Latin Verses of the Twelve Months quoted by him
out of an old Manuscript, I have seen in several Mass-books: And they are
printed in the Kalendar to the Works of Venerable Bede. 'Tis to be presumed,
that they were grounded upon experience; But we have no Instances left us of
the Memorables of those Days.

As for the Third, and Tenth of September, I have here set dow some Extractions
from a little Book call'd The Historians Guide, or Britain's Remembrancer;
which was care­fully collected by a Club. It begins at the Year 1600, and is
continued to 1690. There cannot be found in all the time afore­said, the like
Instances.

Tertia Septembris, & denus fert mala mem­bris.

September 3. 1641. The Parliament Ad­journed to the 20th. of October next, and
the [[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=13) Irish
Rebellion broke out, where were 20000 Persons barbarously Murthered.

September 3. 1643. Biddiford, Appleford and Barnstable surrendred to the King.

Septemb. 3. 1650. Dunbar Fight.

Septemb. 3. 1651. Worcester Fight.

Septemb. 3. 1651. Earl of Darby defeat­ed at Preston.

Septemb. 3. 1654. A Third Parliament at Westminster.

Septemb. 3. 1658. Oliver Protector died.

Septemb. 3. 1675. The Town of Nor­thampton neer burnt down to the ground by
accidental Fire.

Septemb. 3. 1662. William Lenthal Speak­er of the House of Commons died.

Septemb. 3. 4. 1665. Four Dutch Men of War, two East-India Ships, and several
Merchantmen taken by the Earl of Sand­wich, with the loss only of the Hector.

Septemb. 2. 1644. The Earl-of Essex fled to Plymouth, and the Army submitted
to the King.

Septemb. 2. 1645. The Scots raised the Siege from before Hereford.

Septemb. 2. 1653. The Londoners petiti­on the Parliament to continue Tythes.

Septemb. 2. 1685. The Lady Lisle be­headed at Winchester for harbouring Hicks
a Rebel.

Septemb. 4. 1643. Exeter taken by Prince Maurice.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=14) Septemb.
4. 1653. General Blake buried at Westminster.

Septemb. 5. 1652. The French Fleet beat­en by the English.

Memorables on September the Tenth.

Septemb. 10. 1643. The Siege of Glou­cester raised. I remember over that Gate
which leads to Nimphs-field was this follow­ing Inscription in Free-stone: The
Walls are now pulled down.

Always remember

The Tenth of September

One thousand six hundred forty three,

And give God the Glorie.

Septemb. 10. 1645. Bristol surrendred to the Parliament.

Septemb. 10. 1649. Drogheda taken as appears by Cromwell's Letter to the
Speaker Lenthal.

Septemb. 10. 1660. Peace with Spain proclaimed.

Septemb. 10. 1670. Peace concluded be­tween England and Spain in America, was
this day ratified at Madrid.

Septemb. 10. 1673. This day his Majesty commanded the Earl of Ossory to take
the Command of the Fleet at the Buoy in the Nore, in the absence of Prince
Rupert.

Septemb. 12. 1679. The King takes from the Duke of Monmouth his Commission of
General.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=14) Septemb.
11. 1680. Mrs. Celier tryed at the Old-Bailey, for Publishing a Book called,
Malice Defeated, &c. and found Guilty.

Septemb. 12. 1683. The Siege of Vienna raised (after the Besieged had lost
10000 Men, and the Besiegers 70000) by the King of Poland, and the Duke of
Lorrain.

May 29. 1630. King Charles II. born.

May 29. 1660. Restored.

May 29. 1672. The Fleet beaten by the Dutch.

May 29. 1679. A Rebellion broke out in the West of Scotland, where they
Pro­claimed the Covenant, and put forth a De­claration.

The Emperor Charles V. was born on February 24. 1500.

He won the Battle of Pavia, February 24. 1525.

Clement. VII. Crowned him. Emperor, February 24. 1530.

Raphael d' Vrbin [the famous Painter] was born on a Good Friday, and died on a
Good Friday.

At Feltwell in Norfolk [which lies East and West] a Fire happened to break out
at the West end, which the West Wind blew and burned all the Street: On that
day Twenty Years, another Fire happened there, which began at the East end;
and burned it to the ground again. This I had from a Reverend Divine. Quaere
de hoc.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=15) Colonel
Hugh Grove of Wiltshire was be­headed at Exeter [together with Colonel Iohn
Penrudock] on the Ninth day of May 1655: On that very day Three Years, his Son
and Heir died at London of a Malignant Fever, and about the same hour of the
day.

A very good Friend of mine and Old ac­quaintance was born on the 15th of
No­vember: his Eldest Son was born on the 15th of November, and his Second
Son's First Son on the 15th of November.

Day-Fatality of Rome, Written by Iohn Pell, D. D. from whom I had it.

They that called the City of Rome, Vrbs Aeterna, seemed to believe, that Rome
could never be destroyed. But there have been great numbers of Men, that did
verily be­lieve, that it shall have an irrecoverable overthrow. Writers have
proceeded so far, as to foretel the time of Rome's final Ruine. Some said that
Rome's Perdition should happen in the Year of Christ 1670. They have now been
decryed Nine whole Years: So that few take care to know what Reasons moved
them to pitch upon that Number.

A Lutheran Historian, Anno 1656 wrote thus: Finem Iubileorum Ecclesiasticorum
om­niumque temporum in Scriptura revelatorum, desinere in Annum Christi
Millesimum sex­centesimum & septuagesimum, antehac obser­vavit Beatus
Gerhardus cum Philippo Nicolao. [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=15) But all Men are
not of Dr. Gerhard's Opini­on. Many Men believe, that some of the Prophesies
in the Revelation do reach far beyond our times, and that the events of future
times will unclasp and unseal a considerable portion of the Apocalypse.

One of the Reasons that recommended the Number of 1670, was because it is the
Sum of 410, and 1260.

Historians agree, that in the Year of Christ 410, in the Month of August Rome
was trampled under foot, and her Hea­then Inhabitants were miserably
slaughter­ed by the Victorious Army of Alaric, a Christian King of the Goths.
Paulus Dia­conus saith, August the 24th was the day of King Alaric's taking
Rome. Kedrenus saith, it was August the 26th, perhaps the Army first entred
the 24th, and the King follow­ed not till two days after.

As for the other Number 1260. It is twice found in the Revelation of St. Iohn
Chap. 11. 3. My two witnesses shall Prophesie a thousand two hundred and sixty
days. And chap. 12. 6. Should feed the Woman in the Wilderness a thousand two
hundred and three-score days. And it is there expressed in ano­ther form [42
times 30] chap. 11. 2. The Gentiles shall tread the holy City under foot forty
and two Months. chap. 13. 5. Power was given to the Blasphemous Beast to
continue forty and two months. chap. 12. 14. The [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=16) woman is
nourished in the Wilderness for [ [...]] a season and seasons, and half a
season. See Act. 1. 7. 360 and 720 and 180 are equal to 1260. So it seems
every  [...] hath 360 days, or twelve Months at thirty days to a Month. No
doubt Daniel had given occasion to this expression, chap. 7. 25. A time, and
times, and the dividing of time. No Man can ground any distinct reasoning upon
such general words. But at the end of the Chapter, he left off his Chaldean
Tongue, and wrote Hebrew in the rest of his Book; and chap. 12. 7. he speaks
more distinctly [For a season, seasons, and a half his word [Moyed ( [...])
from  [...] condixit, indixit, con­stituit] is not so large a word, as the
other Hebrew words which we Translate Time. But yet it is not tyed to a just
number of days (as 360) but is capable of various in­terpretations in several
Prophesies. Daniel useth a Plural in both places, and not a Dual [Two times,
and two seasons] Nor doth Iohn say, Two seasons: But by his Numeral
Il­lustration, he teacheth us to understand him, as if he had said (chap. 12.
14.) For three seasons and half a season: I say Numeral Illustration. For I
take it to be no other than an easie example (12 and 24 and 6 are 42) to
direct the Sons of the Prophets not yet arrived to the skill of dealing with
difficult supputations of Numbers not then discoverable  [...] Revel. 13 18.
Here is Wis­dom, [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=16) Let him that
hath Vnderstanding count the number of the Beast.

By 1260 days almost all the Interpreters understand so many Years, but not a
Year of 360 days; because they find no Nation that hath so short a Year. The
Egyptians had a year of just 365 days; but before St. Iohn was born, the
Romans had forced them to allow 365¼ as we use now in Eng­land.

In an enquiry concerning Rome it is fit to consider the length of a Roman
Year. (I may justly say a Roman Moyed; for no City ever had  [...] Years
length and form of a Calender Determined, Setled, and Command­ed with so much
absolute Authority as Rome had) Iulius Caesar by an Edict com­manded that
Number of 365¼ to be obser­ved, and therefore it is called a Iulian year.
Three Iulians and an half have days 1278 3/8 But Iulian Years 1378 3/8 are
1278 Iulian Years, and days 13631/32; or almost 137 days.

Almost 100 years ago, Pope Gregory the XIII. by a Papal Bull introduced a
Calen­dar wherein the Years length is supposed to have days 36597/400. Then
three Gregorian Years and an half have days 1278279/800. But Gregorian Years
1278279/800 are 1278 Iulian Years and days almost 118. Wherefore in­stead of
adding 1260, add 1278, add 137 days to the Year of our Lord 410, August 26.
[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=17) The sum
shews the Year of our Lord 1688 August 163, that is, Ten days after the end of
December 1688 Old stile. This is the ut­most, or farthest day, beyond which no
Apocalypse account (reckoning from Alaric) can point out a time, for the final
Destructi­on of the City of Rome.

Again (instead of adding 1260) add 1278 Years, and days 118 to the Year of our
Lord 410 August 24. The sum shews the Year of our Lord 1688 August 142, that
is, Eleven days before the end of De­cember 1688 Old stile. This (December 20)
is the nearest or soonest day that can be ga­thered by Apocalyptic account
(reckoning from Alaric) to point out the time of Romes final Ruin. But if it
happens not before the Eleventh of Ianuary, Men will make no more reckoning of
Alaric; but begin a new account from Attila in the Year of Christ, 453.

Calculation to a day (when we can do it) may be defended by a great example.
Exod. 12. 41. at the end of 430 Years, even the self same day, &c.

Io. Pell.

Dr. Pell told me, that St. Augustin writes somewhere, to this purpose, viz.
That it were to be wished, that some skilful Ma­thematitian would take the
pains to exa­mine and consider the Mathematical parts of the Holy Scripture.

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=17)

### 1.2. CHAP. II.  
Of Fatalities of Families, and Places.

THE L. Chancellor Bacon says,Essay XIV. of Nobi­lity. ‘As for Nobility in
particular Persons, It is a reverend thing to see an Ancient Castle or
Building not in decay; or to see a fair Timber Tree sound and perfect; how
much more to behold an Ancient Noble Family, which hath stood against the
Waves and Weathers of Time: For new Nobility is but the Act of Power; but
Ancient Nobility is the Act of Time.’

But Omnium rerum est vicissitudo: Fami­lies, and Places have their Fatalities,
accord­ing to that of Ovid ‘Fors sua cuique loco est—’

This piece of a Verse puts me in mind of several Pla [...]es in Wiltshire,
Fastorum Lib. IV. and elsewhere that are, or have been fortunate to their
Owners; and è contra.

Sturton [the Seat of the Lord Sturton] was belonging to this Family before the
Conquest. They say, that after the Victo­ry at Battaile, William the
Conquerour came in Person into the West, to receive their Rendition; that the
Lord Abbot of Glastenbury, and the rest of the Lords and Grandees of the
Western parts waited up­on [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=18) the Conquerour
at Stourton-house; where the Family continues to this day.

The Honourable Family of the Hunger­fords is probably of as great Antiquity as
any in the County of Wilts. Hungerford [the place of the Barony] was sold but
late­ly by Sir Edward Hungerford Knight of the Bath; as also the Noble and
Ancient Seat of Farleigh-Castle, about An. 167 ... But that this Estate should
so long continue is not very strange; for it being so vast, 'twas a­ble to
make several with-standings against the Shock of Fortune.

The Family of Gawen have been long at Norrington in the Parish of Alvideston
in Wiltshire. It was sold by—Gawen Esq to Sir Wadham Windham one of the Judges
of the Kings Bench about 1665. They continued in this place Four hundred fifty
and odd Years. Then also was sold their Estate in Broad-Chalk, which they had
as long, or perhaps longer. On the South Down of the Farm of Broad-Chalk is a
little Barrow called Gawen's Barrow; [which must be before Ecclesiastical
Canons were constituted; for since, Burials are only in Consecrated ground.]
King Edgar gave the Mannor and Farm of Broad-Chalk to the Nunns of Wilton-
Abby, which is 900 Years ago.

Mr. Thinne in his Explanation of the hard words in Chaucer, writes thus,
Gawyn, [[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=18)
fol. 23. p. 1. This Gawyn was Sisters Son to Arthur the Great, King of the
Britains, a most famous Man in War, and in all man­ner of Civility; as in the
Acts of the Bri­tains we may read. In the Year 1082 in a Province of Wales
called Rose was his Se­pulchre found. Chaucer in the Squires Tale.

This straunge Knight that came thus sodenly

All armed, save his head, full royally

Sulued the King, and Queen, and Lords all

By order as they sitten in the Hall

With so high Reverence and Obeisaunce

As well in Speech as in Countenance,

That Gawain with his old Courtesie,

Though he came again out of Fairie,

He could him not amend of no word.—

Sir William Batton of Tockenham Baronet [the Father] told me, that his
Ancestors had the Lease of Alton-farm [400 l. per Annum] in Wilts (which
anciently belong­ed to Hyde-Abby juxta Winton) four Hun­dred Years. Sir
William's Lease expired a­bout 1652, and so fell into the hands of the Earl of
Pembroke.

Clavel of—in the Isle of Purbec in the County of Dorset was in that place
before the Conquest, as appears by Dooms-day Book, The like is said of Hamden,
of Hamden in Bucks: Their Pedigree says, that one of that Family had the
Conduct of that County in two Invasions of the Danes. Also Pen of [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=19) Pen in that
County was before the Con­quest, as by Dooms-day Book.

Contrary wise, there are several places un­lucky to their Possessors. e. g.
Charter-house on Mindip in Somersetshire never pass'd yet, to the Third
Generation. The Man­nor of Butleigh near Glastonbury, never went, yet, to the
Third Generation.

Bletchington in Oxfordshire continued in the Family of the Pauures, for about
300 Years: It was alienated by—Pauure to Sir Iohn Lenthall about the Year
1630, who sold it again to Sir Thomas Coghill about 1635. He sold it to
William Lewis Esq whose Relict made it over to the Duke of Richmond and Lenox,
about the Year 166 ..., His Grace sold it to Arthur Earl of Anglesie about 166
...

Fatality of Proper Names of Princes. e. g. Augustus the first Roman Emperor
and Au­gustulus the last. Constantine the first Greci­an Emperor and
Constantine the last. The like is observed of the first and last Mexican
Experors: And the Turks have a Prophesie that the last Emperor will be a
Mahomet.

Iohn hath been an unfortunate Name to Kings. All the Second Kings since the
Conquest have been unfortunate.

London-Derry was the first Town in Ire­land that declared for the Parliament
against King Charles the I. and for the Prince of Orange against King Iames
the II. It was [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=19) closely Besieged
both times without effect. The Kings Party were once Master of all the Kingdom
except London-Derry and Dub­lin, and King Iames had all in his power but
London-Derry and Iniskilling. One Taylor a Minister was as famous for his
Martial feats in the first Siege, as Walker in the last.

'Tis certain, that there are some Houses unlucky to their Inhabitants, which
the Reverend and Pious Dr. Nepier could ac­knowledge. See Tobit chap. 3. v. 8.
That she had been married to seven Husbands, whom Asmodeus the evil spirit had
killed, before they had lien with her.

The Fleece-Tavern in Covent-garden [in York-street] was very unfortunate for
Homi­cides: there have been several killed, three in my time: It is now (1692)
a private House.

A handsom Brick-house on the South side of Clerken-well Church-yard hath been
so unlucky for at least Forty Years that it was seldom Tenanted; and at last,
no body would adventure to take it. Also a hand­some House in Holbourn that
looked toward the Fields; the Tenants of it did not pros­per, several, about
six.

At the Sign of—over against Nor­thumberland House near Chearing-Cross died the
Lady Baynton [Eldest Daughter of Sir Iohn Danvers of Dantesey.] Some years
after in the same House died my Lady Hoby [her [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=20) Sister] of the
Small-Pox, and about twenty years after died their Nephew Henry Dan­vers Esq
of the Small-Pox, aged Twenty one, wanting two Weeks. He was Nephew and Heir
to the Right Honourable Henry Danvers Earl of Danby.

Edmund Wyld Esq hath had more Deo­dands from his Mannour of Totham in Essex,
than from all his Estate besides: Two Mis­chiefs happened in one Ground there.

Disinheriting the Eldest Son is forbid in the Holy Scripture, and Estates
disinherited are observed to be unfortunate; of which one might make a large
Catalogue. See Dr. Saunderson's Sermon—where he dis­courses of this Subject.

Periodical Small-Poxes.

The Small-Pox is usually in all great Towns:This Ac­count I had from Mr. Tho.
Ax. But it is observed at Taunton in Somersetstire, and at Shirburne in
Dorsetshire, that at one of them at every Seventh Year, and at the other at
every Ninth Year comes a Small-Pox, which the Physitians cannot master, e. g.

Small-pox in Shirburn during the year

    1626

Extracted out of the Register-Book.

And during the year

    1634
From Michaelmas 1642 to Mich.

    1643
From Michaelmas 1649 to Mich.

    1650
From Michaelmas 1657 to Mich.

    1658

In the Year 1667 from Ian. to Sept. 1667 Mr. Ax promised me to enquire the
Years it happened there after 1670, and 1680; but Death prevented him.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=20)

Small-Pox in Taunton all the Year

    1658

Out of the Register-Book.

Likewise in the Year

    1670
Again in the Year

    1677
Again very mortal in the Year

    1684

Mr. Ax also promised me to enquire at Taunton the Years it happened there
after 1660.

It were to be wished that more such Ob­servations were made in other great
Towns.

Platerus makes the like Observations in the second Book of his Practise, pag.
323. He practised at Basil 56 Years, and did ob­serve, that every Tenth Year
they died of the Plague there.

See Captain I. Graunts Observations of the Bills of Mortality at London
[indeed, written by Sir William Petty, which in a late Transaction he
confessed] for the Peri­odical Plagues at London, which (as I re­member) are
every Twenty fifth Year.

### 1.3. CHAP. III.  
Ostenta, or Portents.

HOW it comes to pass, I know not;

Discourse of Nich. Muchiavels Book I. chap. LVI.

but by Ancient and Modern Ex­ample it is evident, that no great Accident
befalls a City or Province, but it is pre­saged by Divination, or Prodigy, or
[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=21)
Astrologie, or some way or other.

I shall here set down a few Instances.

A Rainbow appeared about the Sun before the Battel of Pharsalia. See Appian;
and Mr. T. May's V. Book of his Continuation of Lucan,

Ex Chronico Saxonico, P. 112. Anno MCIV. fuit primus Pentecostes dies Nonis
Iunii, & die Martis sequente, conjuncti sunt quatuor Circuli circa Solem, albi
coloris, & quisque sub alio collocatus, quasi picti essent. Omnes qui videbant
obstupuerunt, propterea quod nunquam ante tales meminerant. Post haec facta
est Pax inter Comitem Robertum de Normanniâ, & Robertum de Baelaesme—

Our Chronicles tell us, that Anno Se­cundo Reginae Mariae 15 Feb. two Suns
ap­peared, and a Rainbow reversed: See the Bow turned downwards, and the two
ends standing upwards; before the coming in of King Philip.

This following Phaenomenon was seen at

_[figure]_

Broad-Chalk in Wiltshire, on the first day [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=21) of May, 1647. It
continued from about Eleven a Clock [or before] till XII. It was a very clear
day; but few did take notice of it, because it was so near the Sun­beams. My
Mother happened to espy it, going to see what a Clock it was by an Ho­rizontal
Dial; and then all the Servants saw it. Upon the like occasion Mr. Io. Sloper
B. D. Vicar there, saw it, and all his Family: and Servants of Sir George
Vaug­ham [then of Falston] who were Hunting on the Downs, saw it. The Circles
were of Rainbow colour; the two Filots, which cross the greater Circle [I
presume they were Segments of a Third Circle] were of a pale Colour. The Sun
was within the Intersections of the Circles.See Sir W. Dugdale's Hist. The
next re­markable thing that followed was, that on the Third of Iune following,
Cornet Ioyce carried King Charles I. Prisoner from Hol­denby to the Isle of
Wight. The Isle of Wight lieth directly from Broad-Chalk, at the X a Clock
point.

This following Phaenomenon was seen in the North side of the Church-yard of Bi
­shops-Lavington in Wiltshire, about the lat­ter end of September 1688, about
Three a Clock in the Afternoon.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=22) This was
more than a Semicircle.

Figure 1. Horizon.

B B Two Balls of light. They were about Eleven degrees above the Horizon by
the Quadrant; observed by Mr. Robert Blea, one of the Earl of Abingdon's
Gentlemen.

Cicero de Natura Deorum Lib. II. Mul­ta praeterea Ostentis, multa ex eis
admonemur, multisque rebus aliis, quas diuturnus usus ita notarit, ut artem
Divinationis efficeret.—

### 1.4. CHAP. IV.  
Omens.

BEfore the Battel at Philippi began, two Eagles fought in the Air between the
two Armies: Both the Armies stood still and beheld them, and the Army was
bea­ten, [[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=22)
that was under the vanquished Eagle. See Appian's Hist. Part. II. Lib. 4. §.
2.

The Silver Cross that was wont to be carried before Cardinal Wolsey, fell out
of its Socket, and was like to have knock'd one of the Bishop's Brains out. A
very lit­tle while after, came in a Messenger, and arrested the Cardinal,
before he could get out of the House. See Stow's Chronicle.

'Tis commonly reported, that before an Heir of the Cliftons of Clifton in
Nottingham­shire dies, that a Sturgeon is taken in the River Trent by that
place.

Thomas Fludd of Kent, Esq told me, that it is an old Observation, which was
pressed earnestly to King Iames I, that he should not remove the Queen of
Scots Body from Northamptonshire where she was beheaded, and interred: For
that, it always bodes ill to the Family, when Bodies are removed from their
Graves. For some of the Fami­ly will die shortly after, as did Prince Henry,
and, I think Queen, Anne.

A little before the Death of Oliver Pro­tector, a Whale came into the River
Thames and was taken at Greenwich ... foot long. 'Tis said, Oliver was
troubled at it.

When I was a Freshman at Oxford 1642, I was wont to go to Christ-Church to see
King Charles I. at Supper: Where I once heard him say, ‘That as he was Hawking
in Scotland, he rode into the Quarry, and [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=23) found the Covey
of Partridges falling up­on the Hawk; and I do remember this expression
farther, viz. and I will swear upon the Book 'tis true.’ When I came to my
Chamber, I told this Story to my Tutor; said he, That Covey was London.

The Bust of King Charles I. carv'd by Barnini, as it was brought in a Boat
upon the Thames, a strange Bird [the like where­of the Bargemen had never
seen] drop'd a drop of Blood, or Blood-like upon it; which left a stain not to
be wiped off. This Bust was carved from a Picture of Sir Anthony Van Dyke's
Drawing; the Sculptor found great fault with the Fore-head, as most
un­fortunate. There was a Seam in the middle of his Fore-head (downwards)
which is a very ill sign in Metoposcopie.

Colonel Sharington Talbot was at Notting­ham, when King Charles I. did set up
his Standard upon the top of the Tower there. He told me, that the first
night, the Wind blew it so, that it hung down almost hori­zontal; which some
did take to be an ill Omen.

The day that the Long Parliament began 1641, the Scepter fell out of the
Figure of King Charles in Wood in Sir—Trenchard's Hall at Wullich in Dorset,
as they were at dinner in the Parlour: Justice Hunt then dined there.

The Picture of Arch-Bishop Lawd in his [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=23) Closet fell down
[the string brake] the day of the sitting of that Parliament. This is
men­tioned in Canterbury's Doom by W. Prynn.

The Psalms for the Eleventh Day of the Month are 56, 57, 58, &c. On the 11th.
day of one of the Months in the Summer time, the Citizens came tumultuously in
great Numbers in Boats and Bardges over a­gainst White-hall, to shew, they
would take the Parliaments part. The Psalms afore­said, both for Morning and
Evening Service are as Prophecies of the Troubles that did ensue.

When the High-Court of Justice was voted in the Parliament-House, as
Berken­head [the Mace-bearer] took up the Mace to carry it before the Speaker,
the top of the Mace fell off. This was avowed to me by an Eye-witness then in
the House.

The Head of King Charles Is. Staff did fall off at his Tryal; that is commonly
known.

The Second Lesson for the 30th. of Ianu­ary in the Kalendar before the Common-
Prayer, is concerning the Tryal of Christ: which when Bishop Duppe read, the
King was displeased with him, thinking he had done it of choice: but the
Bishop cleared himself by the Kalendar, as is to be seen.

King Charles II. was Crowned at the very conjunction of the Sun and Mercury;
Mercury being then in Corde Solis. As the King was at Dinner in Westminster-
Hall, it Thundred [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=24) and Lightned
extreamly. The Cannons and the Thunder played together.

King Charles II. went by long Sea to Portsmouth, or Plymouth, or both: an
ex­traordinary Storm arose, which carried him almost to France. Sir Ionas Moor
(who was then with his Majesty) gave me this Account, and said, that when they
came to Portsmouth to refresh themselves, they had not been there above half
an Hour, but the Weather was Calm and the Sun shone: His Majesty put to Sea
again, and in a lit­tle time they had the like Tempestuous Weather as before.

The Gloucester-Frigot cast away at the Lemanore, and most of the Men in it,
the Duke of York escaping in a Cock-boat An­no 1682\. May the fifth, on a
Fryday.

When King Iames II. was Crowned [ac­cording to the Ancient Custom, the Peers
go to the Throne, and kiss the King] the Crown was almost kiss'd off his Head.
An Earl did set it right: And as he came from the Abbey to Westminster-Hall,
the Crown totter'd extreamly.

The Canopy [of Cloath of Gold] carried over King Iames IIs. Head by the
Wardens of the Cinque Ports, was torn by a puff of Wind as he came to
Westminster-hall: It hung down very lamentably: I saw it.

The top of his Scepter [Flower de Lis] did then fall, which the Earl of
Peterborough took up.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=24) Upon
Saint Mark's day, after the Coro­nation of King Iames II. were prepared
stately Fire-works on the Thames: It hap­pened, that they took fire all
together, and it was so dreadful, that several Spectators leap'd into the
River, choosing rather to be drown'd than burn'd. In a Yard by the Thames was
my Lord Powys's Coach and Horses: the Horses were so frighted by the Fire-
works, that the Coachman was not able to stop them, but ran away over one who
with great difficulty recovered.

When King Iames II. was at Salisbury, Anno 1688, the Iron Crown upon the
Tur­ret of the Councel-house was blown off.

In February, March, and April, two Ravens built their Nests on the Weather-
cock of the high Steeple at Bakwell in Darbyshire.

I did see Mr. Chr. Love beheaded on Tower-hill, in a delicate clear day: About
half an hour after his Head was struck off, the Clouds gathered blacker and
blacker: and such terrible Claps of Thunder came, that I never heard greater.

'Tis reported, that the like happened af­ter the Execution of Alderman Cornish
in Cheap-side, Octob. 23\. 1685.

Anno 1643, as Major Iohn Morgan of Wells was marching with the Kings Army into
the West, fell sick of a Malignant Fe­ver at Salisbury, and was brought
dange­rously ill to my Father's at Broad-Chalk, where [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=25) he was lodged,
secretly, in a Garret. There came a Sparrow to the Chamber Window, which
peck'd the Lead of a certain Pannel only, and only one side of the Lead of the
Lozenge, and made one small hole in it. He continued this pecking and biting
the Lead, during the whole time of his sickness (which was not less than a
Month) when the Major went away the Sparrow desisted: and came thither no
more. Two of the Servants that attended the Major, and sober Persons, declared
this for a certainty.

Sir Walter Long's [of Dorset in Wilts] Widow did make a solemn promise to him,
on his Death-bed, that she would not marry after his Decease. But not long
after one Sir—Fox, a very Beautiful young Gen­tleman did win her Love: so that
notwith­standing her Promise aforesaid, she married him: She married at South-
wrax-hall, where the Picture of Sir Walter hung over the Par­lour door, as it
doth now at Dracot. As Sir—Fox led his Bride by the hand from the Church
(which is near to the House) into the Parlour, the string of the Picture
brake, and the Picture fell on her shoulder, and crack'd in the fall: [it was
painted on wood as the fashion was in those days.] This made her Ladyship
reflect on her Promise, and drew some Tears from her Eyes.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=25) See Sir
Walter Raleigh's History Book IV. chap. 2. §. 7. p ... The Dogs of the French
Army, the night before the Battle of No­vara, ran all to the Swisses Army: the
next day the Swisses obtained a glorious Victory of the French. Sir Walter
Raleigh affirms it to be certainly true.

The last Battle fought in the North of Ireland between the Protestants and the
Pa­pists was in Glinsuly near Letterkenny in the County of Donegall. Veneras
was the Po­pish Bishop of Clogher, and that of the Par­liament Army Sir
Charles Coot. They pitch'd their Tents on each side the River Suly. And the
Papists constantly persist in it to this very day, that the Night before the
Action, a Woman of uncommon stature all in white appearing to the said Bishop,
admonished him not to cross the River first to assault the Enemy, but suf­fer
them to do it, whereby he should ob­tain the Victory. That if the Irish took
the water first to move towards the Eng­lish, they should be put to a total
rout, which came to pass. Ocahan, and Sir Henry O Neal who were both kill'd
there, saw se­verally the same Apparition, and disswaded the Bishop from
giving the first onset, but could not prevail upon him. In the mean time I
find nothing in this Revelation, that any common Soldier might not conclude
without extraordinary means.

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=26) Near the
same place a party of the Pro­testants had been surpriz'd sleeping by the
Popish Irish, were it not for several Wrens that just wakned them by dancing
and pecking on the Drums as the Enemy were approaching. For this reason the
wild Irish mortally hate these Birds to this day, calling them the Devils
Servants, and kill­ing them where ever they catch them; They teach their
Children to thrust them full of Thorns: You'll see sometimes on Ho­lidays a
whole Parish running like mad­men from Hedg to Hedg a Wren-hunting.

Anno 1679, After the Discovery of the Popish Plot, the Penal Laws were put in
execution against the Roman Catholicks: So, that if they did not receive the
Sacrament according to the Church of England in their Parish Church, they were
to be severely proceeded against according to Law: Mr. Ployden, to avoid the
Penalty, went to his Parish Church at Lasham near Alton in Hampshire: when Mr.
Laurence [the Minister] had put the Chalice into Mr. Ployden's hand, the Cup
of it (wherein the Wine was) fell off. 'Tis true, It was out of order before;
and he had a Tremor in his hand. The Communion was stopt by this accident.
This was attested to me by two of the Neighbouring Ministers, as also several
Gentlemen of the Neighbourhood.

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=26) When King
Iames II. first entred Dublin after his Arrival from France 1689, one of the
Gentlemen that bore the Mace before him stumbled without any rub in his way,
or other visible occasion. The Mace fell out of his hands, and the little
Cross upon the Crown thereof stuck fast between two stones in the street. This
is very well known all over Ireland, and did much trouble King Iames himself
with many of his chief Attendants.

### 1.5. CHAP. V.  
Dreams.

‘—  [...]’Homer Iliad A.

HE that has a mind to read of Dreams, may peruse Cicero de Divinatione, Hier.
Cardani Somniorum Synesiorum Lib. IV. and Moldinarius de Insomniis, &c. I
shall here mention but little out of them, my purpose being chiefly to set
down some remarkable, and Divine Dreams of some, that I have had the honour to
be intimate­ly acquainted with, persons worthy of Be­lief.

Cicero de Divinatione Lib. I.

Hannibalem, Coelius scribit, cùm Columnam auream, quae es­set in fano Iunonis
Laciniae, auferre vellet, du­bitaretque [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=27) utrum ea solida
esset, an extrinsecus inaurata, perterebravisse: cumque solidam in­venisset,
statuissetque tollere, secundum quietem visam esse ei Iunonem praedicere, ne
id faceret; minitarique, si id fecisset, se curaturam, ut eum quoque oculum,
quo bene videret, amitteret: idque ab homine acuto non esse neglectum: ita­que
ex eo auro, quod exterebratum esset, bucu­lam curasse faciendam, & eam in
summa co­lumna collocavisse.

—Cum duo quidam Arcades familiares iter unà facerent, & Megaram venissent,
alte­rum ad cauponem divertisse; ad hospitem al­terum. Qui, ut coenati
quiescerent, concubia nocte visum esse in somnis ei qui erat in hospi­tio,
illum alterum or are ut subveniret, quòd si­bi à caupone interitus pararetur:
eum primò perterritum somnio surrexisse: deinde, cùm se collegisset, idque
visum pro nihilo habendum esse duxisset, recubuisse: tum ei dormienti eundem
illum visum esse rogare, ut quoniam sibi vivo non subvenisset, mortem suam ne
inultam esse pateretur: se interfectum in plaustrum â caupo­ne esse conjectum,
& supra stercus injectum: petere, ut manè ad portam adesset, priusquam
plaustrum ex oppido exiret. Hoc verò som­nio commotum manè bubulco praestò ad
por­tam fuisse, quaesisse ex eo, quid esset in plaustro: illum perterritum
fugisse, mortuum erutuum esse, cauponem re patefacta poenas dedisse. Quid hoc
somnio dici divinius potest?

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=27) —Somnium
de Simonide, qui cum ignotum quendam projectum mortuum vidisset, eumque
humavisset, haberetque in animo navem conscendere, moneri visus est, ne id
faceret, ab eo, quem sepultum affecerent: si navigasset eam naufragio esse
perituram: itaque Simon­dem redisse; perisse caeteros, qui tum navigassent.

Cicero de Divinatione, Lib. II. Somnium Alexandri. Qui, cùm Ptolomaeus
familiaris ejus in praelio telo venenato ictus esset, eóque vulnere summo cum
dolore moreretur, Alexan­der assidens somno est consopitus; tum secundum
quietem visus ei dicitur draco is, quem mater Olympias alebat, radiculam ore
ferre, & simul dicere quo illa loci nasceretur (neque is longe ab­erat ab eo
loco:) ejus autem esse vim tantam, ut Ptolemaeum facile sanaret. Cùm Alexander
experrectus narrasset amicis somnium, emisisse qui illam radiculam quaererent.
Qua inventa, & Ptolemaeus sanatus dicitur, & multi mili­tes, qui erant eodem
genere teli vulnerati.

‘Cardanus Somniorum Synesiorum. Lib. IIII. Cap. 2. Narrat Plinius 25 Lib. Nat.
Hist. vir ab omni superstitione alienissimus, Histo­riam hujusmodi.Nuper
cujusdam mili­tantis in Paetorio mater vidit in quiete, ut radicem sylvestris
Rosae (quam cynor­rhodon vocant) blanditam sibi aspectu pridie in fruteto,
mitteret filio bibendam: In Lacetania res gerebatur, Hispaniae proxima parte:
casuque accidit, ut mi­lite à morsu canis incipiente aquas ex­pavescere,
[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=28)
superveniret epistola orantis ut parêret religioni: servatusque est ex
in­sperato, & posteà quisquis auxilium simi­le t [...]ntavit.’

Ibid. Galeni tria Somnia.

—Tertium magis dignum miraculo, cum bis per somnium admonitus ut arteriam
secaret quae inter pollicem & indicem est, idque agens liberatus sit à
diu­turno dolore, quo infestabatur eâ in parte, qua septo transverso jecur
jungitur, idque in libri de sectione venae fine testatus est. Magno certè
exemplo, quod tantus vir in medicina eam ad­hibuerit somnio fidem, ut in
seipso periculam vitae subierit, in arte propria. Deinde probi­tatem admiror,
ut quò potuerit solertia ingenii sibi inventum ascribere, Deo cui debebatur,
red­diderit. Dignus vel hoc solo vir immortali­tate nominis, & librorum
suorum.

In his fourth Book, chap. 4. De exem­plis propriis, he owns the Solution of
some difficult Problems in Algebra to his Dreams.

Plinii Nat. Hist. Lib. XXII. cap. 17.

Vernula charus Pericli Atheniensium Prin­pi, cùm is in arce templum
aedificaret, repsissetque super altitudinem fastigii, & inde cecidisset, hac
herba [Parthenio] di­citur sanatus, mostrata Pericli somnio à Minerva. Quare
Parthenium vocari coepta est, assignaturque ei Deae.

Augustinus, Cui etiam praeter sanctitatem, plena fides adhiberi potest, duo
narrat inter reliqua, somnia admiranda. Primum, quod [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=28) cum quidam
mortuo nuper patre venaretur tan­quam de pecunia quam pater illi ex
chirographo debuisset, dum incastus viveret, ex hac causae nocte quadam umbram
patris videt, quae illum admonuit de persolutâ pecuniâ & ubi chirogra­phum
esset repositum. Cum surrexisset, invenit chirographum loco eo quem umbra
paterna docu­erat, liberatusque est ab injusto petitore.

Alterum adhuc magis mirum.

Praestantius, vir quidam, à Philosopho peti­er at dubitationem quandam solvi:
quod ille per­negavit. Nocte sequente, tametsi vigilaret Praestantius, vidit
sibi Philosophum assistere, ac dubitationem solvere, moxque abire. Cùm die
sequenti obviam Praestantius eundem habu­isset Philosophum, rogat, Cur cùm
pridie ro­gatus noluisset solvere illam quaestionem, in­tempesta nocte non
rogatus, & venisset ad se & dubitationem aperuisset. Cui Philosophus. Non
quidem ego adveni, sed somnians visus sum tibi hoc officium praestare.

The Plague raging in the Army of the Emperor Charles Vth, he Dreamt, that the
Decoction of the Root of the Dwarfe-Thistle [a Mountain Plant since called the
Caro­line Thistle] would Cure that Disease. See Gerards Herbal, who tells us
this.

In Queen Mary's time, there was only one Congregation of Protestants in
London, to the number of about 300. One— was the Deacon to them, and kept the
List of their Names: One—of that Congre­gation [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=29) did Dream, that
a Messenger [Queens Officer] had seized on this Deacon, and taken his List;
the Fright of the Dream a­waked him: He fell asleep and dreamt the same
perfect Dream again. In the Morn­ing before he went out of his Chamber, the
Deacon came to him and told him his Dream, and said, it was a Warning from
God; the Deacon slighted his advice as savouring of Superstition; but—was so
urgent with him, that he prevail'd with him to deposite the List in some other
Hand, which he did that Day. The next Day the Queens Officer attacqued him,
and search'd (in vain) for the List, which had it been found, would have
brought them all to the Flame. Fox's Martyrology.

When Arch-Bishop Abbot's Mother (a poor Clothworker's Wife in Gilford) was
with Child of him, she did long for a Iack, and she dreamt that if she should
Eat a Jack, her Son in her Belly should be a great Man. She arose early the
next Morning and went with her Pail to the River-side (which runneth by the
House, now an Ale-house, the Sign of the 3 Mariners) to take up some Water,
and in the Water in the Pail she found a good Jack, which she dressed, and eat
it all, or very near. Seve­ral of the best Inhabitants of Gilford were invited
(or invited themselves) to the Christning of the Child; it was Bred up a
[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=29) Scholar
in the Town, and by degrees, came to be Arch-Bishop of Canterbury.

In the Life of Monsieur Peiresk, Writ by Gassendes, it is said, that Monsieur
Peiresk, who had never been at London, did Dream, that he was there, and as he
was walking in a great Street there, espied in a Goldsmiths Glass-Desk, an
Antique Coin, he could never meet with (I think an Otho.) When he came to
London, walking in (I think) Cheapside he saw such a Shop, and remem­bred the
Countenance of the Goldsmith in his Dream, and found the Coin desir'd, in his
Desk. See his Life.

When Doctor Harvey (one of the Physi­tians College in London) being a Young
Man, went to Travel towards Padoa, he went to Dover (with several others) and
shewed his Pass, as the rest did, to the Go­vernor there. The Governor told
him, that he must not go, but he must keep him Prisoner. The Doctor desired to
know for what reason? how he had transgrest. Well it was his Will to have it
so. The Pacquet-Boat Hoised Sail in the Evening (which was ve­ry clear) and
the Doctor's Companions in it. There ensued a terrible Storm, and the Pacquet-
Boat and all the Passengers were Drown'd: The next day the sad News was
brought to Dover. The Doctor was unknown to the Governor, but by Name and
Face; but the Night before, the Go­vernor [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=30) had a perfect
Vision in a Dream of Doctor Harvey, who came to pass over to Calais; and that
he had a Warning to stop him. This the Governor told to the Doctor the next
day. The Doctor was a pious good Man, and has several times di­rected this
Story to some of my Acquain­tance.

My Lady Seymer dreamt, that she found a Nest, with Nine Finches in it. And so
many Children she had by the Earl of Win­chelsey, whose name is Finch.

The Countess of Cork (now Burlington) being at Dublin, dreamt that her Father
(the Earl of Cumberland) who was then at York, was Dead. He died at that time.

'Tis certain, that several had monitory Dreams of the Conflagration of London.

Sir Christopher Wren, being at his Father's House Anno. 1651\. at Knahil in
Wilts, (a young Oxford Scholar) dreamt, that he saw a Fight in a great Market-
place, which he knew not; where some were flying, and others pursuing; and
among those that fled, he saw a Kinsman of his who went in­to Scotland to the
King's Army. They heard in the Country, that the King was come into England,
but whereabout he was they could not tell. The next Night his Kinsman came to
his Father at Knahill, and was the first that brought the News of the Fight at
Worcester.

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=30) When Sir
Christopher Wren was at Paris about 1671, he was Ill and Feverish, made but
little Water, had a pain in his Reins. He sent for a Physitian, who advis'd
him to be let Blood, thinking he had a Pleurisy: But Bleeding much disagreeing
with his Constitution, he would defer it a Day lon­ger: That Night he dreamt,
that he was in a place where Palm-Trees grew, (sup­pose Egypt) and that a
Woman in a Ro­mantick Habit, reach'd him Dates. The next Day he sent for
Dates, which Cured him of the pain in his Reins.

Since, I have learn'd that Dates are an admirable Medicine for the Stone, from
old Capt. Took of K. Take 6 or 10 Date­stones, dry them in an Oven, pulverize
and searce them; take as much as will lie on a 6 d. in a quarter of a Pint of
White-wine Fasting; and at Four in the Afternoon: Walk or Ride an Hour after:
In a Weeks time it will give ease, and in a Month Cure. If you are at the
Bath, the Bath Water is better than White-wine to take it in.

Sir Iohn Hoskin's Lady, when she lay in of her Eldest Son had a Swelling on
one side of her Belly the 3d. day when the Milk came, and Obstructions: She
dreamt that Syrup of Elderberries and Distill'd water of Woormwood would do
her good; and it did so: she found ease in a quarter of an [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=31) Hour after she
had taken it. I had this Ac­count from her Ladyship's own Mouth.

Captain—Wingate told me, that Mr. Edmund Gunter of Gresham College did cast
his Nativity, when he was about 17, or 18 Years old; by which he did
Prognosticate that he should be in danger to lose his Life for Treason.
Several Years before the Ci­vil Wars broke out, he had dreamt that he was to
be put to Death, before a great Ca­stle, which he had never seen; which made a
strong impression in his Memory. In Anno 1642, he did oppose the Church
Ce­remonies, and was chosen a Member of Par­liament, then was made a Captain,
and was taken Prisoner at Edge-hill by Prince Rupert, and carried to
Kenelworth Castle, where he was Tryed by a Council of War, and Condemn'd to
Die: But they did better consider of it, and spared his Life; for that he
being so considerable a Person, might make an exchange for some of the King's
Party: And he was exchang'd for the Right Honourable Montague Earl of Lindsey
(Heir of the General). Since the Restauration he was made one of the
Com­missioners of the Excise-Office in London. Capt.—Wingate was a Pri­soner
in Oxford after Edg­hill Flight, 1642. He did Protest that Kenelworth Castle
was the very Castle that he saw in his Dream.

Sir Roger L'Estrange was wont to diver­tise himself with Cocking in his
Father's (Sir Hammond L'Estrange's) Park; he dreamt [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=31) that there came
to him in such a place of the Park a Servant, who brought him News, that his
Father (who had been Sick a good while) was departed. The next day go­ing to
his usual Recreation, he was resolv'd for his Dream sake to avoid that way;
but his Game led him to it, and in that very place, the Servant came and
brought him the Ill News according to his Dream.

Mr. Edmund Halley R. S. S. was carried on with a strong Impulse to take a
Voyage to St. Hellens, to make Observations of the Southern Constellations,
being then about 24 Years Old. Before he undertook his Voy­age, he dream'd
that he was at Sea Sailing towards that place, and saw the Prospect of it from
the Ship in his Dream, which he declared in the R. Society that it was the
perfect Representation of that Island, even as he had it really when he
approach'd to it.

A Gentlewoman dream'd that a Pul [...]ess of Blew-Corans, would Cure her sore
Throat; and it did so: She was a pious Woman, and affirm'd it to be true.

Anno 1690 one in Ireland dream'd of a Brother, or near Relation of his, (who
lived at Amesbery in Wiltshire) that he saw him riding on the Downs, and that
two Thieves Robb'd him and Murther'd him: The Dream awaked him, he fell asleep
a­gain and had the like Dream. He Writ to [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=32) his Relation an
account of it, and describ'd the Thieves Complexion, Stature and Cloths; and
advis'd him to take care of himself. Not long after he had receiv'd this
Monitory Letter, he Rode towards Salisbury, and was Robb'd and Murther'd: And
the Murtherers were discovered by this Letter, and were Executed: They hang in
Chains on the Road to London.

'Twas reveal'd to a King of Scots, that if he drank of the Water of Muswell,
he should be Cured—After great enquiry, they heard of such a place, not far
from Hornsey in Middlesex. See Weaver's Funeral Monu­ments of the Well: And
Io. Norden's De­scription of Middlesex. Here was afterwards founded a
Religious-House for Austin Monks: Since it belonged to Sir Tho. Row: and in
1677, was pull'd down, and the Ma­terials sold. Anciently the King's of
Scot­land were Feudatory to the King's of Eng­land, and did their Homage every
Christ­mas Day. They had several Lodges be­longing to them for their Reception
in their Journey; as at Huntingdon &c. See Caxton's Chronicle concerning this.

The Water of this Spring is drank for some Distempers still.

Somnium ex Euburneâ portâ.

Mrs. Cl. of S. in the County of S. had a beloved Daughter, who had been a long
time Ill, and received no benefit from her [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=32) Physitians. She
dream'd that a Friend of hers deceased, told her, that if she gave her
Daughter a Drench of Yewgh pounded, that she would recover, she gave her the
Drench and it Killed her. Whereupon she grew almost distracted: Her Chamber
Maid to Complement her, and mitigate her Grief, said surely that could not
Kill her; she would adventure to take the same her self; she did so, and died
also. This was about the Year 1670, or 1671. I knew the Fa­mily.

A Gentlewoman of my acquaintance dream'd, that if she slept again, the House
would be in danger to be Robb'd: She kept awake, and anon Thieves came to
break open the House; but were prevented.

Mr. Winstanly (Surveyor of the King's Works) hath built a handsome House at
Littlebury in Cambridgshire near Audely-Inn where are to be seen several
Ingenious Ma­chines; one whereof is thus: A Wooden Slipper finely Carved lieth
on the Floor of a Chamber about a Yard and an half within the Door, which the
Stranger is to take up (it comes up pretty stiff) and up starts a Skeleton. I.
H. Esq had been there: And being at West-Lavington with the Earl of Abbington,
dream'd December the 9th, that he was at Mr. Winstanly's House, and took up
the Slipper, and up rose his Mother in Mourning: And anon the Queen appeared
[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=33) in
Mourning. He told his Dream the next Morning to my Lord, and his Lordship
im­parted it to me (then there). Tuesday Dec. 11. in the Evening, came a
Messenger Post from London to acquaint Mr. H. that his Mother was dangerously
Ill: He went to London the next Day: his Mother lived but a­bout 8 Days
longer. On Saturday Dec. 15. the Queen was taken Ill, which turned to the
Small-Pox, of which she died Decem. 28 about two a Clock in the Morning.

There are Millions of such Dreams too little taken notice of; but they have
the truest Dreams, whose IXth House is well dignified; which mine is not: But
most have some Monitory Dreams. The Germans are great Observers of them. It is
said, in the Life of Vavasor Powell, that he was a great Ob­server of Dreams,
(P. 17 and 114 of his Life) that he had many Warnings from them; that God had
spoken to himself and others by them; for Warning, Instruction, or Reproof:
And it is also there averred, that Angels had appear'd to him. See P. 8\. of
his Life.

In Mr. Walton's Life of Sir Hen. Wotton, there is a Remarkable story of the
discove­ry of stoln Plate in Oxford by a Dream which his Father had at Borton
Mulharb in Kent. See in Ath. et Fasti Oxon. Vol. 1. P. 351.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=33)

### 1.6. CHAP. VI.  
Apparitions.

CYnthia [Propertius's Mistress] did ap­pear to him after her death with the
Beril-Ring on her Finger. See Propertius Eleg.—

St. Augustin [in—] affirms, that he did once see a Satyr or Demon.

The Antiquities of Oxford tell us, that St. Edmund Arch-Bishop of Canterbury
did sometimes converse with an Angel, [or Nymph] at a Spring without St.
Clements Parish near Oxford: as Numa Pompilius did with the Nymph Egeria. This
Well was stopped up since Oxford was a Garrison.

Charles the Simple, King of France, as he was hunting in a Forest, and lost
his Com­pany, was frighted to simplicity by an Appa­rition.

Philip Melancthon, writes, that the Ap­parition of a Venerable Person came to
him in his Study, and bade him to warn his Friend Grynaeus to depart from him
as soon as he could, or else the Inquisitors would seize on him: which
monitory Dream saved Grynaeus life.

Mr. Fiennes Morison in his Travels, saith, that when he was at Prague, the
Appariti­of [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=34) his Father came
to him; and at that ve­ry time his Father died.

See the Life of Iohn Donn D. D. Dean of St. Paul's writ by Mr. Isaac Walton,
where it is affirmed, that the Dean did see the Apparition of his Wife.

Henry IV King of France, not long be­fore he was stabbed by Ravellac, as he
was hunting in the Forest (I think of Fon­tain Bleau) met in a Thicket the
Gros Ve­neur, who said to him, Demandez vous? [or Entendez vous?] he could not
tell whe­ther of the two.

There is a Tradition (which I have heard from Persons of Honour) that as the
Protector Seymor and his Duchess were walking in the Gallery at Sheen [in
Surrey] both of them did see a Hand with a bloody Sword come out of the Wall.
He was af­terwards beheaded.

Mr. Caisho Burroughs was one of the most beautiful Men in England, and very
Vali­ant, but very proud and blood-thirsty: There was then in London a very
Beautiful Italian Lady, who fell so extreamly in Love with him, that she did
let him enjoy her, which she had never let any Man do before: Wherefore, said
she, I shall request this fa­vour of you, never to tell any one of it. The
Gentlewoman died: and afterwards in a Tavern in London he spake of it: and
there going to make water, the Ghost of [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=34) the Gentlewoman
did appear to him. He was afterwards troubled with the Appari­tion of her,
even sometimes in company when he was drinking; but he only per­cieved it:
Before she did appear he did find a kind of Chilness upon his Spirits; she did
appear to him in the Morning before he was killed in a Duel. This account I
have from an intimate Friend of mine, who was an acquaintance of his.

Anno 1647, the Lord Mohun's Son and Heir (a gallant Gentleman, Valiant, and a
great Master of Fencing and Horsemanship) had a Quarrel with Prince Griffin;
there was a Challenge, and they were to Fight on Horse-back in Chelsey-fields
in the Morn­ing: Mr. Mohun went accordingly to meet him; but about Ebery-Farm
he was met by some who quarrell'd with him and Pi­stol'd him; it was believed,
by the Order of Prince Griffin; for he was sure, that Mr. Mohun being so much
the better Horse­man &c. would have Killed him, had they Fought. In Iames-
street in Covent-Garden did then Lodge a Gentlewoman a Hand­some Woman but
Common, who was Mr. Mohun's Sweet-heart. Mr. Mohun was Murthered about Ten a
clock in the Morn­ing; and at that very time, his Mistress being in Bed, saw
Mr. Mohun come to her Bed-side, drew the Curtain, looked upon her and went
away: She called after him [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=35) but no answer:
She knock'd for her Maid, ask'd her for Mr. Mohun; she said, she did not see
him, and had the Key of her Cham­ber door in her Pocket. This Account my
Friend aforesaid, had from the Gentlewo­mans own Mouth, and her Maids.

A parallel Story to this, is, that Mr. Brown, (Brother-in-law to the Lord
Conningsby) dis­covered his being Murthered to several. His Phantome appear'd
to his Sister and her Maid in Fleet-street about the time he was Killed in
Herefordshire, which was about a Year since, 1693.

Sir Walter Long of Draycot (Grandfather of Sir Iames Long) had two Wives; the
first a Daughter of Sir—Packinton in Worcestershire; by whom he had a Son: His
second Wife was a Daugter of Sir Iohn Thinne of Longleat; by whom he had
seve­ral Sons and Daughters. The second Wife did use much Artifice to render
the Son by the first Wife (who had not much Prome­thean Fire) Odious to his
Father; she would get her Acquaintance to make him Drunk; and then expose him
in that Con­dition to his Father; in fine she never left off her attempts,
till she had got Sir Walter to disinherit him. She laid the Scene for the
doing this, at Bath at the Assizes, where was her Brother Sir Egrimond Thinne
an E­minent Serjeant at Law, who drew the Writing; and his Clerk was to sit up
all [[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=35) Night
to Engross it; as he was Writing, he perceived a shadow on the Parchment, from
the Candle; he look'd up, and there ap­pear'd a Hand, which immediately
va­nish'd; he was startled at it, but thought it might be only his Fancy,
being sleepy; so he Writ on; by and by a fine White-hand interposed between
the Writing and the Can­dle (he could discern it was a Womans Hand) but
vanish'd as before; I have forgot it appeared a Third time. But with that, the
Clerk threw down his Pen, and would Engross no more, but goes and tells his
Master of it, and absolutely refused to do it. But it was done by some body,
and Sir Wal­ter Long was prevailed with to Seal and Sign it. He lived not long
after; and his Body did not go quiet to the Grave, it being Arrested at the
Church-porch by the Tru­stees of the first Lady. The Heir's Relati­ons took
his part, and Commenc'd a Suit against Sir Walter (the second Son) and
compell'd him to accept of a Moiety of the Estate; so the Eldest Son kept
South-Wran­chester, and Sir Walter the second Son Dracot Cernes, &c. This was
about the middle of the Reign of King Iames the First.

I must not forget an Apparition in my Country, which appear'd several times to
Doctor Turbervile's Sister, at Salisbury; which is much talk'd of. One Marry'd
a second Wife, and contrary to the Agree­ment [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=36) and Settlement
at the first Wife's Marriage, did wrong the Children by the first Venter. The
Settlement was hid be­hind a Wainscot in the Chamber where the Doctor's Sister
did lie: And the Appari­tion of the first Wife did discover it to her. By
which means Right was done to the first Wife's Children. The Apparition told
her that she Wandred in the Air, and was now going to God. Dr. Turbervile
(Ocu­list) did affirm this to be true. See Mr. Glanvill's Sadducismus
Triumphatus.

One Mr. Towes who had been School-fel­low with Sir George Villers, the Father
of the first Duke of Buckingham, (and was his Friend and Neighbour) as he lay
in his Bed a­wake, (and it was Day-light,) came into his Chamber the Phantome
of his dear Friend Sir George Villers: Said Mr. Towes to him, Why, you are
Dead, what make you here? Said the Knight, I am Dead, but cannot rest in peace
for the Wickedness and Abo­mination of my Son George at Court. I do appear to
you, to tell him of it, and to ad­vise and dehort him from his Evil ways. Said
Mr. Tows, the Duke will not believe me, but will say, that I am Mad, or Doat.
Said Sir George, Go to him from me, and tell him by such a Token [some Mole]
that he had in some secret place, which none but himself knew of. Accordingly
Mr. Towes went to the Duke, who Laugh'd at his Mes­sage. [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=36) At his return
home, the Phantome ap­peared again; and told him, that the Duke would be
Stab'd (he drew out a Dagger) a quarter of a Year after: And you shall
out­live him half a Year; and the Warning that you shall have of your Death
will be, That your Nose will fall a bleeding: All which accordingly fell out
so. This Account I have had (in the main) from two, or three; but Sir William
Dugdale affirms what I have here taken from him to be true, and that the
Apparition told him of several things to come, which proved true, e. g. of a
Pri­soner in the Tower, that should be honoura­bly delivered. This Mr. Towes
had so of­ten the Ghost of his old Friend appear to him, that it was not at
all terrible to him. He was Surveyor of the Works at Windsor (by the favour of
the Duke:) Being then sitting in the Hall, he cried out, The Duke of
Buckingham is stabb'd: He was stabb'd that very moment.

This Relation Sir William Dugdale had from Mr. Pine, (Neighbour to Mr. Towes
without Bishop-gate) they were both great lovers of Musick, and sworn
Brothers. Mr. William Lilly Astrologer, did Print this Sto­ry false, which
made Sir Edmund Wyndam (who Married Mr. Pines Daughter) give to Sir George
Hollis this true Account contrary to Mr. Lilly.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=37) Mr.
Thomas Elyot, Groom of the Bed-Chamber, Married Sir Edmund Wyndham's Daughter,
and had the Roll (of near a Quire of Paper) of the Conferences of the
Apparition and Mr. Towes. Mr. Elyot was wont to say, that Mr. Towes was (not a
Bi­got, or did trouble himself much about a Religion, but was) a Man of great
Mo­rals.

Sir William Dugdale did farther inform me that Major General Middleton (since
Lord) went into the Highlands of Scotland, to endeavour to make a Party for
King Charles the First. An Old Gentleman (that was second-sighted) came and
told him that his endeavour was good; but he would be unsuccessful, and
moreover, That they would put the King to Death: and that several other
Attempts would be made, but all in vain: But that his Son would come in, but
not Reign; but at last would be Restored. This Lord Middleton had a great
Friendship with the Laird Bocconi, and they had made an Agree­ment, That the
first of them that Died, should appear to he other in extremity. The Lord
Middleton was taken Prisoner at Worcester Fight, and was Prisoner in the Tower
of London under Three Locks. Ly­ing in his Bed pensive, Bocconi appeared to
him; my Lord Middleton asked him if he were dead or alive? he said, Dead, and
that he was a Ghost; and told him, that [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=37) within Three
Days he should escape, and he did so, in his Wives Cloaths. When he had done
his Message, he gave a Frisk, and said,

Givenni givanni 'tis very strange,

In the World to see so sudden a Change.

And then gathered up and vanished. This Account Sir William Dugdale had from
the Bishop of Edenborough. And this, and the former Account he hath Writ in a
Book of Miscellanies, which I have seen, [and is now reposited (with other
Books of his) in the Musaeum at Oxford.]

Anno. 1670, not far from Cyrencester, was an Apparition: Being demanded,
whe­ther a good Spirit, or a bad? returned no answer, but disappeared with a
curious Perfume and most melodious Twang. Mr. W. Lilly believes it was a
Farie.

So Propertius—

Omnia finieret; tenues secessit in auras:

Mansit odor; posses scire fuisse Deam.

The Learned Hen. Iacob, Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, died at Dr.
Iacob's M. D. House in Canterbury. About a Week after his Death, the Doctor
being in Bed and awake, and the Moon shining bright, saw his Cousin Henry
standing by his Bed, in his Shirt, with a white Cap on his Head, and his Beard
Mustaches turning up, as when he was alive. The Doctor pinched himself and was
sure he was awaked: He turned to the other side, [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=38) from him; and
after some time took courage to turn the other way again towards him; and
Henry Iacob stood there still, he should have spoken to him, but he did not;
for which he has been ever since sorry. About half an Hour after, he vanished.
Not long after this, the Cook Maid, going to the Wood­pile to fetch Wood to
dress Supper, saw him standing in his shirt upon the Wood­pile.See the whole
Sto­ry in Ath. & Fas [...]i Oxon. Part.  [...]. p. 91. This very Story Dr.
Iacob told me himself being then at my Ld. Teynhams in Kent, where he was then
Physitian to my El­dest Son; whom he recovered from a Fever. This Account I
had in a Letter from Dr. Iacob 1673, relating to his Life, for Mr. Anthony
Word; which is now in his Hands.

When Henry Iacob died, he would fain have spoken to the Doctor but could not,
his Tongue faltered. 'Tis imagin'd, he would have told Doctor Iacob, with what
Person he had deposited his Manuscripts of his own Writing: (they were all the
Ri­ches he had) 'tis suspect'd that one had them and Printed them under his
own Name. —See there in the said Athenae Vol. or Part 2. P. 90.

Mr. T. M. an old Acquaintance of mine hath assured me, that about a quarter of
a Year after his first Wives death, as he lay in Bed awake with his little
Grand-child, his Wife opened the Closet-door, and came in­to the Chamber to
the Bed-side, and looked upon him, and stooped down and Kissed him; her Lips
were warm, he fancied they would have been cold. He was about to [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=38) have embraced
her, but was afraid it might have done him hurt. When she went from him, he
asked her when he should see her again? she turned about and smil'd, but said
nothing. The Closet-door striked, as it uses to do, both at her coming in and
going out. He had every Night a great Coal-fire in his Chamber, which gave a
light as clear almost as a Candle. (He was Hypocondrical.) He Marry'd two
Wives since; the later end of his Life was uneasie.

Anno. 165 ... At—in the Moorlands in Staffordshire, lived a poor Old Man, who
had been a long time Lame. One Sunday in the Afternoon he being alone, one
knock'd at his Door: He bade him open it, and come in. The Stranger desir'd a
Cup of Beer: The Lame Man desir'd him to take a Dish and draw some, for he was
not able to do it himself. The Stranger ask'd the poor Old Man, how long he
had been Ill? The poor Man told him. Said the Stranger I can Cure you. Take
two or Three Balm-leaves steep'd in your Beer for a Fortnight, or three Weeks,
and you will be restor'd to your Health: But Constantly and Zealously serve
God. The poor Man did so, and became perfectly well. This Stranger was in a
Purple shag-gown, such as was not seen or known in those parts: And no body in
the street (after Even-song) did see any one in such a colour'd Habit. Dr.
Gilbert Sheldon, (since [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=39) Arch-bishop of
Canterbury) was then in the Moorlands, and justified the truth of this, to
Elias Ashmole Esq from whom I had this Account: And he hath inserted it in
some of his Memoirs, which are in the Musaeum at Oxford.

# Mr. Io Lydill of Trin. College Soc. Oxon. March 11 1649, 50. Attests the
ensu­ing Relation, in a Letter to Mr. Aubrey, thus,

Mr. Aubrey,

COncerning that which happen'd at Wood-stock, I was told by Mr. W. Haws (who
now lives with Sir William Fleetwood in the Park) That the Committee which
sate in the Mannor-house, for Selling the King's Lands, were frighted by
strange Apparitions; and that the Four Surveyors which were sent to Measure
the Park, and Lodged themselves with some other Companions in the Mannor, were
pelted out of their Chambers by Stones thrown in at the Windows (but from what
Hands the Stones came they could not see) that their Can­dles were continually
put out as fast as they lighted them; and that one with his Sword drawn to
de­fend a Candle, was with his own Scabbard in the mean time well Cudgell'd;
so that for the blow, or for fear, he fell Sick, and the others forc'd to
remove; some of them to Sir William Fleet­wood's House, and the rest to some
other [[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=39)
places. But concerning the cutting of the Oak, in particular I have nothing.

Your Friend, to be commanded to my power, Iohn Lydall.

One Lambert a Gun-Smith at Hereford, was at Carmarthen, to mend and put in
or­der the Ammunition of that County before the first Expedition to Scotland,
which was 1639. He was then a Young Man, and walking on the Sand by the Sea-
side, a Man comes to him (he did verily believe it was a Man) and ask'd him,
if he knew Hereford? Yes, quoth he, I am a Hereford Man. Do you know it well,
quoth the other? Per­fectly well, quoth Lambert. ‘That City shall be begirt
[he told me he did not know what the word begirt meant then] by a Foreign
Nation, that will come and pitch their Camp in the Hay-wood, and they shall
batter such a Gate, which they did, (I have forgot the name of it) and shall
go away, and not take it.’ The Scots came in 1645, and Encamp'd before
Hereford in the Hay-wood, and Storm'd the—Gate, and raised the Siege. Lambert
did well remember this Discourse, but did not heed it till they came to the
Hay-wood: Many of the City had heard of this story, but when the— Gate was
Storm'd, Lambert went to all the [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=40) Guards of the
Town, and encouraged them with more than ordinary Confidence: And, contrary to
all humane expectation, when the Besieg'd had no hope o [...] Relief, the
Scots raised the Siege, Sept. 2. 1645, and went back into Scotland, re
infecta. I knew this Lambert, and took this Account from his own Mouth; he is
a modest poor Man, of a very Innocent Life, lives Poor, and cares not to be
Rich.

—A Minister, who lived by Sir Iohn Warre in Somersetshire about 1665, walk­ing
over the Park to give Sir Iohn a Visit, was rencountred by a Venerable Old
Man, who said to him, ‘Prepare your self for such a Day (which was about three
Days after) You shall die.’ The Minister told Sir Iohn Warre and my Lady this
Story, who heeded it not: On the Morning fore-warn'd Sir Iohn calls upon the
Parson early to Ride a Hunting, and to Laugh at his prediction: His Maid went
up to call him and found him stark Dead. This from my Lady Katharine Henley,
who had it from my Lady Warre. But Dr. Bur­net in the Life of the Earl of
Rochester, makes it a Dream.

This put me in mind of a Story in the Legend, &c. of King Edward the Confessor
being forewarned of his Death by a Pilgrim, to whom St. Iohn the Evangelist
reveal'd it: for which the King gave the Pilgrim a rich [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=40) Ring from off
his Finger: And the event answered. The Story is well Painted in Glass, in a
Window of the South Isle of Westmimster-Abbey (the next Window from that over
the Door that opens into the West walk of the Cloyster) it is the best Window
in the Church: Underneath the Two Fi­gures, viz. of the King and the Pilgrim
are these following Verses, Viz.

Rex cui nil aliud praesto fuit, accipe, dixit,

Annulum, & ex digito detrahit ille suo.

—Evangelistae—villa Iohannis.

—gratia petit.

The Verses under the Pilgrim are not legible. This story is in Caxtons
Chroni­cle.

Dr.—Twiss Minister of the New Church at Westminster told me that his Fa­ther
[Dr. Twiss Prolocutor of the Assembly of Divines, and Author of Vindiciae]
when he was a School-boy at Winchester, saw the Phantome of a Schoolfellow of
his deceased [a Rakebell] who said to him, I am damned. This was the occasion
of Dr. Twiss [the Fa­thers] Conversion, who had been before that time (as he
told his Son) a very wick­ed Boy, [He was Hypochondriacal]. There is a story
like this, of the Conversion of St. Bruno, by an Apparition: Upon which he
became mighty devout, and founded the Order of the Carthusians.

Iohn Evelyn Esq R. S. S. shewed us at [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=41) the Royal-
Society, a Note under Mr. Smyth's Hand [the Curate of Deptford] that in
No­vember 1679, as he was in bed sick of an Ague, came to him the Vision of a
Master of Arts, with a white Wand in his Hand: And told him, that, if he did
lie on his back three Hours, viz. from ten to one, that he should be rid of
his Ague. He lay a good while on his back; but at last being weary he turned,
and immediately the A­gue attacqued him afterwards, he strictly followed the
Direction, and was perfectly cured. He was awake, and it was in the day-time.

This puts me in mind of a Dream of old Farmer Good, a Neighbour of mine at
Broad-Chalk, who being ill, dreamt that he met with an old Friend of his (long
since deceas­ed) by Knighton-Ashes (in that Parish) who told him that if he
rose out of his Bed, that he would die. He awaked and rose to make Water, and
was immediateiy seiz­ed with a shivering Fit, and died of an A­gue, aged, 84.

The Lady Viscountess Maidston told me, she saw (as it were) a Fly of Fire, fly
round about her in the dark, half an hour before her Lord died: He was killed
at Sea: and the like before her Mother in Law [the Countess of Winchelseá
died, [She was then with Child.]

A Dutch-Prisoner at Wood-bridge in Suf­folk, [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=41) in the Reign of
Charles II. could dis­cern Spirits; but others that stood by could not. The
Bell tolled for a Man newly de­ceased. The Prisoner saw his Phantôme, and did
descibe him to the Parson of the Parish, who was with him;Dr. Hooke the Parson
of the Pa­rish, has often told this Story; of which I know many more
Par­ticulars. exactly agree­ing with the Man for whom the Bell tolled. Says
the Prisoner, now he is coming near to you, and now he is between you and the
Wall, the Parson was resolved to try it, and went to take the Wall of him, and
was thrown down; but could see nothing. This story is credibly told by several
Per­sons of Belief.

Vavasor Powell saw several Apparitions. See page 8. of his Life.

There is a very remarkable story of an Apparition, which Martin Luther did
see. Mentioned in his Commensalia, or Table-talk, which see.

Those that are delirous in high Fevers, see [waking] Men and things that are
not there. I knew one Mr. M. L. that took Opium, and he did see (being awake)
Men and things that were not present (or per­haps) not in being. Those whose
Spleens are ill-affected have the like Phantasies. The Power of Imagination is
Wonderful.

De seipso duplicato.

Cardanus. Synes. Somniorum. Lib. 11. Cap. 12. In somniis mortis est signum,
quia duo fiunt, cum anima separatur à corpore. Est et signum morbi in ipsis
aegrontantibus, nec tum aliud quicquam significat.

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=42)

As concerning Apparitions of a Man's own self, there are sundry Instances,
some whereof I shall here set down.

The Countess of Thanet (Earl Iohn's La­dy) saw as she was in Bed with her Lord
in London, her Daughter my Lady Hatton, who was then in Northamptonshire at
Horton Kirby, the Candle was burning in her Cham­ber.See Mr. Baxters Last
Book. Since viz. Anno. 167 ... this Lady Hat­ton was Blown up with Gun-powder
set on Fire by Lightning, in the Castle at Garnsey, where her Lord was
Governor.

The Beautiful Lady Diana Rich, Daugh­ter of the Earl of Holland, as she was
walk­ing in her Father's Garden at Kensington, to take the fresh Air before
Dinner, about Eleven a Clock, being then very well, met with her own
Apparition, Habit and every thing, as in a Looking glass. About a Month after
she died of the Small-pox. And 'tis said, that her Sister the Lady Isabella
(Thinne) saw the like of her self also be­fore she died. This Account I had
from a Person of Honour.

Mrs. E. W. Daughter of Sir W. W. af­firms that Mrs. I. (her Father's Sister)
saw [[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=42) her
self (i. e.) her Phantome half a Year be­fore she died, for a quater of an
Hour toge­ther. She said further that her Aunt was sick­ly Fourteen Years
before she died, and that she walked Living, (i. e.) her Apparition, and that
she was seen by several at the same time. The like is reported of others.

Mr. Trehern B. D. (Chaplain to Sir Or­lando Bridgman Lord Keeper) a Learned
and sober Person, was the Son of a Shoe-maker in Hereford: Gne Night as he lay
in Bed, the Moon shining very bright, he saw the Phantome of one of the
Apprentices sitting in a Chair in his red Wastcoat, and Head­band about his
Head, and Strap upon his Knee; which Apprentice was really abed and asleep
with another Fellow-apprentice in the same Chamber, and saw him. The Fellow
was Living 1671. Another time, as he was in Bed he saw a Basket come Sail­ing
in the Air along by the Valence of his Bed; I think he said there was Fruit in
the Basket: It was a Phantome. From him­self.

When Sir Richard Nepier M. D. of Lon­don, was upon the Road, coming from
Bed­fordshire, the Chamberlain of the Inn, shewed him his Chamber; the Doctor
saw a dead Man lying upon the Bed: He look'd more wistly, and saw it was
himself: He was then well enough in Health. He goes forward in his Journey—to
Mr. Ste­ward's [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=43) in Berkshire,
and there died. This Account I have in a Letter from Elias Ash­mole Esquire.
They were intimate Friends.

‘In the Deserts of Africk, Pliny's Na­tural Hist. Lib. VII. Chap. II. you
shall meet oftentimes with Fairies appearing in the shape of Men and Women:
But they vanish quite away like phantastical Delusions.’

I Captain Henry Bell do hereby declare both to the present Age and also to
Poste­rity, that being employed beyond the Seas in State-affairs divers Years
together, both by King Iames, and also by the late King Charles in Germany. I
did hear and under­stand in all places great Bewailing and La­mentation made,
by reason of destroying and burning of above Fourscore Thousand of Martin
Luther's Books: Entitled, His last Divine Discourses.

Upon which Divine Work or Discourses the Reformation, begun before in Germany,
was wonderfully promoted and spred in other Countrys.

But afterward it so fell out, that the Pope then living, viz. Gregory XIII.
un­derstanding what great hurt and prejudice he, and his Religion had already
received by reason of the said Luther's Discourses, and also fearing that the
same might bring further contempt and mischief upon himself and his Church, he
therefore to prevent the same, did fiercely stir up and [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=43) instigate the
Emperor then in being, viz. Rodolphus III. to make an Edict through the whole
Empire, that all the foresaid Printed Books should be burned, and al­so that
it should be Death for any Person to have or keep a Copy thereof, but to burn
the same: Which Edict was speedi­ly put in Execution accordingly; insomuch
that not one of all the said Printed Books, nor any one Copy of the same,
could be found out, or heard of in any place.

Yet it pleased God, that in Anno 1626, a German Gentleman named Casparus Van
Sparr, with whom in my stay in Germany about King Iames's business I became
fa­miliarly known and acquainted, having oc­casion to build upon an old
Foundation of a House, wherein his Grand-father dwelt at that time, when the
said Edict was Publish­ed in Germany, for the Burning of the said Books, and
digging deep into the ground under the said old Foundation, one of the said
Original Printed Books was there hap­pily found, lying in a deep obscure hole,
being wrapped in a strong Linnen Cloth, which was waxed all over with Bees-wax
within and without: whereby the said Book was perserved fair without any
ble­mish.

And at the same time Ferdinandus II. be­ing Emperor of Germany, who was a
severe Enemy and Persecutor of the Protestant [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=44) Religion, the
foresaid Gentleman, and Grand-child to him that had hidden the said Book in
that obscure hole, fearing that if the said Emperor should get knowledge that
one of the said Books were yet forth­coming, and in his custody, whereby not
only himself might be brought into trouble, but also the Book be in danger to
be destroy'd, as all the rest were long before; and also calling to mind that
I had the high Dutch Tongue very perfect, did send the said Ori­ginal Book
over hither into England unto me: Related to me the passages of the
preser­ving and finding the said Book; and ear­nestly moved me in his Letter,
to Translate the said Book into English.

Whereupon I took the said Book before me, and many times began to Translate
the same, but always I was hindred therein, being called upon about other
Business; in so much that by no possible means I could remain by that work.
Then about six Weeks after I had receiv'd the said Book, it fell out, that
being in Bed with my Wife, one Night be­tween Twelve and one of the Clock, she
be­ing asleep, but my self yet awake, there ap­pear'd unto me an Ancient Man,
standing at my Bed-side array'd all in White, having a long and broad white
Beard, hanging down to his Girdle steed, who taking me by the right Ear, spake
these words following un­to me; Sirrah, Will not you take time to [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=44) Translate that
Book which is sent unto you out of Germany? I will provide for you both place
and time to do it: And then he Vanish'd a­way out of my sight.

Whereupon being much affrighted, I fell into an extream Sweat, insomuch that
my Wife awaking, and finding me all over wet, she ask'd me what I ailed? I
told her what I had seen and heard; but I never did heed or regard Visions nor
Dreams. And so the same fell soon out of my mind.

Then about a Fortnight after I had seen the Vision, on a Sunday I went to
Whitehall to hear the Sermon, after which ended, I return'd to my Lodging
which was then in Kingstreet at Westminster, and sitting down to Dinner with
my Wife, two Messengers were sent from the Council-board with a Warrant to
carry me to the Keeper of the Gate-house at Westminster, there to be safely
kept, until further Order from the Lords of the Council; which was done
without shewing any CauseWhatsoever was pretended, yet the true cause of the
Cap­tains Commitment was, because he was urgent with the Ld. Treasurer for his
Ar­rears: which amount­ing to a great Summ, he was not willing to pay, and to
be freed from his clamours clapt him  [...] into Prison. at all, where­fore I
was Committed; upon which said Warrant I was kept there Ten whole Years close
Pri­soner; where I spent Five Years thereof about Translating of the said
Book: Insomuch as I found the words very true which the Old [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=45) Man in the
aforesaid Vision said unto me, I will shortly provide you both place and time
to Translate it.

Then after I had finish'd the Translation, Dr. Laud Arch-bishop of Canterbury,
sent to me in the Prison by Dr. Bray his Chaplain Ten Pounds, and desir'd to
peruse the Book; he afterwards sent him by Dr. Bray Forty Pounds. There was a
Committee of the House of Commons for the Printing of this Translation, which
was in 1652.

### 1.7. CHAP. VII.  
Voices.

Cicero de Divinatione. Lib. I.—

SAepe etiam & in praeliis Fauni auditi, & in rebus turbidis veridicae vuces ex
occulto  [...]issae esse dicuntur. Cujus generis duo sunt ex multis exempla,
sed maxima. Nam non mul­to ante Vrbem captam exaudita vox est à Luco Vestae,
qui à Palatii radice in novam viam de­vexus est, ut muri & portae
reficerentur: fu­turum esse, nisi provisum esset, ut Roma cape­retur. Quod
neglectum cùm caveri poterat, post acceptam illam maximam cladem explica­tum
est. Ara enim Aio loquenti, quam sep­tam videmus, & adversus eum locum
conse­crata est,

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=45)—Neque
solum deorum voces Pythagorei observaverunt, sed etiam hominum, quae vo­cant
omnia—

Taciti Annales. Lib. XIV.‘Nero—& lo'n dit qu'on entendoit un son de trumpette
dans les collines d'alentour, des gemissemens sur le tombeau de sa mere.’

In the Life of King Henry IV of France, writ by the Arch-Bishop of Paris, it
is re­corded, That Charles IX (who caused the Massacre) was wont to hear
Screaches, like those of the Persons Massacred.

St. Augustin heard a Voice, saying, Tolle, lege. He took up his Bible, and
dipt on Rom. 13. 13. Not in rioting and drukenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, &c. and reformed his Manners upon it.

One Mr. Smith a Practitioner of Physick at Tamworth in Warwickshire, an
understand­ing sober Person, reading—Hollinshead's Chronicle, found a relation
of a great Fight between Vortigern and Hengest, about those parts, at a place
call'd Colemore: A little time after, as he lay awake in his Bed, he heard a
Voice, that said unto him, You shall shortly see some of the Bones of those
Men and Horses slain, that you read of: He was surprized at the Voice, and
ask't in the Name of God, who 'twas that spoke to him. The Voice made answer,
that he should not trouble himself about that; but what he told him should
come to pass. Shortly after, as he [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=46) went to see
Colonel Archer (whose Servants were digging for Marle) he saw a great many
Bones of Men and Horses; and also Pot-sherds; and upon the view it appear­ed
to be according to the description in Hol­linshead's Chronicle; and it was the
place where the Fight was; but it is now called Blackmore.

This was about the Year 1685. and I had the Account from my worthy Friend and
old Acquaintance Tho. Mariett of War­wickshire Esq who is very well acquainted
with Mr. Smith aforesaid.

It was since the Restauration of King Charles II. that Martin Luther's Table-
Talk was Translated into English, by— but about half a Year before as he lay
in his Bed awake, he heard a voice, which did bid him Translate that Book: but
by reason of some business he neglected it. The Voice demanded, why he had not
done it; he reply­ed he had not leisure: Said the Voice, You shall have
leisure enough shortly: And shortly after, he was Arrested and put in the
Gate-house at Westminster; where he remained many Months: and there was the
Transla­tion finished. See the Preface before the Book.

#### 1.7.1. Extracts out of the Book, Entituled, Re­lation de la Noüeille
France, 1662, and 1663. 21.

Les Saüvages avoient eu de presentiments [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=46) aussi bien que
les François, de cet horrible Tremble-terre. Voicy la de position d'une
saüvage agé 26. fort innocente, simple, & sincere. La nuict du 4 ou 5 de Febr.
1663 estant en­tirement éveillée, & en plein jugement, as­sise comme sur mon
seant, j'ay entender une voix distincte & intelligible, qui m'a dit, Il doit
arrive aujourdhuy de choses estrangees, la Terre doit tremble. Ie me trouver
ay pour lors saisie d'une grand frageur, parce que je ne voyois personne d'ou
peut provinir cette voix: Remplie de crainte, ja taschay à m'en­dormir auec
assez de peine: Et le jour estant venu, je dis a mon mary cequi in'estoit
arri­vé. Sur le 9, ou le 10 heure de mesme jour, allant au bois pour buscher,
à peine j'estois entrée en la Forest que la mesme voix se fit—entendre, me
disent mesme chose, & de la mesme façon que la nuict precedente: La peur fuit
bien plus grande, moy estant tout seale. She got her burden of Wood, and met
her Sister who comforted her, to whom she told this Story, and when she came
to her Fathers Caban, she told the same Story there; but they heard it without
any reflections.— La chose en demeure la, jusquez à 5, ou 6 heures du soir du
mesme jour, où un tremblement de Terre survenant, ils reconnurent par
expe­rience, que cequ'ils m'auoient intendu dire avant Midy, n'estoit que trop
uray.

Envoyée au R. P. André Castill on Pro­vincial [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=47) de la Province
de France par les Missioners de Peres de la Campagnie de Iesu. Imprimiè à
Paris, 1664.

Livy makes mention, that before the coming of the Gauls to Rome, Marcus
Ce­ditius a Plebeian acquainted the Senate, that passing one Night about
Twelve a Clock through the Via Nova, he heard a Voice (bigger than a Mans)
which ad­vised him to let the Senate know the Gauls were on their March to
Rome. How those things could be, it is to be discoursed by Persons well versed
in the Causes of Natural and Supernatural Events: For my part I will not
pretend to understand them, unles (according to the Opinion of Some
Philosophers) we may believe, that the Air being full of Intelligences and
Spirits, who foreseee­ing future Events, and commiserating the Condition of
Mankind, gives them warning by these kind of Intimations, that they may the
more timely provide and defend themselves against their Ca­lamities. But what
ever is the Cause, Experience assures us, that after such De­nuntiations, some
extraordinary thing or other does constantly happen.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=47)

### 1.8. CHAP. VIII.  
Impulses.

Cicero de Naturâ Deorum. Lib. II.‘PRaeterea ipsorum Deorum saepe praesen­tiae,
quales supra commemoravi,— declarant, ut ab his, & Civitatibus, & singulis
hominibus consuli. Quod quidem intelli­gitur etiam significationibus rerum
futu­rarum, qua tum dormientibus, tum vigi­lantibus portentantur.—Nemo vir
mag­nus sine aliquo afflatu divino unquam fu­it.’

Oliver Cromwel had certainly this Afflatus. One that I knew, that was at the
Battle of Dunbar, told me that Oliver was carried on with a Divine Impulse; he
did Laugh so excessively as if he had been drunk; his Eyes sparkled with
Spirits. He obtained a great Victory; but the Action was said to be contrary
to Human Prudence. The same fit of Laughter seiz'd Oliver Cromwel, just before
the Battle of Naseby; as a Kins­man of mine, and a great Favourite of his,
Colonel I. P. then present, testifi'd. Car­dinal Mazerine said, That he was a
lucky Fool.

In one of the geat Fields at Warminster in Wiltshire, in the Harvest, at the
very [[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=48) time
of the Fight at Bosworth Field, between King Richard III, and Henry VII, there
was one of the Parish took two Sheaves, cry­ing (with some intervals) Now for
Richard, Now for Henry: at last, lets fall the Sheaf that did represent
Richard; and cryed, Now for King Henry, Richard is slain: This Action did
agree with the very Time, Day and Hour. When I was a School-boy, I have heard
this confidently delivered by Tradition, by some Old Men of our Coun­try.

Monsieur de Scudery in his Poem, Entitu­led Rome Vaincus, fancies an Angel to
be sent to Alaric to impel him to over-run the Roman Empire with his swarms of
Nor­thern People. The like may be fancied upon all Changes of Government; when
Providence destines the Ends, it orders the Means.

By way of parallel to this, Pope—by the like instinct, being at Rome in the
Con­sistory, did speak of the Engagement in the Famous Battle of Lepanto, and
that the Christians were Victors. The Fight at Sea being 200 Miles or more
distant from them.

King Charles the First, after he was Con­demned, did tell Colonel Thomlinson,
that he believed, That the English Monarchy was now at an end: About half an
Hour after, he told the Colonel, That now he had an assu­rance [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=48) by a strong
Impulse on his Spirit, that his Son should Reign after him. This Informa­tion
I had from Fabian Philips Esq of the Inner-Temple, who had good authority for
the truth of it: I have forgot who it was.

The Lord Roscomon, being a Boy of Ten Years of age at Caen in Normandy, one
day was (as it were) madly extravagant in Playing, Leaping, getting over the
Table-boards, &c. He was wont to be sober e­nough: They said, God grant this
bodes no ill Luck to him: In the heat of this Ex­travagant Fit, he cries out,
My Father is Dead. A Fortnight after, News came from Ireland, that his Father
was Dead. This Account I had from Mr. Knolls, who was his Governor, and then
with him; since Secretary to the Earl of Strafford, and I have heard his
Lordships Relations confirm the same.

A very good Friend of mine and old Ac­quaintance, hath had frequent Impulses:
When he was a Commoner at Trin. College Oxford, he had several. When he rode
to­wards the West one time in the Stage-Coach, he told the Company, We shall
certainly be Robbed, and they were so. When a Brother of his a Merchant died,
he left him with other Effects, a share of a Ship, which was returning from
Spain, and of which News was brought to the Exchange at Lon­don of her good
Condition; he had such an [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=49) Impulse upon his
Spirit, that he must needs Sell his share, though to loss; and he did Sell it.
The Ship came safe to Cornwal (or Devon) and somewhere afterwards fell up­on
the Rocks and sunk: Not a Man Pe­rished; but all the Goods were lost except
some Parrets, which were brought for Queen Katherine.

The good Genius of Socrates is much re­membred which gave him Warning. The
Ethnick Genii are Painted like our Angels; strong Impulses are to be referr'd
to them.

The Learned Dr. Iohn Pell, hath told me, that he did verily believe, that some
of his Solutions of difficult Problems were not done Sine Divino auxilio.

Mr. I. N. a very understanding Gentle­man, and not Superstitious, Protested to
me, That when he hath been over-per­swaded by Friends to Act contrary to a
strong Impulse, that he never succeeded.

### 1.9. CHAP. IX.  
Knockings.

MR. Baxter's Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits. ‘A Gentleman formerly seeming
Pious, of late Years hath fallen into the sin of Drunkenness; and when he
[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=49) has been
Drunk, and slept himself Sober, something Knocks at his Beds-head, as if one
knock'd on a Wainscot; when they remove the Bed, it follows him; besides loud
Noises on other parts where he is, that all the House heareth.’

‘It poseth me to think what Kind of Spirit this is, that hath such a care of
this Man's Soul, (which makes me hope he will recover.) Do good Spirits dwell
so near us? Or, are they sent on such Mes­sages? Or, is it his Guardian Angel?
Or, Is it the Soul of some Dead Friend, that suffereth, and yet retaining Love
to him, as Dives did to his Brethren, would have him Saved? God keepeth yet
such things from us in the Dark.’

Major Iohn Morgan of Wells did aver, That as he lay in Bed with Mr.—Bar­low
(Son of the Dean of Wells) they heard Three distinct Knocks on the Bed: Mr.
Bar­low shortly after fell sick, and died.

Three or four Days before my Father died, as I was in my Bed about Nine a
Clock in the Morning perfectly awake, I did hear three distinct Knocks on the
Beds-head, as if it had been with a Ruler or Fe­rula.

Mr. Hierome Banks as he lay on his Death Bed in Bell-yard, said Three Days
before he died, that Mr. Iennings of the Inner-Temple (his great Acquaintance,
Dead a Year or [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=50) two before) gave
Three Knocks, looked in, and said, Come away. He was as far from believing
such things as any Man.

Mr. George Ent of the Middle-Temple, told me some Days before he died, that he
had such a deceptio Visus, as he called it.

In Germany when one is to Dye out of ones Family, or some Friends, there will
sometimes likewise happen some Token, that signifieth the Death of one, e. g.
some (or one) in the House heareth the Noise, as if a Meal-sack fell down from
on high upon the Boards of the Chamber; they pre­sently go up thither, where
they thought it was done, and find nothing; but all things in order.

Also at Berlin, when one shall Die out of the Electoral House of Brandenburgh,
a Woman Drest in white Linen appears always to several, without speaking, or
doing any harm, for several Weeks be­fore. This from Iasper Belshazer Cranmer,
a Saxon Gentleman.

### 1.10. CHAP. X.  
Blows Invisible.

MR.—Brograve— of—near Puckridge in Hertfordshire when he was a young Man,
Riding in a Lane in that [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=50) Country, had a
Blow given him on his Cheek (or Head): He look'd back, and saw that no body
was near, behind him; anon, he had such another Blow; I have forgot if a
Third. He turn'd back and fell to the Study of the Law; and was afterwards a
Judge. This Account I had from Sir Iohn Penrudock of Compton-Chamberlain (our
Neighbour) whose Lady was Judge Bro­grave's Niece.

Newark (Sir G. L's.) has Knockings be­fore Death. And there is a House near Co
­vent-Garden that has Warnings. The Pa­pists are full of these Observations.

The like Stories are reported of others.

### 1.11. CHAP. XI.  
Prophesies.

CIcero de Divinatione Lib. I.—gentem quidem nullam video, neq tam humanam at
(que) doctam; ne (que) tam immanem tam (que) barba­ram, quae non significari
futura, & à quibusdam intelligi, praedici (que) posse censeat.

To pass by the Prophecies of Holy-writ, the Prophecies of Nostraedamus do
foretel ve­ry strangely; but not easily understood till they are fulfilled.
The Book is now com­mon.

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=51) Peter
Martyr in his Decads, tells us, That there was a Prophet among the Salvages in
America, that did foretel the coming in of Strangers in Ships, which they had
not known.

The Prophecies of St. Malachi, are ex­ceeding strange. He describes the Popes
by their Coats of Arms, or their Names, or their Manners: If his Prohecies be
true, there will be but 15 Popes more. It is Printed in a Book in Oct.
Entituled Bucelini Historiae Nucleus. 1654. in calce Libri, thus, Prophetia
Malachiae Monachi Bangorensis, et A. Episcopi Ardinensis, Hiberniae Primatis.
1655\. in two Leaves.

Mr. Lancelot Morehouse in the time of the Civil Wars, rescued a sheet of
Parchment in Quarto most delicately Writ, from a Tay­lor's Sheers. It was part
of a Book, and was a Prophecy concerning England in La­tin Hexameters; I saw
it 1649. It pointed at our late Troubles: He gave it to Seth Ward, Bishop of
Salisbury, and is lost among other good Papers.

In a Book of Mr. William Lilly's are Hie­roglyphick Prophecies, viz. of the
great Plague of London, expressed by Graves and dead Corps; and a Scheme with
♊ ascend­ing [the Sign of London] and no Planets in the XII Houses. Also there
is the Picture of London all on Fire, also Moles creep­ing &c. perhaps Mr.
Lilly might be conten­ted [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=51) to have People
believe that this was from himself. But Mr. Thomas Flatman (Poet) did affirm,
that he had seen those Hieroglyphicks in an old Parchment Manu­script Writ in
the time of the Monks.

In the Nave of the Cathedral Church at Wells, above the Capitals of two
Pillars, are the Head of the King, and the Head of a Bishop: It was fore-told,
that when a King should be like that King, and a Bishop like that Bishop; that
Abbots should be put down, and Nuns should Marry: Above the Arch, is an Abbot
or Monk with his Head hanging downwards; and a Nun with Children about her.
The inside of the Arch is Painted Blew, and adorned with Stars, to signifie
the Power and Influence of the Stars. This Prophecy was Writ in Parch­ment,
and hung in a Table on one of those Pillars, before the Civil-Wars. Dr. Duck
(who was Chancellor of Wells) said, that he had seen a Copy of it among the
Records of the Tower at London. It was Prophecy'd 300 Years before the
Reformation. Bi­shop Knight, was Bishop here at the Refor­mation, and the
Picture (they say) did re­semble him.

In the Spanish History it is mentioned, that a Vault being open'd in Spain,
they found there Moors Heads, and some Writ­ings that did express, When People
resem­bling those Heads should come into Spain, [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=52) they would
Conquer that Country: And it was so. See this Story more at large in Iames
Howell's Letters.

There is a Prophecy of William Tyndal, poor Vicar of Welling in the County of
Hertford, made in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. I have seen it: It
is in English Verse, two Pages and an half in Fo­lio. It fore-told our late
Wars. I know one that read it Forty Years since.

A Prophecy

Sexte verere Deos: vitae tibi terminus in­stat,

Cum tuus in medio ardebit Carbunculus igne.

These Verses were made by George Buchanon; but (perhaps) the Prediction was
made by some second-sighted Person. King Iames of Scotland the Sixth was taken
with an Ague, at Trinity College in Cam­bridge; he remov'd to Theobalds (where
he died); sitting by the Fire, the Carbuncle fell out of his Ring into the
Fire, according to the Prediction. This Distick is Printed in the Life of King
Iames by—

Before the Civil-Wars there was much talk of the Lady Anne Davys's Prophecies;
for which she was kept Prisoner in the To­wer of London. She was Sister to the
Earl of Castlehaven, and Wife to Sir Iohn Davys, Lord Chief Justice in
Ireland; I have heard his Kinsman (Counsellor Davys of Shaftsbu­ry) [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=52) say, that she
being in London (I think in the Tower,)Fasti Oxon, p. 432. did tell the very
time of her Husbands Death in Ireland.

### 1.12. CHAP. XII.  
Miranda.

OUR English Chronicles do Record, That in the Reign of King Henry III. a Child
was Born in Kent, that at Two Years old Cured all Diseases. Several Persons
have been Cured of the Kings-Evil by the touching, or handling of a Seventh
Son. (It must be a seventh Son, and no Daughter between, and in pure Wedlock.)

Samuel Scot, seventh Son of Mr. William Scot of Hedington in Wiltshire, did
when a Child, wonderful Cures by touching only, viz. as to the Kings-evil,
Wenns, &c. but as he grew to be a Man the Vertue did de­crease, and had he
Lived longer, perhaps might have been spent. A servant Boy of his Fathers was
also a seventh Son; but he could do no Cures at all. I am very well satisfied
of the truth of this Relation, for I knew him very well, and his Mother was my
Kinswoman.

'Tis certain, the Touch of a dead Hand, hath wrought Wonderful Effects, e.g.—
[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=53) [...]
[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=53) [...]
[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=54) [...]
[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=54) [...]
[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=55) [...]
[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=55) [...]
[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=56) one (a
Painter) of Stowel in Somersetshire near Bridgewater, had a Wenn in the inside
of his Cheek, as big as a Pullets Egg, which by the advice of one was Cur'd by
once or twice Touching or Rubbing with a dead Womans Hand, (è contra, to Cure
a Wo­man, a dead Man's Hand) He was directed first to say the Lord's Prayer,
and to beg a Blessing. He was perfectly Cured in a few Weeks. I was at the
Man's House who at­tested it to me, as also to the Reverend Mr. Andrew
Paschal, who went with me.

Mr. Davys Mell (the famous Violinist, and Clock-maker) had a Child Crook-
back'd, that was Cured after the manner aforesaid, which Dr. Ridgely M. D. of
the College of Physitians, averr'd in my hearing.

The Curing of the Kings-evil by the Touch of the King, does much puzzel our
Philosophers: For whether our Kings were of the House of York, or Lancaster,
it did the Cure (i. e.) for the most part. ('Tis true indeed at the Touching
there are Prayers Read, but perhaps, neither the King attends them nor his
Chaplains.)

In Somersetshire, 'tis confidently reported, that some were Cured of the
Kings-evil, by the Touch of the Duke of Monmouth: The Lord Chancellor Bacon
saith, ‘That Imagi­nation is next Kin to Miracle-working Faith.’

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=56)When King
Charles I. was Prisoner at Carisbrook Castle, there was a Woman Touched by
him, who had the Kings-evil in her Eye, and had not seen in a Fortnight
before, her Eye-lids being glued together: As they were at Prayers (after the
Touch­ing) the Womans Eyes opened. Mr. Sey­mer Bowman, with many others were
Eye­witnesses of this.

At Stretton in Herefordshire in Anno. 1648\. when King Charles I. was
Prisoner, the Tenant of the Mannor-house there, sold excellent Cider to
Gentlemen of the Neigh­bourhood; where they met privately, and could Discourse
freely, and be merry, in those Days so troublesome to the Loyal Par­ty. Among
others that met, there was old Mr. Hill B. D. Parson of the Parish, Quondam
Fellow of Brason-nose College in Oxford: This Venerable good old Man, one Day
(after his accustomed fashion) stand­ing up, with his Head uncover'd to Drink
his Majesties Health, saying, God bless our gracious Sovereign, as he was
going to put the Cup to his Lips, a Swallow flew in at the Window, and pitched
on the brim of the little Earthen-cup (not half a Pint) and sipt, and so flew
out again. This was in the presence of the aforesaid Parson Hill, Major
Gwillim, and two or three more, that I knew very well then, my Neighbours, and
whose joint Testimony of it I have had more [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=57) than once, in
that very Room. It was in the Bay-window in the Parlour there; Mr. Hill's Back
was next to the Window. I cannot doubt of the veracity of the Witnesses. This
is Printed in some Book that I have seen, I think in Dr. Fuller's Worthies.
The Cup is preserved there still, as a Rarity.

In Dr. Bolton's Sermons is an Account of the Lady Honywood, who despaired of
her Salvation. Dr. Bolton endeavour'd to com­fort her: Said she, (holding a
Venice-glass in her Hand) I shall as certainly be Damned, as this Glass will
be broken: And at that word, threw it hard on the Ground; and the Glass
remained sound; which did give her great comfort. The Glass is yet pre­served
among the Cimelia of the Family. This Lady lived to see Descended from her (I
think) Ninety, which is mentioned by Dr. Bolton.

William Backhouse of Swallowfield in Berk­shire Esq had an ugly Scab that grew
on the middle of his Forehead, which had been there for some Years, and he
could not be Cured; it became so nauseous, that he would see none but his
intimate Friends: He was a Learned Gentleman, a Chimist and Antiquary: His
custom was, once eve­ry Summer to Travel to see Cathedrals, Ab­beys, Castles,
&c. In his Journey, being come to Peterborough, he dreamt there, that he was
in a Church and saw a Hearse, and [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=57) that one did
bid him wet his Scab, with the drops of the Marble. The next Day he went to
Morning-Service, and afterwards going about the Church, saw the very Hearse
(which was of Black Say, for Queen Katharine, Wife to King Henry VIII.) and
the Marble Grave-Stone by. He found drops on the Marble, and there were some
Cavi­ties wherein he dip'd his Finger, and wet­ted the Scab: In Seven Days it
was per­fectly Cured. This accurate and certain Information, I had from my
worthy Friend Elias Ashmole Esq who called Mr. Backhouse Father, and had this
Account from his own Mouth. (May Dew is a great Dis­solvent.)

Arise Evans had a fungous Nose, and said, it was reveal'd to him, that the
King's Hand would Cure him: And at the first coming of King Charles II. into
St. Iames's Park he Kiss'd the King's Hand, and rubb'd his Nose with it; which
disturb'd the King, but Cured him. Mr. Ashmole told me.

#### 1.12.1. An Advertisement.

A true Relation of the Wonderful Cure of Mary Maillard (Lame almost ever since
she was Born) on Sunday the 26th of No­vember 1693.

With the Affidavits and Certificats of the Girle, and several other credible
and worthy Persons, who knew her both before and since her being Cured. To
which is added, A [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=58) Letter from Dr.
Wellwood, to the Right Ho­nourable the Lady Mayoress, upon that Sub­ject.
London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick-lane.
1694.

A Narrative of the late extraordinary Cure, wrought in an instant upon Mrs.
Eliz. Savage (Lame from her Birth) with­out the using of any Natural means.

With the Affidavits which were made be­fore the Right Honourable the Lord
Major; and the Certificates of several Credible Per­sons, who knew her both
before and since her Cure.

Enquired into with all its Circum­stances, by Noted Divines, both of the
Church of England, and others: And by Eminent Physitians of the College: And
many Persons of Quality, who have ex­pressed their full satisfaction.

With an Appendix, attempting to prove, that Miracles are not ceased. London,
Prin­ted for Iohn Dunton at the Raven, and Iohn Harris at the Harrow in the
Poultry. 1694.

### 1.13. CHAP. XIII.  
Magick.

IN Barbary are Wizards, who do smear their Hands with some black Ointment, and
then do hold them up to the Sun, and [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=58) in a short time
you shall see Delineated in that black Stuff, the likeness of what you de­sire
to have an answer of. It was desir'd to know, whether a Ship was in safety, or
no? There appear'd in the Womans Hand the perfect Lineaments of a Ship under
Sail. This Mr. W. Cl. a Merchant of London, who was Factor there several
Years, protested to me, that he did see. He is a Person wor­thy of beliefe.

There are wonderful Stories of the Ban­nians in India, viz. of their
Predictions, Cures, &c. of their Charming Crocodiles, and Serpents: And that
one of them walkt over an Arm of the Sea; he was seen in the middle, and never
heard of afterwards.

The last Summer, on the Day of St. Iohn Baptist [1694] I accidentally was
walking in the Pasture behind Montague-House, it was XII a Clock. I saw there
about two or three and twenty young Women, most of them well Habited, on their
Knees very busie, as if they had been Weeding. I could not presently learn
what the mat­ter was; at last a young Man told me, that they were looking for
a Coal under the Root of a Plantain, to put under their Heads that Night, and
they should Dream who would be their Husbands: It was to be found that Day,
and Hour.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=59)The Women
have several Magical Se­crets handed down to them by Tradition, for this
purpose, as, on St. Agnes Night, 21 Day of Ianuary, Take a row of Pins, and
pull out every one, one after another, saying a Pater Noster, or Our Father,
stick­ing a Pin in your Sleeve, and you will Dream of him or her you shall
Marry. Ben. Iohn­son in one of his Masques, makes some men­tion of this.

And on sweet Saint Agnes Night

Please you with the promis'd sight,

'Tis Print­ed St. Ann's Night, falsely.

Some of Husbands, some of Lovers,

Which an empty Dream discovers.

Another. To know whom one shall Marry.

You must lie in another County, and knit the left Garter about the Right
Legg'd Stockin (let the other Garter and Stock­in alone) and as you rehearse
these fol­lowing Verses, at every Comma, knit a Knot.

This Knot I knit,

To know the thing I know not yet,

That I may see

The Man (Woman) that shall my Hus­band (Wife) be,

How he goes and what he wears

And what he does all the Days.

Accordingly in your Dream you will see him; if a Musitian, with a Lute or
other Instrument; if a Scholar, with a Book, &c.

A Gentlewoman that I knew, confessed [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=59) in my hearing,
that she used this Method, and dreamt of her Husband whom she had never seen:
About Two or three Years after, as she was on Sunday at Church, up pops a
young Oxonian in the Pulpit: She cries out presently to her Sister, This is
the very Face of the Man that I saw in my Dream. Sir William Somes Lady did
the like.

Another way is,Some say any other New Moon is as good. to Charm the Moon thus;
At the first appearance of the new Moon after New-years Day, go out in the
Evening, and stand over the Sparrs of a Gate, or Stile, looking on the Moon
and say,

All Hail to the Moon,

In York­shire they kneel on a ground­fast Stone.

all Hail to thee,

I prithee good Moon reveal to me,

This Night who my Husband (Wife) must be.

You must presently after go to Bed.

I knew two Gentlewomen, that did thus when they were young Maids, and they had
Dreams of those that Married them.

Alexander Trallienus, Of Curing Diseases by Spells, Charms, &c. is cited by
Casaubon, before Iohn Dee's Book of Spiritis: It is now Translated out of the
Greek into English.

The Great Historical, Geographical, and Poetical Dictionary. Abracadabra, a
Mysterious Word, to which the Supersti­ous in former times attributed a
Magical power to expel Diseases, especially the Ter­tian-Ague, worn about
their Neck in this manner.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=60)Some
think, that Basilides the Inventor, intends the Name of GOD by it. The method
of the Cure was prescrib'd in these Verses,

Inscribes Chartae quod dicitur Abracadabra

Saepius, et subter repetes, sed detrahe summam

Et magis at (que) magis desint elementa figuris

Singula quae semper capies & caetera figes,

Donec in angustum redigatur Litera Conum,

His lina nexis collo redimire memento.

Talia languentis conducent Vincula collo,

Lethales (que) abigent (miranda potentia) morbos.

Mr.—Scoot a German hath Writ an excellent Book of Magick: It is Prohibited in
that Country. I have here set down Three Spells, which are much approv'd.

To Cure an Ague,

Write this following Spell in Parchment, and wear it about your Neck. It must
be Writ Triangularly.

ABRACADABRA

ABRACADABR

ABRACADAB

ABRACADA

ABRACAD

ABRACA

ABRAC

ABRA

ABR

AB

A

With this Spell, one of Wells hath Cur'd above an Hundred of the Ague.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=60)

To Cure the Biting of a Mad Dog.

Write these Words in Paper, Viz.

Rebus Rubus Epitepscum, and give it to the Party, or Beast Bit, to Eat in
Bread, or &c. A Gentleman of good Quality, and a sober grave Person, did
affirm, that this Receipt never fails,

To Cure the Tooth-ach, out of Mr. Ashmole's Manuscript Writ with his own Hand.

Mars, hur, abursa, aburse.

Iesu Christ for Marys sake,

Take away this Tooth-ach.

Write the words, Three times; and as you say the Words, let the Party burn one
Paper, then another, and then the last. ‘He says, he saw it experimented, and
the Party immediately Cured.’

Mr. Ashmole told me, that a Woman made use of a Spell to Cure an Ague, by the
Advice of—A Minister came to her, and severely repremanded her, for making use
of a Diabolical help, and told her, she was in danger of Damnation for it, and
commanded her to burn it. She did so, and her Distemper returned severely;
inso­much, that she was importunate with the Doctor to use the same again: She
used it, and had ease. But the Parson hearing of it, came to her again, and
thundred Hell and Damnation, and frighted her so, that she burnt it again.
Whereupon she fell extremely Ill, and would have had it a [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=61) Third time; but
the Doctor refused, say­ing, That she had contemned and slighted the power and
goodness of the Blessed Spi­rits (or Angels) and so she died, The cause of the
Lady Honywoods Desparation, was that she had used a Spell to Cure her.

Jamblicus de Mysteriis de nominibus divinis.

Prophyrius quaerit, cur Sacerdotes utantur no­minibus quibusdam nihil
significantibus? Iam­blicus respondet, omnia ejusmodi nomina signi­ficare
aliquid apud deos: quamvis in quibus­dam significata nobis sint ignota, esse
tamen no­ta quaedam, quorum intepretationem divinitus accepimus, omnino verò
modum in eis signifi­candi ineffabilem esse. Neque secundum ima­ginationes
humanas, sed secundum intellectum qui in nobis est, divinus, vel potius
simpliciore, praestantioreque modo secundum intellectum diis unitum.
Auferendum igitur omnes excogitati­ones, & rationales discursus, atque
assimulati­ones naturalis vocis ipsius congenitas, ad res po­sitas in natum.
Et quemadmodum character symbolicus divinae similitudinis in se
intellectu­alis est, atque divinus, ita hunc ipsum in om­nibus supponere,
accipereque debemus, &c.

To Cure an Ague, Tertian or Quartan.

Gather Cinquefoil in a good Aspect of ♃ to the ☽, and let the Moon be in the
Mid-heaven, if you can: and take—of the Powder of it in White-wine: If it be
not thus gathered according to the Rules of A­strology, [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=61) it hath little
or no Vertue in it. With this Receipt—Bradely, a Quaker at Kingston upon
Thames, (near the Bridge-end) hath Cured above an Hundred.

To Cure the Thrush.

There a is certain piece in the Beef, called the Mouse-piece, which given to
the Child, or Party so affected, to Eat, doth certain­ly Cure the Thrush. From
an experienced Midwife.

Another to Cure a Thrush.

Take a living Frog, and hold it in a Cloth, that it does not go down into the
Childs Mouth; and put the Head into the Childs Mouth till it is dead; and then
take another Frog.

To Cure the Tooth-ach.

Take a new Nail, and make the Gum bleed with it, and then drive it into an
Oak. This did Cure William Neal, Sir William Neal's Son, a very stout
Gentleman, when he was almost Mad with the Pain, and had a mind to have
Pistoll'd himself.

For the Iaundise.

The Iaundise is Cured, by putting the Urine after the first Sleep, to the
Ashes of the Ash-tree, Bark of Barberries.

To Cure a Bullock, that hath the Wisp, (that is) Lame between the Clees.

Take the impression of the Bullock's Foot in the Earth, where he hath trod;
then dig it up, and stick therein five or seven Thorns [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=62) on the wrong
side, and then hang it on a Bush to dry: And as that dries, so the Bullock
heals. This never fails for Wisps. From Mr. Pacy a Yeoman in Surrey.

To Cure a Beast that is Sprung, that is Poysoned. It lights mostly upon Sheep.

Take the little red Spider, called a Tent­bob (not so big as a great Pins-
head) the first you light upon in the spring of the Year, and rub it in the
palm of your Hand all to pieces; and having so done, piss on it, and rub it
in, and let it dry; then come to the Beast and make water in your Hand, and
throw it in his Mouth. It Cures in a mat­ter of an Hours time. This rubbing
serves for a whole Year, and it is no danger to the Hand. The chiefest Skill
is to know whe­ther the Beast be Poisoned, or no. From Mr. Pacy.

To stanch Bleeding.

Cut an Ash of One, two or three Years Growth, at the very Hour and Minute of
the Sun's entring into Taurus: a Chip of this applyed will stop it. If it is a
Shoot, it must be cut from the Ground. Mr. Nicholas Mer­cator, Astronomer,
told me that he had tried it with effect. Mr. G. W. says the Stick must not be
bound, or holden; but dipp'd or wetted in the Blood. When King Iames the
second was at Salisbury 1688\. his Nose Bled near two Days; and after many
essays in vain, was stopp'd by this Sympathetick [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=62) Ash, which Mr.
Will. Nash a Chyrurgeon in Salisbury applied.

Against an evil Tongue.

Take Vnguentum populeum and Vervain, and Hypericon, and put a red-hot Iron
into it; you must anoint the Back-bone, or wear it on your Breast. This is
Printed in Mr. W. Lilly's Astrology. Mr. H. C. hath try'd this Receipt with
good success.

Vervain and Dill,

Hinders Witches from their will.

A House (or Chamber) somewhere in London was Haunted; the Curtains would be
rashed at Night, and awake the Gentle­man that lay there, who was Musical, and
a familiar acquaintance of Henry Laws. Hen­ry Laws to be satisfied did lie
with him; and the Curtains were rashed so then: The Gen­tleman grew lean and
pale with the frights, One Dr.—Cured the House of this distur­bance, and Mr.
Laws said, that the princi­pal Ingredient was Hypericon put under his Pillow.

In Herefordshire, and other parts, they do put a cold Iron-bar upon their
Barrels, to preserve their Beer from being sowred by Thunder. This is a common
practice in Kent.

To hinder the Night-mare, they hang in a string a Flint with a hole in it
(naturally) by the Manger; but best of all they say, hung about their Necks,
and a Flint will [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=63) do it that hath
not a hole in it. It is to pre­vent the Night-mare (viz.) the Hag from ri­ding
their Horses, who will sometimes sweat all Night. The Flint thus hung does
hin­der it.

Mr. Sp. told me that his Horse which was Bewitch'd, would break Bridles and
strong Halters, like a Sampson. They fill'd a Bot­tle with the Horse's Urine,
stop'd it with a Cork and bound it fast in, and then bury'd it under Ground:
And the party suspected to be the Witch fell ill, that he could not make
Water, of which he died. When they took up the Bottle, the Urine was al­most
gone: So, that they did believe, that if the Fellow could have lived a little
longer, he had recovered.

It is a thing very common to nail Horse-shoes on the Thresholds of Doors:There
are very me­morable Stories of Witches in Gages Sur­vey of the West-Indies of
his own knowledg. Which is to hinder the power of Witches that enter into the
House. Most Houses of the West-end of London have the Horse-shoe on the
Threshold. It should be a Horse-shoe that one finds. In the Bermudas, they use
to put an Iron into the Fire when a Witch comes in.

At Paris when it begins to Thunder and Lighten, they do presently Ring out the
great Bell at the Abbey of St. German, which they do believe makes it cease.
The like was wont to be done heretofore in Wiltshire; when it Thundred and
Lightned, they did [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=63) Ring St.
Adelm's Bell at Malmsbury Abbey. The curious do say, that the Ringing of Bells
exceedingly disturbs Spirits.

### 1.14. CHAP. XIV.  
Transportation by an Invisible Power.

# A Letter from the Reverend Mr. Andrew Paschal B. D. Rector of Chedzoy in
Somer­set, To John Aubery Esq at Gresham College London.

SIR,

I Last Week received a Letter from a Learn­ed Friend, the Minister of
Barnstable in Devon, which I think worthy your perusal. It was Dated May 3\.
1683. and is as follows. [He was of my time in Queens College in Cambridge.]

There having been many Prodigious things perform'd lately in a Parish a
join­ing to that which Bishop Sparrow presented me to, called Cheriton Bp by
some discon­tented Daemon, I can easily remember that I owe you an account
thereof in lieu of that which you desired of me, and which I could serve you
in.

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=64)About
November last, in the Parish of Spreyton in the County of Devon, there
ap­peared in a Field near the Dwelling-house of Phil. Furze, to his Servant
Francis Fry, being of the age of 21 next August, an aged Gentleman with a Pole
in his Hand, and like that he was wont to carry about with him when living, to
kill Moles withall, who told the Young Man he should not be afraid of him; but
should tell his Master, i. e. his Son, That several Legacies that he had
be­queathed were unpaid, naming 10 s. to one, 10 s. to another, &c. Fry
replied, that the par­ty he last nam'd was Dead. The Spectrum replied, he knew
that, but said it must be paid to—and named the next Relation, These things
being perform'd, he promised he would trouble him no further. These small
Legacies were paid accordingly. But the young Man having caried 20 s. order'd
by the Spectrum to his Sister Mrs. Furze of the Parish of Staverton near
Totness, which Money the Gentlewoman refus'd to receive, being sent her, as
she said, from the Devil. The same Night Fry lodging there, the Spectrum
appear'd to him again, whereup­on Fry challenged his promise not to trou­ble
him, and said he had done all he desir'd him, but that Mrs. Furze would not
re­ceive the Money. The Spectrum replied, that's true indeed. But bid him ride
to Tot­ness and buy a Ring of that value, and that [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=64) she would take:
Which was provided for her; and receiv'd by her. Then Fry rode home­wards
attended by a Servant of Mrs. Furze. But being come into Spreyton Parish, or
ra­ther a little before, he seem'd to carry an old Gentlewoman behind him,
that often threw him off his Horse, and hurried him with such violence, as
astonish'd all that saw him, or heard how horridly the Ground was beaten; and
being come into his Ma­ster's Yard, Fry's Horse (a mean Beast) sprung at once
25 Foot. The trouble from the Man-Spectre ceased from this time. But the old
Gentlewoman Mrs. Furze, Mr. Furze's second Wife, whom the Spectre at his first
appearance to Fry, called, That Wicked Woman my Wife, (though I knew her, and
took her for a very good Woman) presently after appears to several in the
House, viz. to Fry, Mrs. Thomasin Gidley, Anne Langdon born in my Parish, and
to a little Child which was forced to be remov'd from the House; sometimes in
her own shape, sometimes in shapes more horrid, as of a Dog belching Fire, and
of an Horse, and seeming to ride out at the Window, carrying only one pane of
Glass away, and a little piece of Iron. After this Fry's Head was thrust into
a narrow space, where a Man's Fist could not enter, between a Bed and a Wall;
and forced to be taken thence by the strength of Men, all bruised and bloody;
[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=65) upon
this, it was thought fit to Bleed him; and after that was done, the Binder was
re­mov'd from his Arm, and convey'd about his Middle, and presently was drawn
so very straight, it had almost killed him, and was cut asunder making an ugly
uncouth noise. Several other times with Handkerchiefs, Cra­vats and other
things he was near strangled, they were drawn so close upon his Throat. He lay
one Night in his Periwig (in his Ma­ster's Chamber, for the more safety) which
was torn all to pieces. His best Periwig he inclosed in a little Box on the
inside with a Joind-stool, and other weight upon it; the Box was snapp'd
asunder, and the Wig torn all to flitters. His Master saw his Buckles fall all
to pieces on his Feet: But, first I should have told you the fate of his Shoe-
strings, one of which a Gentlewoman greater than all exception, assured me
that she saw it come out of his Shoe, without any visible Hand, and fling it
self to the farther end of the Room; the other was coming out too, but that a
Maid prevented and help'd it out, which crisp'd and curl'd about her Hand like
a living Eel. The Cloaths worn by Anne Langdon and Fry (if their own) were
torn to pieces on their backs. The same Gentle­woman, being the Daughter of
the Mini­ster of the Parish, Mr. Roger Specott, shewed me one of Fry's Gloves,
which was torn in his Pocket while she was by. I did view it [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=65) near and
narrowly, and do seriously confess that it is torn so very accurately in all
the Seams and in other places, and laid abroad so artificially, and it is so
dexterously tatter'd (and all done in the Pocket in a Minutes time) as nothing
Human could have done it; no Cutler could have made an Engine to do it so.
Other fantastical Freeks have been very frequent, as, the marching of a great
Bar­rel full of Salt out of one Room into another; an Andiron-laying it self
over a Pan of Milk that was scalding on the Fire, and two Flitches of Bacon
descending from the Chim­ney where they hung, and laid themselves over that
Andiron. The appearing of the the Spectrum (when in her own shape) in the same
Cloaths, to seeming, which Mrs. Furze her Daughter-in-law has on. The
intangling of Fry's Face and Legs, about his Neck, and about the Frame of the
Chairs, so as they have been with great difficulty disengaged.

But the most Remarkable of all happen'd in that Day that I passed by the Door
in my return hither, which was Easter-eve, when Fry returning from Work (that
little he can do) he was caught by the Woman Spectre by the Skirts of his
Doublet, and car­ried into the Air; he was quickly mist by his Master and the
Workmen, and great enquiry was made for Fran. Fry, but no hearing of him; but
about half an Hour af­ter [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=66) Fry was heard
Whistling and Singing in a kind of a Quagmire. He was now affe­cted as he was
wont to be in his Fits, so that none regarded what he said; but coming to
himself an Hour after, he solemnly pro­tested, That the Daemon carried him so
high that he saw his Master's House under­neath him no bigger than an Hay-
cock, that he was in perfect sense and prayed God not to suffer the Devil to
destroy him; that he was suddenly set down in that Quagmire. The Workmen found
one Shoe on one side of the House, and the other Shoe on the o­ther side; his
Periwig was espied next Morn­ing hanging on the Top of a tall Tree. It was
soon observ'd, that Fry's part of his Body that had laid in the Mud, was much
benum'd, and therefore the next Saturday, which was the Eve of Low-Sunday,
they car­ried him to Crediton to be let Blood; which being done, and the
Company having left him for a little while, returning they found him in a Fit,
with his Fore-head all bruis­ed and swoln to a great bigness, none being able
to guess how it came, till he recover'd himself, and then he told them, That a
Bird flew in at the Window with a great force, and with a Stone in it's Mouth
flew directly against his Fore-head. The People looked for it, and found on
the Ground just under where he sat, not a Stone, but a weight of Brass, or
Copper, which [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=66) the People were
breaking, and parting it among themselves. He was so very ill, that he could
not ride but one Mile or little more that Night, since which time I have not
heard of him, save that he was ill handled the next Day, being Sunday. Indeed
Sir you may wonder that I have not Visited that House, and the poor afflicted
People; espe­cially, since I was so near, and passed by the very Door: But
besides that, they have called to their assistance none but Noncon­forming
Ministers, I was not qualified to be welcome there, having given Mr. Furze a
great deal of trouble the last Year about a Conventicle in his House, where
one of this Parish was the Preacher. But I am very well assured of the truth
of what I have written, and (as more appears) you shall hear from me again.

I had forgot to tell you that Fry's Mother came to me, grievously bewailing
the mise­rable condition of her Son. She told me, that the Day before he had
five Pins thrust into his Side. She ask'd, and I gave her the best Advice I
could. Particularly, that her Son should declare all that the Spectre,
especi­ally the Woman gave him in Charge, for I suspect, there is aliquid
latens; and that she should remove him thence by all means. But I fear that
she will not do it. For I hear that Anne Langdon is come into my Parish to her
Mother, and that she is grievously [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=67) troubled there.
I might have written as much of her, as of Fry, for she hath been as ill
treated, saving the Aerial Journey. Her Fits and Obsessions seem to be
greater, for she Scrieches in a most Hellish tone. Thomasin Gidley (though
removed) is in trouble, as I hear.

Sir this is all my Friend wrote. This Let­ter came inclosed in another from a
Clergy-Man my Friend, who lives in those parts. He tells me, all the Relations
he receives from divers Persons living in Spreyton and the Neighbouring
Parishes agree with this. He spake with a Gentleman of good fashion, that was
at Crediton when Fry was Blood­ed, and saw the Stone that bruised his Fore-
head; but he did not call it Copper or Brass, but said, it was a strange
Mineral. That Gentleman promised to make a strict en­quiry on the place into
all particulars and to give him the result: Which my Friend also promises me;
with hopes that he shall procure for me a piece of that Mineral sub­stance,
which hurt his Fore-head.

The occasion of my Friends sending me this Narrative, was my entreating him
sometime since to enquire into a thing of this nature, that happen'd in
Barnstable, where he lives. An account was given to me long since, it fills a
Sheet or two, which I have by me: And to gratifie Mr. Glanvil who is
Collecting Histories for his Sadducism. [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=67) Triumphatus. I
desir'd to have it well attested, it being full of very memorable things; but
it seems he could meet only a general con­sent as to the truth of the things;
the Re­ports varying in the Circumstances.

Sir,

yours

# A Copy of a Letter from a Learned Friend of mine in Scotland, Dated March
35. 1695.

Honoured Sir,

I received yours Dated May 24 1694. in which you desire me to send you some
instances and examples of Transportation by an invisible Power. The true cause
of my delaying so long to reply to that Letter, was not want of Kindness; but
of fit Mate­terials for such a Reply.

As soon as I read your Letter of May 24 I called to mind a Story which I heard
long ago, concerning one of the Lord Duffus (in the Shire of Murray) his
Predecessors, of whom it is reported, That upon a time, when he was walking
abroad in the Fields near to his own House, he was suddenly car­ried away, and
found the next Day at Paris in the French King's Cellar with a Silver Cup in
his Hand; that being brought into the King's Presence and question'd by him,
Who he was? And how he came thither? He told his name, his Country, and the
place of his Residence, and that on such a Day of the [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=68) Month (which
proved to be the Day im­mediately preceeding) being in the Fields, he heard
the noise of a Whirl-wind, and of Voices crying Horse and Hattock (this is the
Word, which the Fairies are said to use when they remove from any place)
where­upon he cried (Horse and Hattock) also, and was immediately caught up,
and trans­ported through the Air, by the Fairies to that place, where after he
had Drunk hear­tily he fell a-sleep, and before he awoke, the rest of the
Company were gone, and had left him in the posture wherein he was found. It's
said, the King gave him the Cup which was found in his Hand, and dismis'd him.

This Story (if it could be sufficiently attested) would be a noble Instance
for your purpose, for which cause I was at some pains to enquire into the
truth of it, and found the means to get the present Lord Duffus's opinion
thereof; which shortly is, That there has been, and is such a Traditi­on, but
that he thinks it fabulous; this ac­count of it, his Lordship had from his
Fa­ther, who told him, that he had it from his Father, the present Lord's
Grandfather, There is yet an old Silver-Cup in his Lord­ship's Possession
still, which is called the Fairy Cup; but has nothing Engraven up­upon it
except the Arms of the Family.

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=68)The
Gentleman by whose means I came to know the Lord Duffus his sentiment of the
forgoeing story, being Tutor to his Lordships eldest Son, told me another
lit­tle passage of the same nature, whereof he was an Eye witness. He reports,
that when he was a Boy at School in the Town of For­res, yet not so Young, but
that he had Years and Capacity, both to observe and remember that which fell
out; he and his School-fellows were upon a time whipping their Tops in the
Church-yard before the Door of the Church; though the Day was calm, they heard
a noise of a Wind, and at some distance saw the small Dust be­gin to arise and
turn round, which motion continued, advancing till it came to the place where
they were; whereupon they began to Bless themselves: But one of their number
(being it seems a little more bold and confident than his Companions) said,
Horse and Hattock with my Top, and immediately they all saw the Top lifted up
from the Ground; but could not see what way it was carried, by reason of a
Cloud of Dust which was raised at the same time: They sought for the Top all
about the place where it was taken up, but in vain; and it was found
afterwards in the Church-yard, on the other side of the Church. Mr. Steward
(so is the Gentleman called) decla­red to me that he had a perfect remembrance
of this matter.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=69)The
following Account I received No­vember last, from Mr. Alexander Mowat a Person
of great Integrity and Judgment, who being Minister at the Church at Lesly, in
the Shire of Aberdene, was turned out for refusing the Oath of Test, Anno.
1681\. He informs, That he heard the late Earl of Cathnes who was Married to a
Daughter of the late Marquess of Argyle tell the follow­ing Story, viz. That
upon a time, when a Vessel which his Lordship kept for bring­ing home Wine and
other Provisions for his House, was at Sea; a common Fellow, who was reputed
to have the Second-sight, being occasionally at his House; the Earl enquired
of him, where his Men (mean­ing those in the Ship) were at that present time?
The Fellow replied, at such a place, by name, within four Hours Sailing of the
Har­bour, which was not far from the place of his Lordship's Residence: The
Earl asked, what Evidence he could give for that? The o­ther replied, that he
had lately been at the place, and had brought away with him one of the Sea-
mens Caps, which he deli­vered to his Lordship. At the four Hours end the Earl
went down himself to the Harbour, where he found the Ship newly arrived, and
in it one of the Seamen with­out his Cap; who being questioned, how he came to
lose his Cap? Answered, that at such a place (the same the Second-sight'd
[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=69) Man had
named before) there arose a Whirl-wind which endangered the Ship, and carried
away his Cap: The Earl asked, if he would know his Cap when he saw it? He said
he would; whereupon the Earl produced the Cap, and the Seaman owned it for
that, which was taken from him.

This is all the Information which I can give at present concerning
Transporta­tion by an invisible Power. I am sorry that I am able to contribute
so little to the pub­lishing of so curious a piece as it seems your Collection
of Hermerick Philosophy will be. I have given Instructions to an Acquain­tance
of mine now living at Kirkwall, and took him engaged when he left this place,
to inform him concerning the old Stone Mo­numents, the Plants and Cures in the
Or­cades, and to send me an Account. But I have not heard from him as yet,
tho' I caused a Friend that was Writing to him, to put him in mind of his
promise; the oc­casions of Correspondence betwixt this place and Orkney are
very rare.

SIR,

Your Faithful Affectionate Friend and Servant, I. G.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=70)

Sir,

'TIs very likely my Lord Keeper [North] (if an Account of a thing so
considerable, hath not been presented to him by another Hand) will take it
kindly from you. I would Transcribe it for Dr. Henry More, to whom, as I
remember, I promised some time since an Account of the Barnstable Apparition;
but my Hands are full of Work. May I beg of you to visit Dr. Whitchcot
Minister of St. Laurence Church, and to communicate a sight of this Letter
from Barnstable: Probably he will be willing to make his Servant Tran­scribe
it, and convey it to Dr. More. Pray present my humble Service to him, as also
my affectionate Service to our Friends Mr. Hook and Mr. Lodwick. I ever rest

SIR,

Your most Faithful Chedzoy. and Affectionate Servant, Andrew Paschal.

[[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=70)There was
in Scotland one—[an Ob­sessus] carried in the Air several times in the view of
several Persons, his Fellow-Soldi­ers. Major Henton hath seen him carry'd away
from the Guard in Scotland sometimes a Mile or two. Sundry Persons are living
now (1671.) that can attest this Story. I had it from Sir Robert Harley (the
Son) who Marryed Major Henton's Window; as also from E. T. D. D.

A Gentleman of my Acquaintance Mr. —M. was in Portugal, Anno. 1655\. when one
was Burnt by the Inquisition for being brought thither from Goa in East
In­dia, in the Air, in an incredible short time.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=71)

### 1.15. CHAP. XV.  
Visions in a Berill, or Crystall.

A Berill is a kind of Crystal that hath a weak Tincture of Red; it is one of
the Twelve Stones mentioned in the Reve­lation. I have heard*Dr. I. Pell.,
that Spectacles were first made of this Stone, which is the reason that the
Germans do call a Specta­cle-Glass [or pair of Spectacles] a Brill.

Dr.—Pocock of Oxford in his Com­mentary on Hosea, hath a Learned Dis­course of
the Vrim and Thummim: as also Dr.—Spenser of Cambridge, That the Priest had
his Visions in the Stone of the Breast-plate.

The Prophets had their Seers, viz. Young Youths who were to behold those
Visions, of whom Mr. Abraham Cowly writes, thus,

With hasty wings, time present they out­fly,

And tread the doubtful Maze of Desti­ny;

There walk and sport among the years to come,

And with quick Eye pierce every Causes Womb.

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=71)The
Magicians, now, use a Crystal­Sphere,_[figure]_ A Mine­ral-Pearl. or Mi­neral-
Pearl for this purpose, which is in­spected by a Boy, or sometimes by the
Querent himself.

There are certain Formula's of Prayer to be used before they make the
inspecti­on, which they term a Call. In a Ma­nuscript of Dr. Forman of Lambeth
(which Mr. Elias Ashmole had) is a Discourse of this, and the Prayer. Also
there is the Call which Dr. Nepier did use.

Iames Harrington [Author of Oceana] told me that the Earl of Denbigh then
Ambassador at Venice did tell him, that one did shew him there several times
in a Glass, things past, and to come.

When Sir Mermaduke Langdale was in Italy, he went to one of those Magi, who
did shew him a Glass, where he saw him­self kneeling before a Crucifix: He was
then a Protestant; afterwards he became a Roman Catholick. He told Mr. Thomas
Henshaw R. S. S. this himself.

I have here set down the Figure of a Consecrated Berill, now in the possession
of Sir Edward Harley Knight of the Bath, which he keeps in his Closet at
Brampton-Bryan [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=72)

_[figure]_

in Herefordshire, amongst his Cime­lia, which I saw there. It came first from
Norfolk; a Mini­ster had it there, and a Call was to be used with it.
Afterwards a Mil­ler had it, and both did work great Cures with it (if
Curable) and in the Berill they did see, either the Receipt in Writing, or
else the Herb. To this Minister the Spirits or Angels would appear openly, and
because the Miller (who was his fami­liar Friend) one day happened to see
them, he gave him the aforesaid Berill and Call: By these Angels the Mini­ster
was forewarned of his Death. This Account I had from Mr. Ashmole. After­wards
this Berill came into somebodies hand in London, who did tell strange things
by it; insomuch that at last he was [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=72) questioned for
it, and it was taken away by [...] Authority [it was about 1645.]

This Berill is a perfect Sphere, the Di­ameter of it I guess to be something
more than an Inch: It is set in a Ring, or Cir­cle of Silver resembling the
Meridian of a Globe: The stem of it is about Ten Inches high, all gilt. At the
Four quarters of it are the Names of Four Angels, viz. Vriel, Raphael,
Michael, Gabriel. On the top is a Cross Patee.

Sam. B [...]isardus hath writ a Book de Di­vinatione per Crystallum.

A Cloathier's Widow of Pembridge in Herefordshire, desired Dr. Shirburn [one
of the Canons of the Church of Hereford, and Rector of Pembridge] to look over
her Husbands Writings after his Decease: a­mong other things, he found a Call
for a Crystal. The Clothier had his Clothes oftentimes stolen from his Racks;
and at last obtain'd this Trick to discover the Thieves. So when he lost his
Clothes, he went out about Midnight with his Crystal and Call, and a little
Boy, or lit­tle Maid with him [for they say it must be a pure Virgin] to look
in the Crystal, to see the likeness of the Person that com­mitted the Theft.
The Doctor did burn the Call, 1671.

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=73) Visions
without a Glass, or Crystal.

About the later end of the Reign of King Iames the First, one—a Taylor in
London had several Visions, which he did describe to a Painter to paint, and
he writ the description himself in an ill, Taylor­like hand, in false English;
but legibly: It was (at least) a Quire of Paper. I re­member one Vision is of
St. Iame's Park, where is the Picture of an Altar and Cru­cifix. Mr. Butler of
the Toy-shop by Ludgate [one of the Masters of Bridewel] had the Book in Anno
1659; The then Earl of Northampton gave Five Pounds for a Copy of it.

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=73)

### 1.16. CHAP. XVI.  
Converse with Angels and Spirits.

DR. Richard Nepier was a Person of great Abstinence, Innocence, and Piety: He
spent every day two Hours in Family Prayer: When a Patient, or Que­rent came
to him, he presently went to his Closet to Pray: and told to admira­tion the
Recovery, or Death of the Pati­ent. It appears by his Papers, that he did
converse with the Angel Raphael, who gave him the Responses.

Elias Ashmole Esq had all his Papers, where is contained all his Practice for
about Fifty Years; which he, Mr. Ashmole, care­fully bound up, according to
the Year of our Lord, in—Volumes in Folio; which are now reposited in the
Library of the Musaeum in Oxford. Before the Res­ponses stands this Mark, viz.
R Ris. which Mr. Ashmole said, was Responsum Raphaelis.

In these Papers are many excellent Me­dicines, or Receipts for several
Diseases that his Patients had; and before some of them is the aforesaid Mark.
Mr. Ashmole [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=74) took the pains
to Transcribe fairly with his own hand all the Receipts; they are about a
Quire and half of Paper in Folio, which since his Death were bought of his
Relict by E. W. Esq R. S. S.

The Angel told him, if the Patient were curable, or incurable.

There are also several other Queries to the Angel, as to Religion,
Transubstantia­tion, &c. which I have forgot. I remem­ber one is, Whether the
Good Spirits, or the Bad be most in Number? R Ris, The Good

It is to be found there, that he told Iohn Prideaux D. D. Anno 1621, that
Twenty Years hence [1641] he would be a Bishop, and he was so, sc. Bishop of
Worcester.

R Ris, did resolve him, That Mr. Booth of—in Cheshire should have a Son that
should inherit, Three Years hence [Sc. Sir George Booth, the first Lord
Delamere] viz. from 1619. Sir George Booth aforesaid was born December 18.
Anno 1622.

This I extracted out of Dr. Nepiers Ori­ginal Diary, then in the possession of
Mr. Ashmole.

When E. W. Esq was about Eight Years old, he was troubled with the Worms: His
Grand-father carried him to Dr. Nepier at Lynford. Mr. E. W. peeped in at the
Closet at the end of the Gallery, [[Page
135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=74) and saw him
upon his Knees at Prayer. The Doctor told Sir Francis, that at Four­teen Years
old his Grandson would be freed from that Distemper: and he was so. The
Medicine he prescribed was, to drink a little draught of Muscadine in the
Morn­ing. 'Twas about 1625.

It is impossible, that the Prediction of Sir George Booth's Birth, could be
found a­ny other way, but by Angelical Revelati­on.

This Dr. Richard Nepier was Rector of Lynford in Bucks, and did Practise
Physick; but gave most to the Poor that he got by it. 'Tis certain, he
foretold his own Death to a Day and Hour; he dyed Pray­ing upon his Knees,
being of a very great Age, 1634. April the First. He was near­ly related to
the Learn'd Lord Nepier Ba­ron of M. ... in Scotland; I have forgot whether
his Brother. His Knees were hor­ny with frequent Praying. He left his E­state
to Sir Richard Nepier M. D. of the Col­lege of Physitians London, from whom
Mr. Ashmole had the Doctor's Picture, now in the Musaeum.

Dr. Richard Nepier Rector of Lynford was a good Astrologer, and so was Mr.
Marsh of Dunstable; but Mr. Marsh did seriously confess to a Friend of mine,
that Astrolo­gy was but the Countenance; and that he [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=75) did his
business by the help of the blessed Spirits; with whom only Men of great
Pi­ety, Humility and Charity, could be ac­quainted: And such a one he was. He
was an Hundred Years old when my Friend was with him; and yet, did understand
him­self very well.

At Ashridge in Buckinghamshire, near Berkhamsted, was a Monastery, (now in the
Possession of the Earl of Bridgwater,) where are excellent good old Paintings
still to be seen. In this Monastery was found an old Manuscript Intituled
Iohannes de Rupescissâ, since Printed (or part of it) a Chimical Book, wherein
are many Receipts; among others, To free a House Haunted with Evil Spirits, by
Fumes: Mr. Marsh had it, and did Cure Houses so Haunted by it. Ovid in his
Festivals hath something like it. See Thesaurus Exorcismorum writ by— è
Societate Iesu. Oct. Wherein are several high Physical and Medicinal things.

Good Spirits are delighted and allured by sweet Perfumes, as rich Gums,
Frankin­cense, &c. Salt, &c. which was the reason that the Priests of the
Gentiles, and al­so the Christians used them in their Temples, and Sacrifices:
And on the contrary, Evil Spirits are pleased and allured and called up by
Suffumigations of Henbane, &c. stinking Smells, &c. which the Witches do use
in [[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=75) their
Conjuration. Toads (Saturnine A­nimals) are kill'd by putting of Salt upon
them; I have seen the Experiment. Ma­gical Writers say, that Cedar-wood drives
away evil Spirits; it was, and is much used in Magnificent Temples.

Plinii Natural Hist. Lib. XII. Cap. XIV.

Alexandro Magno in pueritia sine parsimo­nia thura ingerenti aris, paedagogus
Leonides dixerat, ut illo modo, cum divicisset thurife­ras gentes,
supplicaret. At ille Arabia potitus; th [...]re onustam navim misit ei, large
exhortatus, ut Deos adoraret.

One says why should one think the In­tellectual World less Peopled, than the
Material? Pliny in his Natural History Lib.—Cap.—tells us, That in Afri­ca do
sometimes appear multitudes of Aeri­al Shapes, which suddenly vanish. Mr.
Ri­chard Baxter in his Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits, (the last Book he
Writ, not long before his Death) hath a Discourse of An­gels: and wonders they
are so little taken notice of, he hath counted in Newman's Concordance of the
Bible, the word Angel in above 300 places,

Hugo Grotius in his Annotations on Io­nah, speaking of Nineve, says, That
Hi­story hath divers Examples, that af­ter a great and hearty Humiliation, God
delivered Cities, &c. from their Calami­ties. [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=76) Some did
observe in the late Civil Wars, that the Parliament, after a Humi­liation, did
shortly obtain a Victory. And as a three-fold Chord is not easily broken; so
when a whole Nation shall conjoin in fervent Prayer and Supplication, it shall
produce wonderful Effects. William Lawd (Arch-bishop of Canterbury) in a
Sermon Preached before the Parliament, about the beginning of the Reign of
King Charles I. affirms the power of Prayer to be so great, That though there
be a Conjunction or Op­position of Saturn or Mars (as there was one of them
then) it will overcome the malignity of it. In the Life of Vavasor Powel is a
memorable Account of the effect of fervent Prayer, after an exceeding Drought:
And Mr. Baxter (in his Book afore-menioned) hath several Instances of that
Kind, which see.

St. Michael and all Angels.

The Collect.

O Everlasting God, who hast Ordered and Constituted the services of Men and
Angels, af­ter a Wonderful manner: Mercifully grant, that as thy Holy Angels
alway do thee service in Hea­ven: So by thy Appointment, they may succour and
defend us, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

[[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=76)

### 1.17. CHAP. XVII.  
Corps-candles in Wales.

# Part of a Letter to Mr. Baxter.

SIR,

Mr. Bax­ter's Cer­tainty of the Worlds of Spirits, page 137. I am to give you
the best satis­faction I can touching those Fiery Apparitions [Corps-candles,]
which do, as it were mark out the way for Corpses to their  [...], and
sometimes before the Partie [...] [...] fall Sick, and sometimes in their
[...]kness. I could never hear in Eng­land of these, they are common in these
Three Counties, viz. Cardigan, Car­marthan and Pembroke, And in Radnor. and as
I hear in some other parts of Wales.

These  [...] in our Language we call Canhwyllan Cyrph (i. e.) Corps-can­dles;
and Candles we call them, not that we see any thing besides the Light; but
because that Light doth as much resemble a material Candle-light, as Eggs do
Eggs, saving, that in their Journey these Can­dles be modò apparentes, modò
disparentes, especially, when one comes near them; and if one come in the way
against them, unto whom they vanish; but presently appear behind and hold on
their course. If it be a little Candle pale or bluish, [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=77) then follows
the Corps either of an Abortive or some Infant; if a big one, then the Corps
of some one come to Age: If there be seen 2, or 3, or more, some big, some
small together, then so many and such Corpses together. If two Can­dles come
from divers places, and be seen to meet, the Corpses will the like; if a­ny of
these Candles are seen to turn some­times a little out of the way, or path,
that leadeth to the Church, the following Corps will be forced to turn in that
very place, for the avoiding some dirty Lane, or plash, &c. Now let us fall to
Evi­dence. Being about the Age of Fifteen, dwelling at Lanylar, late at Night,
some Neighbour saw one of these Candles ho­vering up and down along the
River­Bank, until they were weary in behold­ing it, at last they left it so,
and went to Bed. A few Weeks after came a proper Damsel from Montgomery-shire,
to see her Friends, who dwelt on the other side of that River Istwith, and
thought to Ford the River at that very place where the Light was seen; being
dissuaded by some lookers on (some it is most likely of those that saw the
Light) to adventure on the Water, which was high by reason of a Flood: She
walked up and down along the River-Bank, even where, and even as [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=77) the aforesaid
Candle did, waiting for the falling of the Water; which at last she took, but
too soon for her, for she was Drowned therein. Of late my Sexton's Wife, an
Aged understanding Woman, saw from her Bed, a little bluish Candle on her
Tables-end, within 2, or 3, Days after came a Fellow enquiring for her
Husband, and taking something from un­der his Cloak clap'd it down upon the
Tables-end; it was a Dead-born Child.

Another time, the same Woman saw such another Candle upon the end of the self-
same Table; within a few Days after a weak Child newly Christned by me, was
brought to the Sexton's House, where presently he died: And when the Sexton's
Wife, who was then abroad came home, she found the Child, on the other end of
the Table, where she had seen the Candle.

Some 30, or 40 Years since, my Wife's Sister, being Nurse to Baronet Rudds
three Eldest Children, and (the Lady Mistress being Dead) the Lady
Comp­troller of the House going late into the Chamber where the Maid-servants
lay, saw no less than Five of those Lights toge­ther. It happened a while
after, that the Chamber being newly Plaister'd, and a Grate of Coal-fire
therein kindled to hasten [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=78) the drying of
the Plaister, that five of the Maid servants went to Bed as they were wont
(but as it fell out) too soon; for in the Morning they were all Dead, be­ing
Suffocated in their Sleep with the steem of the new-tempered Lime and Coal.

This was at Langathen in Carmar­than-shire

—Io. Davis.

See more— Generglyn, March 1656.

To this Account of Mr. Davis, I will subjoin what my worthy Friend and
Neighbour Randal Caldicot D. D. hath af­firm'd to me many Years since, Viz.
‘When any Christian is Drowned in the River Dee, there will appear over the
Water where the Corps is, a Light, by which means they do find the Body: And
it is therefore called the Holy Dee. The Doctor's Father was Mr. Caldicot of
Caldicot in Cheshire, which lies on the River.’

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=78)

### 1.18. CHAP. XVIII.  
Oracles.

Hleronimus Cardanus Lib. III. Synesiorum Somniorum, Cap. XV. treats of this
Subject, which see. Iohannes Scotus Erigena, when he was in Greece, did go to
an Ora­cle to enquire for a Treatise of Aristotle, and found it, by the
Response of the Ora­cle. This he mentions in his Works lately Printed at
Oxford; and is quoted by Mr. Anthony à Wood in his Antiquities of Oxon, in his
Life. He lived before the Conquest, and taught Greek at the Abby in
Malemsbury, where his Scholars stabbed him with their Pen-knives for his
Severity to them. Keland mentions that his Statue was in the Choire there.

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=79)

### 1.19. CHAP. XIX.  
Extasie.

Cardanus, Lib. II. Synes. Somniorum. Cap. VIII.‘—IN Ecstasin multis modis
dalabuntur homines: aut per Syncopen, aut ani­mi deliquium, aut etiam proprie
abducto om­ni sensu externo, absque alia causa. Id vero contingit consuetis
plerunque, & nimio affectu alicujus rei laborantibus;—Ecstasis medi­um est
inter vigiliam & somnium, sicut som­nus inter mortem & vigiliam seu vitam—Visa
in Ecstasi certiora insomniis: Clariora & evi­dentiora —Ecstasi deprehensi
audire possunt, qui dormiunt non possunt.’

Anno 1670\. A poor Widow's Daughter in Herefordshire went to Service not far
from Harwood [the Seat of Sir Iohn Hoskins Baronet R. S. S] She was aged neer
about twenty; fell very ill, even to the point of Death, her Mother was old
and Feeble, and her Daughter was the Comfort of her life; if she should die,
she knew not what to do: She besought God upon her Knees in Prayer, that he
would be pleased to [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=79) spare her
Daughters life, and take her to him: At this very time, the Daughter fell into
a Trance, which continued about an Hour; they thought she had been Dead: When
she recovered out of it, she declared the Vision she had in this Fit, viz.
That one in black Habit came to her, whose Face was so bright and glorious she
could not be­hold it; and also he had such brightness up­on his Breast, and
(if I forget not) upon his Arms: And told her, that her Mother's Prayers were
heard, and that her Mother should shortly dye, and she should sudden­ly
recover: And she did so, and her Mo­ther dyed. She hath the character of a
modest, humble, vertuous Maid. Had this been in some Catholick Country, it
would have made a great noise.

'Tis certain, there was one in the Strand, who lay in a Trance a few Hours
before he departed: And in his Trance had a Visi­on of the Death of King
Charles the II. It was at the very Day of his Apoplectick Fit.

There is a Sheet of Paper Printed 16 ... concerning Extasies, that Iames
Vsher, late Lord Primate of Ireland, once had: But I have been assur'd from my
Honour'd Friend Iames Tyrrel Esq (his Lordship's Grand­son) that, this was not
an Extasie; but that his Lordship upon Reading the 12, 13, [[Page
146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=80) 14, &c.
Chapters of the Revelation, and farther reflecting upon the great increase of
the Sectaries in England, supposed that they would let in Popery, which
Conside­ration put him into a great Transport at the time when his Daughter
(the Lady Tyrrel) came into the Room; when he Discoursed to her divers things
(tho not all) contained in the said Printed Paper.

### 1.20. CHAP. XX.  
Glances of Love, Malic.

AMor ex oculo: But (as the Lord Bacon saith) more by Glances, than by full
Gazings; and so for Envy and Malice.

Tell me dearest,

Mr. Fletch­er in Cupid's Revenge.

what is Love?

'Tis a Lightning from above:

'Tis an Arrow, tis a Fire,

'Tis a Boy they call Desire.

'Tis something Divine and Inexplicable. It is strange, that as one walks the
Streets sometimes one shall meet with an Aspect, (of Male or Female) that
pleases our Souls; [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=80) and whose
Natural sweetness of Nature, we could boldly rely upon. One never saw the
other before, and so could neither oblige, or disoblige each other. Gaze not
on a Maid, saith Ecclus. 9. 5.

The Glances of Envy and Malice, do shoot also subtilly; the Eye of the
Malici­ous Person does really Infect (and make Sick) the Spirit of the other.
The Lord Bacon saith, it hath been observed, That after Triumphs, the
Triumphants have been sick in Spirit.

The Chymist can draw subtile Spirits, that will work upon one another at some
distance, viz. Spirits of Alkalies and A­cids, e. g. Spirits Coelestial (Sal
Armoniac and Spirit C. C. will work on each other at half a Yard distance, and
smoke); but the Spirits above mentioned are more sub­tile than they.

Non amo te Sabati, nec possum dicere quare.

But if an Astrologer had their Nativities, he would find a great disagreement
in the Schemes. These are Hyperphysical Opticks, and drawn from the Heavens.

Infants are very sensible of these Irradia­tions of the Eyes: In Spain,
France, &c. Southern Countries, the Nurses, and Pa­rents, [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=81) rents are very
shy to let People look upon their young Children, for fear of Fascina­tion. In
Spain they take it ill if one looks on a Child, and make one say, God Bless
it. They talk of mul dé ojos. We usually say, Witches have evil Eyes.

## 2\.

### 2.1.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=81)

AN Accurate Account OF Second-Sighted-Men IN SCOTLAND: IN Two Letters from a
Learned Friend of mine in Scotland.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=82)

[[Page 151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=82)

### 2.2. OF Second-Sighted-Men IN SCOTLAND.

# To Mr. John Aubrey Fellow of the Royal-Society.

SIR,

FOR your Satisfaction I drew up some Queries about the Second­sighted Men, and
having sent them to the Northern parts of this King­dom, some while ago I
recieved Answers to them from two different Hands, where­of I am now to give
you an Account, viz.

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=83) Query.
I.

If some few credible well-attested Instances of such a Knowledge as is
commonly called the Second-sight, can be given?

Answer.

Many Instances of such Knowledge can be given, by the Confession of such who
are skilled in that Faculty: For instances, I re­fer you the Fourth Query.

Query. 2.

If it consists in the discovery of present, or past Events only? Or, if it
extend to such as are to come?

Answer.

The Second-sight relates only to things future, which will shortly come to
pass. Past Events I learn nothing of it.

Query. 3.

If the Objects of this Knowledge, be sad and dismal Events only; such as
Deaths and Mur­ders? Or, joyful and prosperous also?

Answer.

Sad and dismal Events, are the Objects of this Knowledge: As sudden Deaths,
dismal Accidents: That they are Prospe­rous, [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=83) or Joyful, I
cannot learn. Only one instance I have from a Person worthy of Credit, and
thereby judge of the Joyful­ness or Prosperity of it, and it is this. Near 40
Years ago Macklend and his Lady, Sister to my Lord Seaforth, were Walking
about their own House, and in their return, both came into the Nurses Chamber,
where their young Child was on the Breast: At their coming into the Room, the
Nurse falls a Weeping; they asked the cause, dreading the Child was Sick, or
that she was scarce of Milk: The Nurse replied, the Child was well, and she
had abundance of Milk; yet she still Wept; and being pressed to tell what
ailed her; she at last said, Macklend would dye, and the Lady would shortly be
Marryed to another Man. Being enquired how she knew that Event, she told them
plainly, that as they came both into the Room, she saw, a Man with a scarlet
Cloak and a white Hat, betwixt them, giving the Lady a Kiss over the Shoulder;
and this was the cause of her Weeping. All which came to pass after Macklend's
Death: the Tutor of Lovat Marry'd the Lady in the same Habit the Woman saw
him. Now by this instance, judge if it be Prosperous to one, it is as Dis­mal
to another.

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=84)Query. 4.

If these Events, which Second-sighted Men discover, or fore-tell, be visibly
represented to them, and acted, as it were, before their Eyes?

Answer.

Affirmatively, they see those things vi­sibly; but none sees but themselves;
for in­stance, if a Man's Fatal-end be Hanging; they'll see a Gibbet, or a
Rope about his Neck: if Beheaded, they'll see the Man without a Head; if
Drowned, they'll see Water up to his Throat; if unexpected Death, they'll see
a Winding-sheet about his Head: All which are represented to their View. One
Instance I had from a Gentleman here, of a Highland Gentleman of the
Mackdonalds, who having a Brother that came to visit him, saw him coming in
wanting a Head; yet told not his Brother, he saw any such thing; but within 24
Hours thereafter, his Brother was taken, (being a Murderer) and his Head cut
off, and sent to Edenburgh. Many such In­stances might be given.

Query. 5.

If the Second-sight be a thing that is trou­blesome and uneasie to those that
have it? and such as they would gladly be rid of?

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=84)Answer.

It's commonly talk'd-by all I spoke with, That it is troublesome; and they
would gladly be freed from it, but cannot: Only I heard lately of a Man very
much troubled in his Soul therewith, and by serious beg­ging of God
Deliverance from it, at length lost the Faculty of the Second-sight.

Query. 6.

If any Person, or Persons, truly Godly, who may justly be presumed to be such,
have been known to have had this Gift or Faculty?

Answer.

Negatively, not any Godly, but such as are Vitious.

Query. 7.

If it descends by succession from Parents to Children? Or, if not, Whether
those that have it, can tell how they came by it?

Answer.

That it is by Succession, I cannot learn; how they came by it, is hard to
know, nei­ther will they tell; which if they did, they are sure of their
stroaks from an invisible Hand. One Instance I heard of one Allen Miller,
being in company with some Gen­tlemen, [[Page
156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=85) having gotten a
little more than ordinary of that strong Liquor they were Drinking, began to
tell Stories and strange passages he had been at: But the said Allen was
suddenly removed to the farther end of the House, and was there almost
strangled; recovering a little and coming to the place where he was before,
they asked him, What it was that troubled him so? He answered, he durst not
tell; for he had told too much already.

How came they by it?

Answer.

Some say by Compact with the Devil; some say by Converse with those Daemons we
call Fairies. I have heard, that those that have this Faculty of the Second-
sight, have offered to teach it to such as were Curious to know it; upon such
and such Conditions they would teach them; but their proffers were rejected.

This is all I could learn by Tradition of that Faculty, from Knowing and
Intelli­gent Men. If this satisfie not these Queries aforesaid, acquaint me,
and what can be known of it, shall be Transmitted.

I cannot pass by an Instance I have from a very honest Man in the next Parish,
who told me it himself. That his Wife being big with Child near her Delivery,
he buys [[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=85)
half a Dozen of Boards to make her a Bed against the time she lay in. The
Boards lying at the Door of his House, there comes an old Fisher-woman, yet
alive, and asked him, Whose were those Boards? He told her they were his own;
she asked again, For what use he had them? He replied, for a Bed; she again
said, intend them for what use you please, she saw a dead Corps ly­ing on
them, and that they would be a Cof­fin: Which struck the honest Man to the
Heart, fearing the Death of his Wife. But when the old Woman went off, he
calls presently for a Carpenter to make the Bed, which was accordingly done;
but shortly after the honest Man had a Child died, whose Coffin was made of
the ends of those Boards.

Sir, The Original, whereof this that I have Writ, is a true Copy, was sent by
a Minister, living within some few Miles of Inverness, to a Friend of mine
whom I em­ployed to get Information for me; as I insi­nuated before: I have
other Answers to these Queries from another Hand, which I purposed to have
communicated to you at this time; but I find there will not be room enough for
them in this Sheet; howbeit, in case you think it fit, they shall be sent you
afterward.

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=86)In the
mean time, I shall tell you what I have had from one of the Masters of our
College here (a North Country-man both by Birth and Education, in his younger
Years) who made a Journey in the Harvest time into the Shire of Ross, and at
my desire, made some enquiry there, concern­ing the Second-sight. He reports,
That there they told him many Instances of this Knowledge, which he had
forgotten, except two. The first, one of his Sisters, a young Gentlewoman,
staying with a Friend at some 30 Miles distance from her Father's House, and
the ordinary place of her Re­sidence; One who had the Second-sight in the
Family where she was, saw a young Man attending her as she went up and down
the House, and this was about Three Months before her Marriage. The second is
of a Woman in that Country who is re­puted to have the Second-sight, and
decla­red, that Eight Days before the Death of a Gentleman there, she saw a
Bier or Coffin covered with a Cloth which she knew, car­ried as it were to the
place of Burial, and attended with a great Company, one of which told her it
was the Corps of such a Person, naming that Gentleman, who died Eight Days
after. By these Instances it appears, that the Objects of this Knowledge are
not sad and dismal Events only, but [[Page
159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=86) joyful and
prosperous ones also: He de­clares farther, that he was inform'd there, if I
mistake not, by some of those who had the Second sight, That if at any time
when they set those strange Sights, they set their Foot upon the Foot of
another who hath not the Second-sight, that other will for that time see what
they are seeing; as also that they offered, if he pleased, to com­municate the
Second-sight to him. I have nothing more to add at present, but that I am

SIR Your Faithful Friend and Humble Servant,

[[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=87)

# To Mr. John Aubery Fellow of the Royal Society at Gresham College, London.

Honoured Sir,

SInce my last to you, I have had the fa­vour of two Letters from you: To the
first Dated February 6\. I had replied sooner, but that I wanted leisure to
Tran­scribe some farther Accounts of a Second-sighted Man, sent me from the
North, whereof (in obedience to your desire) I give here the Doubles.

> May the 4th 1694.

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=87)

#### 2.2.1. A Copy of an Answer to some Queries concerning Second-sighted Men,
sent by a Minister living near Inverness, to a Friend of mine.

##### 2.2.1.1. Query. 1.

That there is such an Art, commonly called the Second-sight, is certain, from
these following Instances,

First, in a Gentleman's House, one Night the Mistress considering why such
Persons whom she expected, were so late, and so long a coming, the Supper
being all the while delayed for them; a Servant Man about the House (finding
the Mistress anxious) having the Second-sight, desires to cover the Table, and
before all things were put on, those Persons she longed for would come in:
Which happened ac­cordingly.

A Second Instance, concerning a young Lady of great Birth, whom a Rich Knight
fancied and came in sute of the Lady, but she could not endure to fancy him,
being a harsh and unpleasant Man: But her Friends importuning her dayly, she
turned melancholy and lean, Fasting and Weep­ing [[Page
162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=88) continually. A
common Fellow about the House meeting her one Day in the Fields, asked her,
saying, Mrs. Kate, What is that that troubles you and makes you look so ill?
She replied, that the cause is known to ma­ny, for my Friends would have me
Marry such a Man by name, but I cannot fancy him. Nay, (says the Fellow) give
over these Niceties, for he will be your first Hus­band, and will not Live
long, and be sure he will leave you a rich Dowry, which will procure you a
great Match, for I see a Lord upon each Shoulder of you: All which came to
pass in every Circumstance; as Eye and Ear Witnesses declare.

A Third Instance, of a Traveller coming in to a certain House, desired some
Meat: The Mistress being something nice and backward to give him Victuals; you
need not, says he, churle me in a piece of Meat; for before an Hour and an
half be over, a young Man of such a stature and garb will come in with a great
Salmon-fish on his Back, which I behold yonder on the Floor: And it came to
pass within the said time.

A Fourth Instance, of a young Woman in a certain House about Supper time,
re­fused to take Meat from the Steward who was offering in the very time Meat
to her; being asked why she would not take it? replied, she saw him full of
Blood, and [[Page
163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=88) therefore was
afraid to take any thing of his Hands. The next Morning, the said Steward
offering to compose a difference between two Men, at an Ale-house Door got a
stroke of a Sword on the Forehead, and came home full of Blood. This was told
me by an Eye Witness.

##### 2.2.1.2. Query. 2.

Those that have this Faculty of the Se­cond-sight, see only things to come,
which are to happen shortly thereafter, and some­times fore-tell things which
fall out Three or four Years after. For instance, one told his Master, that he
saw an Arrow in such a Man through his Body, and yet no Blood came out: His
Master told him, that it was impossible an Arrow should stick in a Man's Body
and no Blood come out, and if that come not to pass he would be deemed an
Impostor. But about 5 or 6 Years after the Man died, and being brought to his
Burial-place, there arose a Debate anent his Grave, and it came to such a
height, that they drew Arms and bended their Bows, and one letting off an
Arrow, shot through the dead Body upon the Bier-trees, and so no Blood could
issue out at a dead Man's Wound. Thus his Sight could not inform him whether
the Arrow should be shot in [[Page
164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=89) him Alive or
Dead, neither could he con­descend whether near or afar off.

##### 2.2.1.3. Query. 3.

They foresee Murthers, Drownings, Weddings, Burials, Combates, Manslaught­ers,
of all which many Instances might be given. Lately (I believe in August last
1695.) one told there would be Drown­ing in the River Bewly, which came to
pass: Two pretty Men crossing a Ford both Drowned, which fell out within a
Month. Another Instance, a Man that served the Bi­shop of Catnes, who had 5
Daughters in his House, one of them grudged, that the bur­then of the Family
lay on her wholly: The Fellow told her that ere long she should be exonered of
that Task, for he saw a tall Gen­tleman in black walking on the Bishop's
Right-hand whom she should Marry: And this fell out accordingly within a
quarter of a Year thereafter. He told also of a cover­ed Table, full of
Varieties of good Fare, and their Garbs who sat about the Table.

##### 2.2.1.4. Query. 4.

They see all this visibly acted before their Eyes; sometimes within, and
sometimes without-doors, as in a Glass.

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=89)

##### 2.2.1.5. Query. 5.

It is a thing very troublesome to them that have it, and would gladly be rid
of it. For if the Object be a thing that is terrible, they are seen to sweat
and tremble, and shreek at the Apparition. At other times they Laugh, and tell
the thing chearfully, just according as the thing is pleasant or astonishing.

##### 2.2.1.6. Query. 6.

Sure it is, that the Persons that have a sense of God and Religion, and may be
pre­sumed to be Godly, are known to have this Faculty. This evidently appears,
in that they are troubled for having it, judging it a Sin, and that it came
from the Devil, and not from God; earnestly desiring and wish­ing to be rid of
it if possible, and to that effect have made application to their Mini­ster,
to Pray to God for them, that they might be exonered of that Burthen. They
have supplicated the Presbyterie, who ju­dicially appointed publick Prayers to
be made in several Churches, and a Sermon Preached to that purpose in their
own Parish Church by their Minister, and they have compeired before the
Pulpit, after Sermon [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=90) making
Confession openly of that Sin with deep sense on their Knees; renounced any
such Gift or Faculty which they had to God's dishonor; and earnestly desired
the Mini­ster to pray for them; and this their Re­cantation Recorded, and
after this, they were never troubled with such a sight any more.

[[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=90)

#### 2.2.2. A Copy of a Letter, written to my self by a Gentleman's Son in
Straths-pey being a Student in Divinity, concern­ing the Second-sight.

SIR,

I Am more willing than able to satisfie your desire: As for instances of such
a Knowledge, I could furnish many. I shall only insert some few attested by
several of good Credit yet alive.

And First, Andrew Mackpherson of Clunie in Badenoch, being in sute of the
Laird of Gareloch's Daughter, as he was upon a day going to Gareloch, the Lady
Gareloch was going somewhere from her House within kenning to the Road which
Clunie was coming; the Lady perceiving him, said to her Attendants, that
yonder was Clunie, going to see his Mistress: One that had this Second-sight
in her company replied and said, if yon be he, unless he Marry within six
Months, he'll never Mary. The Lady asked, how did he know that? He said, very
well; for I see him, saith he, all inclosed in his Winding-sheet, except his
Nostrils and his Mouth, which will also close up within Six Months; which
[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=91) happened
even as he foretold; within the said space he died, and his Brother Duncan
Mackpherson this present Clunie succeeded. This and the like may satisfie your
fourth Query, he seeing the Man even then co­vered all over with his dead
Linens. The Event was visibly represented and as it were acted (before his
Eyes) and also the last part of your second Query, viz. That it was as yet to
come. As for the rest of the Questions, viz. That they discover pre­sent and
past Events, is also manifest, thus: I have heard of a Gentleman whose Son had
gon abroad, and being anxious to know how he was, he went to Consult one who
had this Faculty, who told him, that that same Day 5 a Clock in the Afternoon
his Son had Married a Woman in France, with whom he had got so many Thousand
Crowns, and within two Years he should come home to see Father and Friends,
leav­ing his Wife with Child of a Daughter, and a Son of six Months Age behind
him: Which accordingly was true. About the same time two Years he came home,
and verified all that was fore-told.

It is likewise ordinary with Persons that lose any thing, to go to some of
these Men, by whom they are directed; how, what Persons, and in what place
they shall find it. But all such as profess that Skill, [[Page
169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=91) are not equally
dexterous in it. For In­stance, two of them were in Mr. Hector Mackenzi
Minister of Inverness his Father's House; the one a Gentleman, the other a
common Fellow; and Discoursing by the Fire-side, the Fellow suddenly begins to
Weep, and cry out Alas! alas! such a Wo­man is either Dead or presently
expiring. The Gentlewoman lived 5 or 6 Miles from the House, and had been some
Days before in a Fever. The Gentleman being some­what better expert in that
Faculty, said, No, saith he, she's not Dead; nor will she dye of this Disease.
O saith the Fellow, do you not see her all covered with her Winding-sheet? Ay,
saith the Gentleman, I see her as well as you do; but do you not see her
Linnen all wet? which is her Sweat, she being presently, cooling of the Fever.
This Story Mr. Hector himself will testifie. The most Remarkable of this sort,
that I hear of now, is one Archibald Mackeanyers, alias Mackdonald, Living in
Ardinmurch within 10 or 20 Miles, or thereby, of Glen­coe, and I was present
my self, where he fore-told something, which accordingly fell-out. In 1683.
this Man being in Strathspey in Iohn Mackdonald of Glencoe his Company, told,
in Balachastell before the Laird of Grant, his Lady, and several o­thers, and
also in my Father's House; that [[Page
170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=92) Argyle, of whom
few or none knew then where he was, at least there was no word of him then
here; should within two Twelve Months thereafter, come to the West-High-lands,
and raise a Rebellious Faction, which would be divided among themselves, and
disperse, and he unfortunately be taken and Beheaded at Edinburgh, and his
Head set up­on the Talbooth, where his Father's Head was before him: Which
proved as true, as he fore-told it, in 1685. thereafter. Like­wise in the
beginning of May next after the late Revolution, as my Lord Dundee re­turn'd
up Spey-side after he had followed Ge­neral Major Mac Kay in his Reer down the
length of Edinglassie, at the Milatown of Gar­tinbeg the Machleans joined him,
and after he had received them, he Marched forward, but they remained behind,
and fell a Plun­dering: Upon which, Glencoe and some o­thers, among whom was
this Archibald, being in my Father's House and hearing that Mac Leans and
others were Pillaging some of his Lands, went to restrain them, and com­manded
them to March after the Army; after he had cleared the first Town, next my
Father's House of them, and was come to the second, there standing on a Hill,
this Archibald said, Glencoe, If you take my Advice, then make off with your
self with all possible haste, for ere an Hour [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=92) come and go,
you'll be put to it as hard as ever you was: Some of the Com­pany began to
droll and say, what shall be­come of me? Whether Glencoe believed him, or no,
I cannot tell; but this I am sure of, that whereas before he was of intention
to return to my Father's House and stay all Night, now we took leave and
immedi­ately parted: And indeed, within an Hour thereafter Mac Kay, and his
whole Forces appeared at Culnakyle in Abernethie 2 Miles below the place where
we parted, and hear­ing that Cleaverhouse had Marched up the Water-side a
little before, but that Mac Leans and several other stranglers had stayed
behind, commanded Major Aeneas Mac Kay, with 2 Troops of Horse after them; who
finding the said Mac Leans at Kinchardie in the Parish of Duthel, Chased them
up the Morskaith: In which Chase Glencoe hap­pened to be, and was hard put to
it, as was fore-told. What became of Archibald him­self, I am not sure, I have
not seen him since, nor can I get a true Account of him, only I know he is yet
alive, and at that time one of my Father's Men whom the Red-coats meeting,
compell'd to guide them, within sight of the Mac Leans, found the said
Archibald's Horse within a Mile of the place where I left him. I am also
inform'd, this Archibald said to Glencoe, that he would [[Page
172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=93) be Murthered in
the Night-time in his own House Three Months before it happen'd.

Touching your 3d. Query, The Objects of this Knowledge, are not only sad and
dismal; but also joyful and prosperous: Thus, they fore-tell of happy
Marriages, good Children, what kind of Life Men shall Live, and in what
Condition they shall Die: Also Riches, Honour, Preferment, Peace, Plenty and
good Weather.

Query. 6. What way they pretend to have it? I am informed, that in the Isle of
Sky, especially before the Gospel came thither; several Families had it by
Succes­sion, descending from Parents to Children, and as yet there be many
there that have it that way; and the only way to be freed from it is; when a
Woman hath it her self and is Married to a Man that hath it also; if in the
very Act of Delivery, upon the first sight of the Childs Head, it be
Bap­tized, the same is free from it; if not he hath it all his Life: By which
it seems, it is a thing troublesome and uneasie to them that have it, and such
as they would fain be rid of. And may satisfie your 5th Query. And for your
farther contentment in this Query; I heard of my Father, that there was one
Iohn du beg Mac Grigor a Reanach-man Born, very expert in this Knowledge, and
my Father coming one Day from Inverness, [[Page
173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=93) said by the
way, that he would go into an Alehouse on the Road, which then would be about
5 Miles off. This Iohn Mac Grigor being in his Company, and taking up a
Slate­stone at his Foot, and looking to it, re­plied; Nay, saith he, you will
not go in there, for there is but a matter of a Gal­lon of Ale in it even now,
and ere we come to it, it will be all near Drunken, and those who are Drinking
there, are Strangers to us, and ere we be hardly past the House, they'll
discord among them­selves: Which fell out so; ere we were two pair of Butts
past the House, those that were Drinking there went by the Ears, wounded and
mischieved one an­other. My Father by this and several o­ther things of this
nature, turned curious of this Faculty, and being very intimate with the Man,
told him he would fain learn it: To which he answered, that indeed he could in
3 Days time Teach him if he pleased; but yet he would not advise him nor any
Man to learn it; for had he once learned he would never be a Minute in his
Life, but he would see innumerable Men and Women Night and Day round about
him; which perhaps he would think wearisome and unpleasant, for which rea­son
my Father would not have it. But as Skilful as this Man was, yet he knew not
[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=94) what
should be his own last End; which was Hanging: And I am Informed, that most,
if not all of them, though they can fore-see what shall happen to others; yet
they cannot fore-tell, much less prevent what shall besal themselves. I am
also in­formed by one who came last Summer from the Isle of Sky, that any
Person that pleases will get it Taught him for a Pound or two of Tobacco.

As for your last Query. For my own part, I can hardly believe they can be
justly presumed, much less truly Godly. As for this Mac Grigor several report,
that he was a very civil discreet Man, and some say he was of good Deportment,
and also unjustly Hanged. But Archibald Mackenyere will not deny himself, but
once he was one of the most Notorious Thieves in all the Highlands: But I am
informed since I came to this Knowledge which was by an Acci­dent too long
here to relate, that he is turned honester than before.

There was one Iames Mack Coil-vic-alaster alias Grant, in Glenbeum near Kirk-
Michael in Strathawin, who had this Sight, who I hear of several that were
well acquainted with, was a very honest Man, and of right blameless
Conversation. He used ordinari­ly by looking to the Fire, to fore-tell what
Strangers would come to his House the next [[Page
175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=94) Day, or shortly
thereafter, by their Habit and Arms, and sometimes also by their Names; and if
any of his Goods or Cattel were missing, he would direct his Ser­vants to the
very place where to find them whether in a Mire or upon dry Ground; he would
also tell, if the Beast were already Dead, or if it would Die ere they could
come to it; and in Winter if they were thick about the Fire-side, he would
desire them to make room to some others that stood by, tho they did not see
them, else some of them would be quickly thrown in­to the midst of it. But
whether this Man saw any more than Brownie and Meig Mal­lach, I am not very
sure: Some say, he saw more continually, and would often be very angry-like,
and something troubled, no­thing visibly moving him: Others affirm he saw
these two continually, and some­times many more.

They generally term this Second-sight in Irish Tashitaraughk, and such as have
it Taishatrin, from Taish, which is properly a shadowy substance, or such
naughty, and thing, as can only, or rather scarcely be discerned by the Eye;
but not caught by the hands: for which they as­signed it to Bugles or Ghosts,
so that Taish­tar, is as much as one that converses with Ghosts or Spirits, or
as they commonly [[Page
176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=95) call them, the
Fairies, or Fairy-Folks. Others call these Men Phissichin, from Phis, which is
properly Fore-sight, or Fore-knowledge. This is the surest and clearest
account of Second-sighted Men that I can now find, and I have set it down
fully, as if I were transiently telling it, in your own presence, being
curious for nothing but the verity, so far as I could. What you find improper
or superfluous, you can best compendise it, &c.

Thus far this Letter, written in a Fami­liar and Homely stile, which I have
here set down at length: Meg Mullack, and Brownie mentioned in the end of it,
are two Ghosts, which (as is constantly re­ported) of old haunted a Family in
Straths-pey of the Name of Grant. They appeared, the first in the likeness of
a young Lass: The Second of a young Lad.

Dr. Moulin (who presents his service to you) hath no aquaintance in Orkney;
but I have just now spoken with one who not only hath acquaintance in that
Country, but also entertains some thoughts of going thither himself, to get me
an account of the Cures usually practised there. The Cortex Winteranus
mentioned by you as an excellent Medicine, I have heard com­mended as good for
the Scurvy; if you know it to be Eminent or Specifick [[Page
177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=95) (such as the
Peruvian Bark is) for any Disease. I shall be well pleased to be in­formed by
you.

Thus, Sir, you have an account of all my Informations concerning Second-
sight­ed Men: I have also briefly touched all the other particulars in both
your Letters, which needed a Reply, except your Thanks so liberally and
obligingly returned to me for my Letters, and the kind sense you express of
that small service. The kind reception which you have given to those poor
trifles, and the value which you put on them, I consider as effects of your
kindness to my self, and as engagements on me to serve you to better purpose
when it shall be in the power of

Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

[[Page 178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=96)

#### 2.2.3. Additaments of Second-sight.

DIembroke in his Book de Peste, gives us a story of Dimmerus de Raet, that
being at Delft, where the Plague then raged, sent then his Wife Thirty Miles
off. And when the Doctor went to see the Gentleman of the House, as soon as he
came in, the old Chair-woman that washed the Cloathes fell a weeping: He asked
her, Why? said she, My Mistress is now dead: I saw her Apparition but just now
without a Head, and that it was usual with her when a Friend of hers died, to
see their Apparitions in that man­ner, though never so far off. His Wife died
at that time.

Mr. Th. May in his History Lib. VIII. writes, that an Old Man (like an
Her­mit) Second-sighted, took his leave of King Iames the First, when he came
into England: He took little notice of Prince Henry, but addressing himself to
the Duke of York [since King Charles I.] fell a weeping to think what
misfortunes he should undergo; and that he should be one of the miserablest
unhappy Princes that ever was.

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=54241&page=96)A Scotch
Noble Man sent for one of these Second-sighted Men out of the High-lands to
give his Judgment of the then great Favourite George Villiers, Duke of
Buckingham; as soon as ever he saw him, Pish, said he, he will come to
nothing. I see a Dagger in his breast; and he was stabbed in the breast by
Capt. Felton.

Sir Iames Melvin hath several the like Stories in his History.

A certain Old Man in South-Wales told a Great Man there of the Fortune of his
Family; and that there should not be a Third Male Generation.

In Spain there are those they call Salu­dadores, that have this kind of Gift.
There was a Dominican Fryar one— a Portugues belonging to Queen Katharine
Dowagers Chapel, who had the Second-sight.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Aubrey, John, 1626-1697.. Date: 1696  

