## (unknown project)

# Mr. Bee's answer to Mr. Poole's second vindication of his Design for
printing A synopsis of criticall and other commentators

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Mr. Bee's Anſwer to Mr. Poole's Second Vindication of his Deſign for Printing A Synopſis of Criticall and other Commentators.
  * 2\. An Advertiſement concerning Mr. POOLE'S Synopſis, &c.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98363&page=1)

## 1\. Mr. Bee's Anſwer to Mr. Poole's Second Vindication of his Deſign for
Prin­ting A Synopſis of Criticall and other Commentators.

WEre it not that Mr. Bee had received the Character of Mr. Poole, to be a
confident and reſt­leſs man in his way, he ſhould have very much wondred to
have found him publiſhing a new Vindication of his Deſign, &c. for Mr. Bee
really believed the ſtrength and reaſon of his former Paper, in Anſwer to what
Mr.Poole and all his Friends were able before to ſay, would have ſatisfied,
and once more ſilenced him, and ſaved both parties the farther trouble of
multiplying Replies upon the preſent Difference. But ſince Mr.Poole has again
gone a­bout to abuſe the World with a ſecond Paper, which he calls by the ſame
name as he did his former, (and well he may ſo doe, ſince it conſiſts in ſo
great meaſure of mere vain and needleſs Repetitions of what he had formerly
written, and what Mr.Bee had formerly as fully anſwered; the reſt of it being
made up of notorious Falſities, Miſtakes wilfull or of Ignorance, ſomething of
Abſurditie, an impertinent Flaſh or two of Wit, and Confidence more then
ſufficient through the whole) Mr. Bee is re­ſolved not to be behind-hand with
him in juſtifying his Right and Propriety, and therefore to Mr.Poole's Se­cond
Vindication returns this Anſwer, (if at leaſt any Senſe and Reaſon will paſs
with Mr.Poole for an Anſwer.)

1\. For his firſt Clauſe, of conſulting with able Lawyers, and receiving their
Judgement in favour of his De­ſign; Mr. Bee thinks he hath ſufficiently
anſwered that already; that one Story may be good till another be heard, that
he hath alſo the Judgement of very able Lawyers againſt the Deſign, and that
if Mr. Bee himſelf were fairly and fully to ſtate the Caſe to thoſe very
Gentlemen named by Mr. Poole, he nothing doubts but, upon a clear ſight of the
Pretenſions and Grounds on both ſides, they would be ready to entertain
favourable thoughts to his Right in the Buſineſs controverted.

2\. For Mr. Poole's Offer to refer all to Arbitration, &c. and Mr. Bee's
Refuſall; Mr. Bee has confeſſed it, and given a Reaſon for it ſufficiently
good to ſatisfie any Rational man. For the grand Abſurdity Mr. Bee is guilty
of, neither Mr.Bee nor any body elſe can tell where it lies. Mr. Poole ſaies,
It was not to be referr'd whether the CRITICI SACRI were Mr. Bee's; but what
Right Mr.Bee had in Mr. Poole's Collections out of them and many others. Mr.
Bee anſwers, that Mr. Poole's Collections out of the CRITICKS were Mr. Bee's
juſt Right, as being his Authours in part; and for his many others, they could
be no ground of any Reference, ſince he never laid Claim to them, nor had any
thing to ſay to them. So that Mr. Bee's Authours in part (which Mr. Poole
calls his Collections) were the thing to be referr'd, whether they were Mr.
Poole's or Mr. Bee's Right. And where now lies the Abſurdity? Whereas Mr.
Poole ſaies he offered an Equivalent, a greater proportion of Materials, and I
know not how much Care and Pains in contriving and digeſting the whole: Mr.
Bee anſwers; for his Pains he may thank himſelf, if he would be buſier then he
needed, and run his Plow into another man's Ground upon his own head. What his
Care was, Mr. Bee knows not; but when Mr.Bee ſhall have knock'd off Mr.
Poole's fingers from meddling at all with his CRITICKS, and Mr. Poole ſhall
have given his Subſcribers two or three more ſuch Slurrs as he has done by
quitting the Biblia Maxima, one of his beſt Materials, which he formerly
promiſed to bring in, but  [...]ow declares he will let alone, (ſo that they
know not what they pay their Money for) Mr. Bee thinks by that time he may
have his Labour for his Care and Pains. For the reſt of his Materials Mr. Bee
knows not what they are: but were they of never ſo much worth and credit, when
Mr.Bee ſaies he'll have nothing to doe with them, and Mr. Poole's other
colle­ctions are his own already, how can Mr.Bee or any man elſe look upon
this as an Equivalent? So that Mr.Bee goes on to declare, that Mr.Poole may as
well religiouſly Epitomize his Purſe upon the High-way, as goe about by theſe
crooked and ſiniſter Artifices to extort his unqueſtionable Right out of his
hands, and all (as he pre­tends) for the Glory of God. That Mr.Bee never choſe
above one perſon to any Meeting, and that one declar'd himſelf unſatisfied
with Mr.Poole's Profer, Mr. Bee again affirms. And whereas Mr. Poole threatens
never to offer the like Terms again; Mr.Bee cannot help it, but deſires
Mr.Poole not to trouble his head about that, till ſuch time as he ſhall ſend
to him, and beg ſuch a Favour of him.

3\. For Mr. Bee's Ʋnrighteouſneſs, and his bringing down the Prices of Books
to the loſs and prejudice of many Scholars, (if there be any ſo prejudiced)
there needs no new Anſwer. But whereas Mr.Poole ſaies, If theſe Loſſes and
Injuries be expiated by the Serviceableneſs of Mr.Bee's Deſign to the publick
good, why may not he have the benefit of the ſame Plea? Mr.Bee anſwers,
Becauſe Mr. Poole has not that true and juſt Title to the Copies he pretends
to as himſelf had. For Mr.Bee meddled with no Authours that any Engliſh­man
could claim a Right in, without firſt making them Satisfaction: But Mr. Poole
declares to take his princi­pal Materials out of thoſe Authours that Mr.Bee
has made himſelf a Legal Title in, and that without his Leave or Conſent, or
any Conſideration for them. Let Mr.Poole but keep his own ground, and not
treſpaſs upon the CRITICKS, and let his Epitomizing bring down the prices of
what Authours he will.

4\. To his fourth Clauſe, (which is moſt of it Crambe) concerning one man's
Epitomizing anothe [...] Copy without being queſtion'd for it, (as Mr. Poole
ſaies) Mr.Bee gives his former Anſwer, That Mr.Poole will find no Book in
England, of one ſort or other, (before the Parliament 1642) printed either in
whole or part, but either by the right Owner, or with his Conſent and
Approbation; and the like in any forein ſettled Kingdome, State, or
Principality. What things have been here ſince done to the contrary, have been
done beſide Law [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98363&page=2) and Reaſon. And if
ſome men in thoſe Arbitrary and Licencious times have not been able to help
themſelves againſt Ʋſurpers, their caſe was to be pitied, rather then drawn
into Example. But if any true Proprietors will in theſe daies either wink at
other men while they pick their Pockets, or be negligent of their own
Intereſts, when they have the Law open to defend and juſtifie them, or think
it not worth their while to ſue a Beggar and catch Vermine, or it may be have
taken Compoſition under-hand, (all which are at leaſt tacit Conſents) why
ſhould this ſway any thing with Mr. Bee, who never made over the leaſt of his
Right, nor any way allow'd another to meddle with it, but is reſolved (by
God's aſſiſtence) to try what the Law will doe for him, which as it is the
great Diſcerner, ſo the Securer of all mens Proprieties? For Marlorat's
Epitome, Mr. Bee again averrs, that it was printed at the Charge of the ſame
Bookſellers that had the Propriety in the Authours he Epitomized, and printed
by the very ſame Printer. Mr. Poole ſaies, he that looks on the Title-pages of
thoſe Authours will find this a mere Fiction of Mr. Bee. But let Mr. Poole
look on the Title-pages of the firſt Im­preſſions of thoſe Authours, (not
thoſe after-Impreſſions in other Countries which lay out of the bounds of
their Privileges, and could no way be prevented, as Mr. Bee cannot prevent a
Diſcourteſie of that nature to him­ſelf in Forein parts, and therefore had
need to be ſecured by his Grant at home) Let Mr. Poole look on theſe, and he
will ſoon find Mr. Bee's Tale true, and the Fiction to lie at his own door. By
that time Mr. Poole has ſerved an Apprenticeſhip to the Trade (as every
Bookſeller ſhould) he will learn to make this diſtinction: but at preſent he
is but raw and green in the way. That the Law-Patent-Caſe was determined by
the Lord Keeper the laſt Term, (by which Mr. Poole muſt mean Hilary Term, for
this is but the ſame Ʋntruth repeated, which he formerly printed in his firſt
Paper a little after that Term) Mr. Bee wonders with what face Mr. Poole can
perſiſt in ſo groſs and palpable a Falſity; when 'tis notoriouſly known that
in that laſt Term (as he calls it) there was nothing like a Determination, but
it was onely referr'd to a future Hearing the enſuing Eaſter term, that in
that Term it was again heard, and again put off, and at this preſent Term
continues undecided. This all the Town can tell him. Now what eminent Lawyer
it was that ſhould ſo abuſe Mr. Poole, (if Mr. Poole does not rather abuſe his
Lawyer) as to aſſure him he was preſent, and heard the Lord Keeper determine
the Caſe, Mr. Bee cannot imagine, but takes the whole Story for a Caſtle built
in the Air of Mr. Poole's Fancy, as moſt of what he ſaies beſides ſeems to
have had its firſt hatching and production there.

5\. Mr. Poole ſaies, he does not pretend to Epitomize the whole CRITICKS. Nor
does Mr. Bee know how it can be done: for can a man Epitomize, and yet take
the whole? can he take but parts of a thing, and yet have all? However (as Mr.
Bee ſaid formerly) he takes all that he judges the beſt, and makes moſt for
his purpoſe; he takes the Kernell, and leaves the Shell to Mr. Bee for his
Fifteen thouſand pound. No, ſaies Mr. Poole, there are many material things in
them not belonging to Expoſition of Scripture, which are valu­able another
way. But what if Mr. Poole ſhould fall upon another Deſign hereafter, and then
Collect out of them all that he now leaves behind, by the ſame Law and Reaſon
that he now thinks to run away with ſo conſiderable a part of them? Mr. Bee
remembers the Apologue of the old Fox and the young one. A ſorry Fox
Epitomized a Flock of Geeſe, and brought home a couple of the fatteſt. The
young ones laugh'd. At dinner ſaies one of them, Mother, they are excellent
meat; but why did you bring no more of them? Peace, you fool, ſaies the old
one, I have brought you home two of the beſt, and when occaſion ſerves I know
where to find the reſt of them. So that Mr. Bee has no Security for the
Remainder, and all that he has to thank Mr. Poole for is, his Reprieving the
reſidue of his CRITICKS till his Luſt and Stomach be as ready for them as his
Conſci­ence is.

6\. His laſt Clauſe divides the Hoof, ſplits into two parts, and behold there
come forth Twins. The firſt part conſiſts of a Tale of a Tub, the ſecond, with
the Bottom out.

To the firſt Mr. Bee ſaies, that he underſtands not what Mr. Poole means, when
he ſaies his Deſign can be no Loſs of any preſent or certain Benefit to Mr.
Bee. 'Tis true, what is certain and preſent Mr. Bee is ſure of. But this is
certain at preſent, that the noiſe of Mr. Poole's Project (with divers that
did not well underſtand the true ſtate of Buſineſſes) has done him ſome
manifeſt Diſſervice abroad, which Mr. Bee muſt bear as well as he can. And
whereas Mr. Poole is ſo raſhly confident as to publiſh in print now a ſecond
time  that ſeveral of Mr. Bee's Partners declare they will not joyn with him
in a ſecond Impreſſion: why ſhould they declare ſo, when Mr. Bee had never
propoſed the thing to them? But to ſtop Mr. Poole's mouth for this matter, and
to ſpoil his game here, let him but reade the following few words as they
voluntarily came from Mr. Bee's Partners (now living) ſubſcribed with their
own hands.

We declare that we never refuſed to joyn with Mr. Bee in re-printing the
CRITICKS, as Mr. Poole falſely chargeth us in his Paper.

  * Richard Royſton.
  * William Wells.
  * Sam. Thomſon.
  * William Morden.

The Original of this Mr. Bee keeps by him, to ſatisfie Mr. Poole upon
occaſion, or any of his ſcrupling Friends.

But  [...]. Poole goes on, and ſays 'tis generally believed by Scholars and
Bookſellers, that it is not like to be printe  [...] ▪ He neither tells their
names, nor where they live. For the generality, Mr. Bee knows it to be falſe:
and if there be any ſuch that ſo believe, Mr. Bee would know whether ever they
finger'd Joſeph's Divination Cup, or how they came to dive to the bottom of
his Thoughts and Intentions. And yet they are groſsly [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98363&page=2) wide in their
Gueſſes, which are directly beſides Mr.Bee's Reſolution, (if God permit) to go
on as vigorouſly as Mr.Poole, according to the Pattern exhibited to the World
in his late Specimen. But Mr. Poole ſays this Undertaking of Mr.Bee is a work
of time, charge, and uncertainty. For the Ʋncertainty, Mr. Poole's Deſign is
equally ſubject to it; and more uncertain in this reſpect, that the Epitomizer
himſelf ſeems to be ſo uncertain, as not yet to be well reſolved what to take
in to his Doing, and what to leave out; whereas Mr. Bee's whole Deſign is
completed and digeſted. For Accidents and Caſualties they are common to both.
For the Charge of it, let it not trouble Mr.Poole, it ſhall never coſt him a
farthing. For the Time, Mr. Bee hopes to carry it on with that convenient
expedition, that poſſibly it may prevent Mr.Poole's, and make a younger
Brother of it, if it do not in the meanwhile prove Abortive, or ſtifled in the
Wombe. And whereas Mr. Poole ſays he has a Privilege as well as Mr. Bee, and
bears himſelf high upon that: Mr. Bee wonders upon the account of what Merit
he procured it. But how-ever, he hopes Mr.Poole will conſider he is his ſenior
in Privilege eight years, and that the Scene lies not in Kent, but in
Middleſex, where Gavel-kind-Law has no footing, but the Elder has the
advantage and priority of the reſt, that is, the Privilege. Both Mr. Bee and
Mr.Poole can't have Right to the Eſtate. But if Mr. Bee's Privilege will not
hold water, and ſecure him from any attempt Mr. Poole can make upon his
Propriety, what does Mr.Poole think will become of his, if any man ſhould go
about in a mad humour to Epitomize part or whole (as he phraſes it) of his
Deſign? If Mr. Bee's Privilege will doe no good, why ſhould Mr. Poole trouble
himſelf to procure one, which may as well be undermined by another, and that
by a third, and ſo Mr.Poole be reduced to the ſame condition as he endeavours
to bring Mr.Bee into, ſmart by his own Rod, and be gull'd of his pretended
Right after his own Example?

To the ſecond part; Whereas Mr.Poole inſtances in ſeveral Authours Epitomized,
as Baronius, Raleigh, &c. which yet bear good rates in the World, and
therefore Mr. Bee's Clamours are groundleſs, &c. Mr. Bee an­ſwers, that there
are Epitomes which have been undertaken with ſo little diſcretion and
judgement in the Ma­nagery, that the Undertakers have been laugh'd at and
hiſs'd off the Stage: and no wonder if thoſe Authours at large have kept their
Advantage. But for others, Baronius for one, they have been manifeſtly
obſtructed in their ſales and rates, ſays the old Book-ſeller, what-ever
Mr.Poole, (who is yet but a Pretender to the Trade) may ſay to the contrary.
But is there any Authour ſo martyred as Mr. Poole threatens to ſerve Mr.Bee's,
and yet lives? He pretends to drain and ſuck all the marrow and heart-bloud
out of the CRITICKS, all that tends any way to the underſtanding of difficult
places of Scripture, which is the whole Deſign and Life of Mr.Bee's nine
Volumes? Mr.Poole ſays, Mr. Bee did formerly declare that ſuch a synopſis as
Mr.Poole's would not prejudice his Work. If Mr. Poole means the Synopſis as he
has now contriv'd it, to conſiſt two Vo­lumes in three out of his Work,
there's no man can believe Mr. Bee ſo ſenſleſs as to expreſs himſelf to any
ſuch purpoſe. All that he ſaid was, if Mr. Poole meddled not with his
CRITICKS, or if his Deſign were as he firſt repreſented it to Mr.Bee, it would
not be ſo prejudicial: but ſince he has declared to take one whole Volume, and
another time no leſs then two, out of them, the caſe is alter'd, and Mr.Bee
muſt not be underſtood to de­clare a thing ſo manifeſtly tending to his own
ruine. Whereas Mr.Poole twits Mr. Bee with his conceit of ima­ginary Profit
which may accrue to him, does not Mr.Poole expect the like in his Undertaking?
and what may Mr. Bee think of him, who has the real profit and advantage of
his subſcription-money for ſome moneths at leaſt, if his Deſign goes no
farther on?

Having gone thus far, Mr.Poole propoſes two ſmart Caſes, which if Mr.Bee
thought it worth the while he would anſwer. To the firſt of them he ſays onely
this, That if Mr.Poole will bring his imaginary Reve­rend and Learned Doctour
out of the Clouds, where he ſuppoſes him to live, and procure a Meeting
betwixt Mr.Bee and him, Mr. Bee will give him a ſatisfactory Anſwer to the
wild Quere Mr. Poole makes on his be­half, (whether he may not print a
Collection gathered out of ſeveral other as well as Mr. Bee's Authours be­fore
he printed them, (divers of which latter neither Mr.Poole nor his learned
Doctour had ever ſeen or heard of, had not they found them in the CRITICKS)
print this Collection, I ſay, which he made for his own private uſe:) but till
then Mr.Bee will give neither him nor Mr.Poole leave to tamper with any thing
that has ſo im­mediate a relation to himſelf by way of Propriety.

The other, of Epitomizing Speed, &c. (which Mr. Poole ſaies is exactly his
Caſe) is as ſhallow: But the main thing that Mr.Bee obſerves by Mr. Poole's
ramble, from the CRITICKS, to Law-Books, from them to Dictionaries, to
Hiſtorians, to one thing after another, is this, that Mr.Poole's aim is for
the levelling of all Propriety in any ſorts of Books whatſoever: and if he be
not well obſerved in his preſent motion, he (or ſome other of his Friends that
now lie fallow and have leiſure enough) may ere long attempt farther in
ſubjects of another nature, eſpecially if he once finde himſelf of ſtrength to
deal with Mr.Bee in the preſent Diſpute.

But the thing that does moſt of all ſting and nettle Mr. Poole is Mr.Bee's
challenging him of breach of Pro­miſe before his going into Holland, which
was, that he would deſiſt in his Deſign till Mr. Bee's return from thence.
Here Mr.Poole is ſore and winces, and at laſt is ſo far carried as to ſay he
is ready to contradict Mr. Bee with an Oath, (which it may be for all that he
would not doe if he were put to it.) He ſays, had any ſuch Promiſe been made,
Mr.Bee would have put it in his Firſt Paper. That Mr.Bee ſpared him then, was
out of a reſpect he had to his Coat, (though Mr.Poole's were never perfectly
black) and the hope he had he ſhould have no occaſion to urge it. But  [...]
nothing elſe would ſerve the turn, Mr.Bee thought it f [...] to dally no
longer, but to let the world know how unworthily Mr. Poole had dealt by him.
So that it was no afternoon-dream, as Mr. Poole waggiſhly ſuggeſts, but a real
Truth of ſome weeks ſtanding, though then firſt awak'd by Mr. Bee, to the
confutation of Mr.Poole's boaſt of his great Sincerity and Candour in this
whole Tranſaction. But let Mr.Poole have a care, that notwithſtanding Mr.
Bee's afternoon-dream, he be not up time enough in the morning to meet him in
the firſt full career of his vigorous proceeding, and take the boldneſs to bid
him Stand. For Mr. Bee's good invention, let any man judge where the Invention
lies, and who has the beſt [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98363&page=3) knack that way, by
the ſeveral Weakneſſes Mr. Poole has been trapp'd in through this whole Paper
hitherto. When Mr. Poole cites 2 Kings 9\. 11. Mr. Bee is afraid he is beſide
the Text, and had turned down the wrong leaf, or that he prick'd with a Pin
for it, as Boys do in a Lottery-Book; otherwiſe Mr. Bee thinks he might have
as well cited the firſt verſe in Geneſis as that, for any thing that either
the one or the other concerns the preſent buſineſs. But though Mr. Poole be a
little obſcure here, yet by and by Mr. Bee queſtions not but to make the World
know the man and his communication. How much more pertinent had it been for
Mr. Poole to have turned to another Chapter? where he ſhould have found Ahab,
a branded man for notorious impie­ty, yet making Conſcience in the caſe of
another's Vineyard, which he would not ſeize upon either in whole or part
without firſt profering an equivalent Compenſation? But as to Mr. Poole's
Promiſe in Jewin Street, Mr. Bee is ready to ſwear, that it was given, and for
3 months, with thoſe circumſtances which he has rela­ted in his former Paper.
And though it had the fortune to be a private and unwitneſſed Tranſaction, (as
Mr. Poole ſaies, who has otherwhile told Mr. Bee, that if a third man ſhould
at any time come amongſt them, he would hold no diſcourſe of the buſineſs in
difference betwixt them) yet Mr. Bee has ſufficient witneſs, that after his
Return from Holland, this Paſſage was betwixt Mr. Poole and him in his Shop.
Mr. Bee there in diſ­courſe taxed Mr. Poole with faileur in his Promiſe made
before he went over. Mr. Poole then, as now, de­nied any ſuch Promiſe. What
was it then, Mr. Poole, ſaid Mr. Bee, that you and I talked of ſo long
together in Jewin street? Was it not about my buſineſs? And was there nothing
of a Promiſe mention'd? Mr. Poole at laſt ingenuouſly confeſs'd he promiſed
for three weeks. This was over-heard and ready to be atteſted by one then at a
little diſtance from us. Now Mr. Bee leaves it to others to judge, the onely
ground of the Pro­miſe being his neceſſary occaſion of abſence in the Low-
Countries about his Concerns, which he then told Mr. Poole would require three
months time; whether it were to any purpoſe for Mr. Poole to promiſe, or Mr.
Bee to accept the Promiſe for three weeks, which was all one as if there had
been no Promiſe at all; and whether it be not probable (there being a Promiſe
made) it was rather for the whole term Mr. Bee's Occa­ſions required; who, had
it not been that he had thought himſelf ſecure during his being abroad upon
Mr. Poole's word paſſed, had at leaſt deferr'd his Voiage till ſome time
after. But Mr. Poole grows warm, and ſaies he is ready to make Oath before a
Magiſtrate that he made no ſuch Promiſe. Though Mr. Bee is not a little
pleaſed to find Mr. Poole ſo far coming on, that at length he can perſuade
himſelf to be willing to take ſome kind of Oath upon ſome occaſion; yet for
him, who, after ſome boggling, at laſt refuſed and ſtill ſtands out againſt a
Subſcription tendered from the great Authority of the Nation, tending ſo much
to the preſerva­tion of the quiet and peace of the Nation, for him to make his
firſt Eſſay of Swearing in a Caſe tending to his own private profit and
advantage, to the manifeſt Detriment of his neighbour, and where Mr. Bee is
con­fident the Truth ſtands againſt him; Mr. Bee deſires him to conſider
whether there be not ſomething of his own Gnat and Camel in the caſe.

For Mr. Bee's ſpreading a Report, that Mr. Poole's Work was ſtopp'd; Mr. Bee
gives this ſhort Anſwer in Mr. Poole's ear: 'Tis falſe. But if any employ'd by
Mr. Poole to diſperſe his Specimens ſhould accidentally glean up ſuch a ſtory
in the Coffee-houſe, Mr. Bee cannot help it, nor is he bound to anſwer what
people ſay in that prattling School. How could Mr. Bee goe about to raiſe ſuch
a Report, when he knew in his Conſci­ence he neve [...] had mov'd the leaſt
ſtep towards the ſtopping of it? For as long as Mr. Poole was but onely words
and Preparations, Mr. Bee never troubled himſelf to meddle with him, or by any
Application extra­ordinary to diſturb him; neit [...]er is he a man of that
temper, to impound his neighbour's Cattel till he take them Damage-feaſant.
Now, is his time to ſtop him; and it may be Mr. Poole may ſoon find it more
then a Report.

But in the mean while, who raiſed the Report both in the City and
Univerſities, that Mr. Bee's friends need not make ſuch a ſtir about Mr.
Poole's unjuſt and hard dealing with Mr. Bee, for Mr. Bee was well ſatisfied
by Mr. Poole in the buſineſs? Certainly this muſt be either Mr. Poole's doing,
(the ſtory is ſo falſe) or Mr. Bee knows not where to look the Authour; it
being probable no unintereſted perſon would concern himſelf to hammer out ſuch
a notorious invention. It muſt therefore be at leaſt a Sharer in the Synopſis
of Criticall and other Commentators that firſt contrived it, as Mr. Bee is
well aſſured it was firſt publiſhed and maintained in the above-named talking
Academy.

To conclude, let Mr. Poole reſt content with what is his own, and leave Mr.
Bee to diſpoſe as he thinks good of what is his; let him leave out the
Critical, and retain his other Commentators: if then Mr. Poole have oc­caſion
to cite here and there a paſſage out of Mr. Bee's Authours, (for confirmation
of the Subject he treats on, as he may a Text of Scripture in a Sermon,
according to the Judgement of one of his Lawyers) Mr. Bee ſhall not be againſt
it, provided he do it civilly and modeſtly; for Mr. Bee does not love he
ſhould cite all his Book thus at a time. But if a Synopſis be a Beaſt of that
nature, to hook and fang in all that lies within its reach for its Maſter's
advantage, Mr. Bee thinks it not fit to be endured in a Commonwealth where
Meum and Tuum are in faſhion. It is yet in Mr. Poole's power for him and Mr.
Bee to part friends, the fault is elſe at his door: but in caſe Mr. Poole
proceeds in his perverſe humour, Mr. Bee is reſolved (with God's help) to make
uſe of thoſe Remedies which are proper for the Diſeaſe, and to endeavour by
the beſt Art he can to put a ſtop to Mr. Poole in his unreaſonable
proceedings.

> June 10. 1668.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98363&page=3)

## 2\. An Advertiſement concerning Mr. POOLE'S Synopſis, &c.

THere being ſome ſupernumerary Books printed in reference to forein parts, and
divers of our own Nation (who in reaſon ſhould be firſt provided for) having
declared their Diſappointments in their intended Subſcriptions by divers
accidents, and their deſire to ſubſcribe, if it were not too late; they may
hereby take notice, that if they ſpeedily come or ſend to Mr. Cornelius Bee's
at the King's Arms in Little Brit­tain in London, they ſhall be directed and
aſſiſted to procure the Firſt Volume at the ſame price with the former
Subſcribers; viz. paying 50 s. in hand, and 15 s. more at the coming forth of
the Second Volume, and 15 s. more at the coming forth of the Third Volume; for
which they are to receive the Firſt Vo­lume in hand, and the Second and Third
Volumes when they ſhall be printed and publiſhed. And any perſon that ſhall
ſpeedily ſubſcribe or procure Subſcriptions for Ten Books ſhall have one for
himſelf. And whereas there are ſome few Copies left of the Royall Paper, over
and above thoſe that were diſpoſed of to Benefactours, thoſe that deſire them,
paying the double price, (as the manner is in ſuch caſes,) may be furniſhed
with them. And ſuch as deſire an exchange of their ordinary Books for the
other of Royal Paper, ſhall be allowed what they pay'd for them: every
Sub­ſcriber paying 6 d. each Volume for incidentall Char­ges.

March 31. 1670.

  * Matthew Poole.
  * Cornelius Bee.

[Home](/)

Bee, Cornelius.. Date: 1668  

