## (unknown project)

# The delightful companion, or, Choice new lessons for the recorder or flute
to which is added, several lessons for two and three flutes to play together :
also plain and easie instructions for beginners, and the several graces proper
to this instrument.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=1)

THE Delightful Companion: OR, CHOICE NEW LESSO [...] FOR The Recorder or
Flute. To which is added, Several Lessons for Two and Three Flutes to play
together.

ALSO Plain and Easie Instructions for Beginners, and the several Graces proper
to this Instrument.

The Second Edition, Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for John P [...]yford, at his Shop near the T [...] Church;
[...] Carr, at his Shop at the Middle Temple Gate▪  [...] ▪

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Instructions for the RECORDER.
  * 2\. Advertisement of MUSICK lately printed, and sold by J. Playford near the Temple Church.
  * 3\. Lesons for the Flute or Recorder
    * 3.1. Ayre
    * 3.2. Trumpet minuett
    * 3.3. March
    * 3.7. A Ayre Slow
    * 3.8. B A Farwell tune
    * 3.9. Bore
    * 3.10. C An Italion Ground
      * 3.10.1. D
    * 3.11. Ayre
    * 3.12. E Trumpet tune
    * 3.13. Minuet
    * 3.14. Ayre
    * 3.15. F March
    * 3.17. G Trumpet tune
    * 3.18. Bore
    * 3.19. H
    * 3.20. A Round O
    * 3.21. Sweet Betty
    * 3.22. Minvet
    * 3.23. Minvet
    * 3.24. Minvet
    * 3.25. Prelude
    * 3.26. Tune
    * 3.28. Ayre
    * 3.29. Ayre
    * 3.30. Tune
    * 3.31. Ayre
    * 3.32. Ayre
    * 3.33. Ayre
    * 3.34. Ayre
    * 3.35. Tune
    * 3.36. Minvet
    * 3.37. Tune
    * 3.38. Tune
    * 3.39. Tune
    * 3.40. Round O
    * 3.41. Ayre
    * 3.42. Theater Tune
    * 3.43. Tune
    * 3.44. Ayre
    * 3.45. Theater Tune
    * 3.46. Ayre
    * 3.47. Theater Tune
    * 3.48. Tom Iolly
    * 3.49. Heers that will Chaling all the Faire
    * 3.50. Fy nay preethe Iohn
    * 3.51. Theater Tune
    * 3.52. Theater Tune
    * 3.53. Tune

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=2)

## 1\. Instructions for the RECORDER.

THIS Delightful Companion, the Pipe Recorder, hath been for a long time out of
use; but now it's beginning to be in a greater Repute than ever it was before:
And indeed there is no Musick so near a natural Voice, it admits of excellent
Harmony in Consort of two and three Parts. I have therefore with the
Assistance of several able Masters set down these plain and easie Instructions
for Beginners.

The first thing that a Practitioner is to observe, is the true manner of
holding the Pipe, and placing his Fingers exactly on the holes; for the
perfecting of which, observe these Rules following:

First, hold your Pipe with your left hand uppermost next your Mouth, then
observe there is eight holes upon the Pipe, viz. seven before and one
underneath, which we call the uppermost, and is to be stopt with your Thumb,
the next with your fore finger, the third with your second finger, the fourth
with your third finger, next stop the next or fift hole with the fore finger
of your right hand, your second finger of the same hand stop on the sixth
hole, then stop the seventh hole with your third finger, the last or lowest
hole stop with your little finger; having thus placed your fingers, be sure to
stop them all close, then begin to blow with a gentle breath, which will sound
the first Note or Stop which is called F-fa-ut, next take off your little
finger, keeping all the rest close, then you will sound or stop G-sol-re-ut,
and so you are to proceed in all the Notes ascending, which are prickt upon
five lines, and named and placed according to the proper places in Space and
on Rule according to the Scale or Gamut, the several Stops are placed under
them by Dots on seven Lines, the seven Dots do express all to be stopt by your
fingers as is afore-mentioned; where you see no Dots are placed, there the
holes are open, as you may plainly see and learn by this following Table.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=3)

The first Table of ye Plaine Notes Assending.

The Severall Notes as theyAssend on Rule and space by the G Sol re vt Cliffe

F fa vt

G sol re vt

A la mi re

B fa ♭ mj

C sol fa

D la sol

E la

F fa vt

G sol re vt

A la mj re

B fa ♭ mj

C sol fa

D la sol

Left Hand

Thumb

□

□

□

□

□

□

□

□



✚

✚

✚

✚

First Finger

□

□

□

□

□

□

□





□

□

□

□

Second Finger

□

□

□

□

□

□



□

□

□

□

□

□

Third Finger

□

□

□

□

□









□

□

□



Right Hand

First Finger

□

□

□













□







Second Finger

□

□

□

□











□

□





Third Finger

□

□



□

□

□

□

□

□









Fourth Finger



























Secondly, In this Table observe, That the lower seven Lines represent the
several holes, and the Dots upon those lines what holes are to be stopt.

The little finger or eighth hole hath no peculiar line, but is placed below
the other seven lines, and is expressed by this Signature or Circumflex marked
thus ☽; next observe, that for G-sol-re-ut, above which we call in Alt, you
are to keep on your second finger on the third hole (as you find underneath it
a Dot on the third line) and not to blow the Pipe open as on the Flagelet, for
so the Pipe will be out of Tune.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=3) Next you are
to observe, That the seven Lines and Dots are not intended for a method or
constant Rule to play by, for it is not a commendable way, neither do I advise
any to use it any other ways than to attain to the right knowledge of the
Stops for every Note, that so you may the readier know them when you come to
play any Tunes prickt in the right Musical way upon five Lines, as all the
following Tunes are.

Figure 1. A Scale of all the Notes gradually Assending both Flatt and Sharpe.

This Table directs, and is a Guide, to know all the Stops upon the Recorder or
Flute, both Flat and Sharp, or the half Notes ascending and descending,
according to the Scale of Musick.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=4)

Figure 2. A Table of ye Seuerall Notes which require Shakes or Back falls

Of these Graces, a Beat is marked thus  [...], a Shake is marked thus  [...] A
Beat is fetcht from the half Note below the Note it stands over; and a Shake
is fetcht from, or shaked in the proper Note above it; a Slur is thus marked
[...], when it is over or under two Notes tied together, and is a sliding from
one Note or more to another in the drawing of one breath. In all the Ayres or
Tunes in this Book, you will meet with these Graces set over the several Notes
that are to be so Graced.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=4) The last and
most chiefly to be understood is the Notes, their Names and Proportions of
Time, which are here set in the plainest method I could invent, beginning with
the Semibreve, which is accoun­ted a whole Measure.

The Names of the Notes.

Semibreve.

    𝆹 𝆹
Minim.

    톹텥 톹텥
Crotchet.

    톺텥 톺텥
Quaver.

    톼텮 톼텮
Semiquaver.

    톼텯 톼텯

These two last are often for conveniency tied together, sometimes 4 or 6.

The Rests or Pauses for each Note is thus marked.

Semibreve.

    𝇄 𝇄
Minim.

    𝇅 𝇅
Crotchet.

    𝇆 𝇆
Quaver.

     (quaver rest) (quaver rest)
Semiquaver.

     (semiquaver rest) (semiquaver rest)

A Semibreve is the longest Note (being a full Time) for which you must keep
your Breath on the Pipe so long as you can leisurely in imagination tell four,
which are to be Crotchets, for in the Common Time all Notes are reckoned
double in proportion to the Semibreve, as two Minims, four Crotchets, eight
Quaver, sixteen Semiquavers, as this first Example directs, which is marked
with this Character 𝇍 or Mood, which is set at the beginning of all Lessons.

Common Time.

𝆹

톹텥

톹텥

톺텥

톺텥

톺텥

톺텥

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

Tripla Time by 3 Minims.

𝆹·

톹텥

톹텥

톹텥

톺텥

톺텥

톺텥

톺텥

톺텥

톺텥

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

Tripla Time by 3 Crotchets.

톹텥·

톺텥

톺텥

톺텥

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텮

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

톼텯

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=5) The second
and third Examples direct the Tripla Time, which is numbred by 3, and this
Character 𝇊3 or Mood is placed at the beginning of all Lessons: In these two
Proportions of Time you often meet with Pricks added to the Notes, which
Pricks are half the measure and proportion of the Notes to which they are
added.

Example.  [...]

Thus I have in the most plain and easiest manner I could, set down the
Examples of all Notes and Proportions of Time; such as desire to see the same
more at large, I refer them to Mr. John Playford's Introduction to Musick.

To conclude; By these Rules and Directions, with a little help of some able
Master to explain the true meaning and use thereof, you may in a short time
become good Proficients on this Instrument. Thus hoping that these my
Endeavours will be kindly accepted, it will be an Encouragement for me to
present you with a Second Part of this nature in a few Months.

Your Servant, ROBERT CARR.

## 2\. Advertisement of MUSICK lately printed, and sold by J. Playford near
the Temple Church.

THere is newly published Musick's Recreation, containing choice new Lessons
and Tunes for the Tyra-Viol, with plain and cafe Instructions for Beginners.
Price 1s. 6d.

The Dancing-Master, newly Reprinted with addition of 40 new Dances never
printed before. Price bound 2s. 6d.

The Second Part of the Musical Companion, containing a Collection of new merry
Catches and Songs. Price 1s. 6d.

There is newly printed a new Edition of the Violin Book, entituled, Apollo's
Banquet, (first Part,) containing new Ayres, Theatre Tunes, Horn pip [...],
Jiggs, and Scotch Tunes. The second Part of this Book contains a Collection of
French-dancing Tunes, used at Court and in Dancing-Schools; as, several new
Braw [...]s, Corants, Borees Minuets, Gavots, Sarabands, &c. Most of which are
proper to play on the Flute or Recorder, as well as on the Violin, Price 1s.
6d.

## 3\. Lesons for the Flute or Recorder

[[Page J]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=5)

### 3.1. Ayre

[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=6) [...] [...] [...]
[...] [...] [...]

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=6)

### 3.2. Trumpet minuett

[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=7)

### 3.3. March

[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=7) [...] [...] [...]
[...]

### 3.4.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=8)

[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 3.5.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=8)

[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 3.6.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=9)

[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] from ye lower place

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=9)

### 3.7. A  
Ayre Slow

[...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

The Duke of Graftons March

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=10)

### 3.8. B  
A Farwell tune

[...] [...] [...] [...]

### 3.9. Bore

[...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=10)

### 3.10. C  
An Italion Ground

[...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

turn over

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=11)

#### 3.10.1. D

[...] [...] [...] [...]

### 3.11. Ayre

[...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=11)

### 3.12. E  
Trumpet tune

[...] [...]

### 3.13. Minuet

[...] [...]

### 3.14. Ayre

[...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=12)

### 3.15. F  
March

[...] [...] [...]

### 3.16.

[...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=12)

### 3.17. G  
Trumpet tune

[...] [...] [...]

### 3.18. Bore

[...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=13)

### 3.19. H

[...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

Soft

[...]

Softer

Ayre uery brisk

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=13)

### 3.20. A Round O

20 [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 3.21. Sweet Betty

21 [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=14)

### 3.22. Minvet

22 [...] [...]

### 3.23. Minvet

23 [...] [...]

### 3.24. Minvet

24 [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=14)

### 3.25. Prelude

25 [...] [...]

### 3.26. Tune

26 [...] [...]

### 3.27.

27 [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=15)

### 3.28. Ayre

28 [...] [...] [...]

### 3.29. Ayre

29 [...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=15)

### 3.30. Tune

30 [...] [...] [...]

### 3.31. Ayre

31 [...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=16)

### 3.32. Ayre

32 [...] [...] [...]

### 3.33. Ayre

33 [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=16)

### 3.34. Ayre

Monsr. Peasable

34 [...] [...] [...] [...]

### 3.35. Tune

35 [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=17)

### 3.36. Minvet

36 [...] [...]

### 3.37. Tune

37 [...] [...]

### 3.38. Tune

38 [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=17)

### 3.39. Tune

39 [...] [...] [...]

### 3.40. Round O

40 [...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=18)

### 3.41. Ayre

41 [...] [...]

### 3.42. Theater Tune

42 [...] [...]

### 3.43. Tune

43 [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=18)

### 3.44. Ayre

44 [...] [...] [...]

### 3.45. Theater Tune

45 [...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=19)

### 3.46. Ayre

46 [...] [...] [...]

### 3.47. Theater Tune

47 [...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=19)

### 3.48. Tom Iolly

48 [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=20)

### 3.49. Heers that will Chaling all the Faire

49 [...] [...] [...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=20)

### 3.50. Fy nay preethe Iohn

50 [...] [...] [...]

### 3.51. Theater Tune

51 [...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=21)

### 3.52. Theater Tune

52 [...] [...] [...]

### 3.53. Tune

53 [...] [...] [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95303&page=21)

[Home](/)

Carr, Robert, fl. 1686-1696.. Date: 1686  

