## (unknown project)

# A mixt poem, partly historicall, partly panegyricall, upon the happy return
of His Sacred Majesty Charles the Second and his illustrious brothers, the
Dukes of York and Glocester with honourable reflections upon some state-
martyrs and the renowned generall, not forgetting the Rump and its
appurtenances / by J.C.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=1)

A Mixt Poem, Partly Hiſtoricall, partly Panegyricall, UPON THE Happy Return of
His Sacred MAJESTY Charls the Second, AND HIS Illuſtrious Brothers, the DUKES
of YORK and GLOCESTER.

With Honourable Reflections upon ſome State-mar­tyrs, and the Renowned
Generall.

Not forgetting the Rump and its Appurtenances.

By J. C. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bettertun at his ſhop in Westminster-hall. 1660.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=2)

## To his moſt beloved Brother Captain GILBERT CROUCH.

Good Brother,

IT hath ever been the Ambition of Writers to climb as high as they can to an
Honourable Patronage, even to Heaven it ſelf, if the Nobility of the ſubject
might autho­rize the Preſumption; Now Poets, rankt (eſpecially by the more
earthly part of the World) amongst the moſt airy of Pen-men, are priviledg'd
by common Opinion to ſoar up with the Higheſt: But my preſent Obligations
inſtruct me to the contrary. As Loyalty was the Muſe inſpir'd this Poem; ſo
Love ſhall appoint the Dedication. Though my weak Muſe hath ſometimes borrowed
the expeditious Aids of the Preſſe, yet not till now appeared in publick: As
ſhe never knew the triumphs of Fame, ſo ſhe never felt the bluſhes of
Diſhonour, was never injurious to any per­ſon but her ſelf. But in this
ſubject, Secreſy had been a kind of Combination, Privacy a privative Treaſon;
ſo ill do clandestine joyes become an univerſall Jubilee. That I come behind
in the reare of our Poetique Forces, must be imputed to ſome unkind
contingencies; my thoughts be­ing conceived with the first, but by ſome
miſpriſions met
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=3) with hard
labour from the midwifry of the Preſs. Never­theleſſe, it will be honour
enough for me, if I may have leave to wait upon (as their obſequious ſhadows)
the heroick Poems of thoſe 3. Seraphims, Waller, Cowly, & Lluellin, whoſe
ſudden march alarum'd both Ʋniverſities. Mine, if they come not too early,
will come ſoon enough to bluſh. But in earneſt, I muſt thank the Preſſe for a
ſecond benefit, beſides the manifeſtation of my Allegiance, that it furniſheth
me with a kind occaſion of acknowledging unto the ungrate­full world, even in
Print, the many kindneſſes I have recei­ved from ſo good a Brother. In fine,
You, whoſe Heart and Sword ſo long maintained the Royal Cauſe, are obliged to
protect the Heraulds of it Accept therefore, Good Bro­ther, (which
compellation I prefer before all Titles) accept of this Poem (whoſe onely
merit is its Subject) as a mark of Loyalty to my Prince, and as a Token of my
Love to your ſelf, from

Your moſt Affectionate Brother, John Crouch.

## Table of contents

  * To his moſt beloved Brother Captain GILBERT CROUCH.
  * 1\. Upon the happy Return of his Sacred Majeſty CHARLES the Second, &c.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=3)

## 1\. Upon the happy Return of his Sacred Ma­jeſty CHARLES the Second, &c.

HAil, Second Charls, who (Our Blest Phoenix) came

From the ſpic'd Aſhes of a Martyrs name.

Welcome (Great Soul!) ſent to revive the Dead;

Heavens Plant! nurſt up to graft a Monarchs Head.

Stop here, and bleed my muſe—O Curſed Ax!

Made victim'd Majeſty pay three Kingdomes Tax.

Mount, mount, my Soul, mount to another ſphere,

Leave my dead Trunk a Mourning Statue here.

Death's ſervice is too flight, 'twill not ſuffice;

Our Altars ask a living Sacrifice:

If piles of ſlaughter'd ſouls could have appeas'd

Incenſed Heaven, we long ſince had been eas'd.

Charls, and three Kingdomes Life at once return,

And chill the Aſhes of that Royall Ʋrn;

The Sun at his Meridian height appears,

Drinks up the Tribute of his Fathers Tears.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=4) Bow, Bow,
my Muſe; after ſo long a dearth

Of Loyalty, adore and kiſſe the Earth,

Long cold, but ſince the Loyal Spring begun

Warm'd with Reflections of the Brittiſh Sun.

Then riſe and ſnatch, O ſnatch thoſe orient Rayes!

Twine them about thy Brows inſtead of Bayes:

Thoſe Beams which Majeſty for luſtre weare;

I muſt turn Indian Prieſt, and Worſhip here.

I'm rapt above the Moon, but muſt not ſtick

So Low, am Sun-burnt, and not Lunatick.

Sweat, ſweat, Star-gazers, till your Hearts grow pale,

You that for Lucre ſet the Heavens to ſale.

Hang thy ſelf Lilly in thy Northern Chain,

Thy darling Swede muſt die, and Charls muſt Reign:

Thou, whoſe praedictions animated ſtrife,

Go now (ſad wretch) ſpeak truths to ſave thy life.

The Bells i'th' Strand was crackt, it now appears,

When they rung No King for a hundred years.

Mr. Lilly at the five Bells in the Strand, be­fore ſeveral perſons, proved by
his Aſtrologie that there ſhould be no King in England for an hundred years.

Fly Needham, thou ingenious Devil, fly,

Gall'd with the late Kings helliſh Hue and Cry;

Before the Rope, for thy laſt comfort, look

On Intereſt will not lie, that Dooms-day book;

Where thou, with a malicious Ravens pen,

Deſcribing our Black Prince (the beſt of men)

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=4) Mad'ſt a
falſe parallel 'twixt the Soul and Face,

Better skill'd in complexions, than in grace.

Whoſe two Diurnals weekly did diſperſe

Venome and Rancour through the Univerſe;

VVhich ſtufft with Miſchiefs, Flatteries, and Lies,

Poyſon'd all, but the Antidoted wiſe.

VVho, when thy treaſons wanted their pretence,

Kindly beſtowdſt them upon Providence:

Serv'dſt every Intereſt, though with partiall odds,

Didſt worſhip two Protectors, thy two Gods.

Go black-mouth'd Cerberus, bark aloud and cry

'Tis Conſcience will not, (Intereſt may lie)

Tremble proud France, which barbarouſly ſent

Our King the ſecond time to baniſhment;

Be wiſe in time, and pawn thy Flower de luce,

To purchaſe, not a full peace, but a truce;

For our Queens ſake, perhaps we may be led

To give your Crown back for your Card'nals head:

That Machivilian Cap, who to advance

His private int'reſt more than that of France,

Hir'd our Grand Rebell, who for his full pay,

He ſent for Gold to Hiſpaniola.

The gratefull Stateſ-man could no leſſe diſpenſe

Than the whole Indies for a Recompence;

Cromwell's ambition would accept no leſſe,

Than an Exchequer might be bottomleſſe.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=5) I cannot
blame that Tyrant of Renown,

Who wanted Love, and Gold, to make his Crown.

Bring the Turks Creſcent to its loweſt Wain,

Onely be good and kind to civil Spain;

Prompted by Heaven t' eſpouſe the Stuarts Right,

Spain ſave thy Portugall and Indies by't.

France ſhall no more raiſe with a jealous ſhrugg

The Spaniſh Faction for the Engliſh Bugg;

Nor ſhall our apiſh folly more advance

The Vanities, and Antick modes of France;

We'l leave thee to thy fears, and cold deſpair,

Not to be heightned by the pureſt Air.

Though we are Proteſtants, we ſhall not ſtick

To own the Spaniard, The King Catholick:

But call thy Red-cap, Devil, or worſe man,

And ſcarce believe his King a Chriſtian,

Quake at your late Auxiliaries advance;

Remember, England has a King of France.

But where is Crumwell, once ſo gay and brave,

Thief of three Kingdomes, now not worth a Grave?

VVhere's that prodigious Camell, whoſe ſtrong back

Carried three Nations Treaſure for its Pack:

That Crocodile, that murtherer of Souls,

The Whale that ſhov'd men out o'th' world by ſhoals.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=5) Whoſe rage
ſpar'd no degree, no ſex; whoſe pride,

VVould nothing that oppoſed it, abide.

Ask poor Tredah the number of her ſlain,

VVhoſe ſtreets had onely ſilence to complain:

VVhere piles on piles of dead, wide breaches fill'd,

VVhich cool blood butcher'd, and wild fury kill'd.

One perſon (he a

Dr. Ber­nard.

Prieſt) the ſtorm did paſſe,

To tell how kind the Sacrificer was.

Read Worſters ſtory, and you'l read the ſence

Of Crumwels malice, and Heavens providence,

To what a low Ebb had he brought our ſtate,

VVhen one

Mrs Jan [...] Lane.

weak Woman ſtood 'twixt Charls & fate.

O may ſhe never loſe her glorious Name,

Unleſſe it be t' advance her Houſe and Fame.

But they ſeem few, which horrid war deſtroy'd,

The Sword of Juſtice too muſt be his Bawd;

A Court's dreſs'd up in Scarlet, that the place

May ſhew the colour of his Heart and Face.

Three Kingdomes Head upon the Block muſt lye,

To give proud Bradſhaw's Robes a ſecond dye.

May courteous time his name and memory rot,

May the unmatcht example be forgot:

If the day muſt be own'd, O let it come,

To conſecrate the good Kings Martyrdome.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=6) Vultures
kill Doves, the blood of Innocence ſpilt;

A Kings pure blood, by th' impure hands of guilt:

As if that black Crime by deſign had meant

To give th' out-vy'd world a new Preſident.

Hambleton, Holland, Capel, (three Peers fall)

To make one Breakfaſt for this Caniball.

Capel, who dying ſhew'd to crown his merit,

A Roman Courage, and a Chriſtian Spirit.

But when great Derby fell, Crumwell began

T' uncrown the King firſt in the Iſle of Man.

Derby, that Regal Lord, whoſe Loyal Head

Deſerv'd a Coronet of Gold, not Lead.

Shrewsbury muſt ſcape, by a Divine reprieve,

So mortall 'twas to love the King and live.

All are not mark'd for Sacrifices, ſome

Heaven rates above a Civil Martyrdome.

But the Fiends Altar is not fatted yet,

Till two

D. Hew­  [...], Love.

Prieſts ſacred blood beſprinkle it,

Penruddock, Slingsby, many more muſt go,

To enlarge the book of Martyr's Folio.

For all this Cromwel breathes ſecurely, hath

His beds of Roſes, and his milky path,

Treads air and Pinacles; thus Cedar-tall,

He knowes no Earth, on which to ſtand, or fall.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=6) Now
Parliaments are ſummon'd, but in vain,

Wiſe Cato's all, come in, go out again.

O ſtrange Viciſſitude of Earthly things!

Crowns, Scepters, Thrones, more mortall than their Kings,

Oft dye before 'um, as if to be High,

Were to be chang'd; we riſe, we fall, we dye.

Yet Height is no impulſive cauſe of ill,

We might ſit high, and ſafe, could we ſit ſtill:

But we muſt move Excentrick, cannot ſee

VVe tread the Globe of mutability.

Honour is that great Boon the Gods beſtow,

Their Image ſtampt on mortals here below:

And makes them ſhine like Gods on earth, till they

Poorly their Honour to their ends betray.

Now Vice Vertues white Herauldry muſt ſtain,

Honour contemn'd, is mixt with earth again.

Thus is our Ruine meaſur'd by our Riſe,

And Greatneſſe brings the greater Precipice.

Now are the old Peers into corners thruſt,

Their titles mingled with the Nations duſt;

What were thoſe Starres, when this black night begun,

Borrowing their beams from that late Man i' th' Moon?

Now noble Stars, but Sunleſſe had not light

To view themſelves, much leſs t' adorn their Night:

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=7) The
Heraulds office all imploy'd, to bring

Crumwels Deſcent down from ſome Brittiſh King.

But fate prevents his pride, the Prince oth' Aire

With one good Whirlwind cures our long deſpair;

He that had rais'd ſuch Earth-quakes in his Life,

Could not depart without the Elements ſtrife,

Trees twiſted up by th' roots, and toſſed high,

Sent by the winds to bruſh th' infected Sky.

Thus, thus the proud Leviathan was hurld

With Curſes and black tempeſts out oth' world.

And now his gratefull Vaſſals when he's dead,

Put a rich Crown upon his uſeleſſe head,

And ſo ingeniouſly their Mock-Prince deride,

Emblematizing why the poor man dy'd:

Who with one impious gripe three Kingdomes got,

Alas, all King, except his Name and Hat.

Great Cromwell's gone, now Rome may live in hope,

Let's ſing Te Deum for the reſcued Pope.

But Richard, ſpurr'd on by ambitious friends,

In peace the Protectorian Throne aſcends;

With ſpread arms graſpt the Chair, but could not reach,

He was too ſmall (god wot) to fill the breach.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=7)

They that ſo near the bleſſings of a Crown

Had brought the Old Sire, pull the Filly down

Poor Squire, I pitty thy unkind advance,

Left heir to mercy, thy Inheritance.

This Mercy too had far more eaſie been,

Hadſt not poſſeſt thy Fathers Seat and Sin,

The ſeat of Scorners (our Protector call'd)

And from that Seat by thy own Vaſſals hal'd.

But who knows what this civil Gentleman meant?

Some ſay he ſufferd for this good Intent;

Though he the Scepter ſway'd, & ſome months ſtood,

He kept his hands white, dipt them not in blood:

Pull'd down the Scarlet Court; good Heavens for this

May he gain pardon, and the Kings hand kiſs.

Now the reſtor'd Rump, Jehu-like drives on,

Scorns all Protectors, either God, or man;

Neither confirm the Creatures, nor quite fail,

Hold the Fanaticks in an even ſcale.

Project on Project, Tax on Tax they raiſe,

Never had England ſuch improving dayes:

For now our pious Governours, well advis'd,

Turn'd Jews, and our Obedience circumcis'd.

Baptiſts and Quakers our ſole Princes ſway,

Scarce one Religious man left to obey.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=8) The
Orthodox to Conventicles take,

VVhile bold Fanaticks the Church Viſible make;

VVho neither Anthems ſing, nor Chapters read,

All inſpir'd, as the worm crawles in their Head.

Now, now the Steeples in ſad tremblings were,

Some with old Age and Ruine, moſt with fear.

Doubtleſſe good luck preſerv'd the merry Bells,

To ring in good time the Fanaticks Knells.

But ſee how naturall tis for one to raign,

Lambert for Lambert, Booth for King again:

No ſooner blaz'd a Comet from the Eaſt,

VVhen with faint beams The Sun declin'd i'th' Weſt;

VVithout diſpute the Almighty One then meant

To do his work by a ſingle Instrument.

Lambert, proud of a Vict'ry without Fight,

Rears his hopes to a Protectorian height;

The Army gather into mutinous Heards,

March up, and pluck their Maſters by the Beards.

The Rump turns backwards on a fatall broach,

Riſe and do reverence to the Swords approach;

But Lambert, ſpight of Countrey, Rump, and City,

Winds up three Nations into one Committee,

Ycleped Safety; but event ere long,

Declar'd the Baſtard Child was Chriſtn'd wrong.

The Common-wealth is to be Minted new,

But what the ſtamp ſhould be no Conjurer knew.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=8) O
Architects than Babells more unskill'd!

Strange Platonists, without Idea's build

Mean time new Workmen from the Scottiſh Land

Prepares themſelves, with ſharp tools in their hand;

Out of the frozen pole ſtarts a good Swain,

Rigs up, and wheels Charles long-diſmounted Wain;

The Lambertonians ſhrink, refuſe to Move,

Encourag'd by apoſtate friends Above;

Who for a little Coyn, and leſſe applauſe,

Leave their Lieutenant and the Good old Cauſe.

Now the Rump rules the Roaſt again i'th' Eaſt,

Serv'd up to Uſher in a ſecond Feast;

Up marches George undaunted, though he find

Armies before him, Armies left behind;

Through all the awakened Counties as he went,

The loud Aire Ecchoes, A Free Parliament.

The people from all parts like Snow-balls rowl,

Love and praiſe Monk, as if they knew his Soul.

No perſon of a King one word durſt ſtart,

He ſtill ſleeps ſafe in every Loyall Heart.

Monk climbs to London, where he found (fame ſaith)

His Maſters half perſwaded of his Faith.

They vote their Gold to th' Touch-ſtone, and (O Fates!)

Send him commands to unhinge the City Gates.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=9) But the
Sagacious Generall ſmells their Ends,

(To make him odious) haſtens to his Friends.

Triumphant London her proud Joyes expreſſes

In Acclamations, Shouts, and frank Careſſes:

The Rump now flye-blown, quit their ſeats, but thence

Shall not be forc'd by Sword or Violence:

But as the Hammer makes Naile ſtrike out Naile,

So the Secluded Head thruſts out the Taile.

Now, not till now, the wiſe Myſterious Monk

Whiſpers with Charls from his oraculous Trunk;

The Generall had (with Reverence I infer)

Onely the King his Privy Counceller.

O Secrecy, the Midwife of Deſignes!

Betray'ſt not, but bring'ſt forth thy Golden Mines,

Wrought and ſublim'd by Induſtry and Art:

Charls owes much to Monks Head, more to his Heart.

Had either Fear or Joy this ſilence broke,

Perhaps the Thing it ſelf had never ſpoke

England hath long ador'd a George in paint,

That was the Picture, but this George the Saint:

God acts with the ſame Methods he begun,

VVe had the ſhadow firſt, and then the Sun.

Secluded Members Act, Vote their conſent

For the juſt freedom of a Parliament.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=9) They riſe,
when forthwith from their burdned Hives,

Ripe Bees ſwarm out, all prodigall of their Lives:

The Bells to their new Hive theſe cluſters Ring,

Where, with one humming Vote they call their King.

Great Charls's call'd home, not manacl'd, nor chain'd,

But to the height of his juſt power maintain'd:

Monk was not ſo much Presbyter to bring

A Royall Captive home, inſtead of King,

That he himſelf might his return deplore,

As made more Exile than he was before.

Charls is proclaim'd with all Imperial Dues,

Whileſt every hollowing Street ſends Heaven the news.

Such Flames into the aire proud Bonfires ſent,

Threatned to change the Cognate Element.

Event, by truth, falſe Prophets does beguile,

London was (and yet ſtands) one burning pile:

No ſooty Pyramids of ſmoak aſpire,

Th' whole City is one Elementall fire:

Shouts damp all ſounds, the Air oppreſt with throngs,

The next great Peſt muſt be Decay of Lungs.

The active fire-works ſinſg'd the Moons bright horns,

The Man had much adoe to ſave his Thorns;

Light ſpeaks the Sun, Expreſſion Souls; O then!

What Joy, what Bonfires in the hearts of Men.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=10) Clip,
clip your VVings, my Joyes, ſoar not too high,

Leſt you unfit me for humility;

May the juſt Adoration of a Crown

Humble my joyes, and weigh my Raptures down.

Great Charles, brought upon Angels wings, appears,

The long deſpair, of prayers, of ſighs, of tears,

VVelcome three Kingdomes Love, methinks all three

Now in my hearts triangle panting be.

Welcome three Brothers, and three Kingdomes Joyes,

One Mighty Monarch, and two Great Vice-Royes,

VVelcome bleſt Prince, ſent in a needfull hour,

VVhom Heav'n reſtor'd to ſhew its ſlighted power;

O may your Reign bring back the Age of Gold

May Love's ſoft hand your Sword and Scepter hold:

Some ſay the Heavens, ſome ſay the Earth do move,

But ſure both Globes turn on the poles of Love.

O that the whole worlds pride ſat on my knee,

It all ſhould bend to your Dread Majeſty:

Since loweſt things durſt brave your Empire, now,

All heights and Pyramids under Heav'n ſhall bow.

All hearts are pleas'd, except ſuch hearts as prove

Gall-drencht, not born to be belov'd or love;

The City now long ſqueez'd and wire-drawn, made

The Citadel, and Mart of Europe-trade▪

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=46638&page=10) The Ship-
wrackt Merchants in full Change reſort,

Conceive both Indies brought home with the Court.

For ever, London, ſhut thy Heart and Hands

Againſt all factious and rebellious Bands:

'Twas time to King it, when thy purſe and fame

Lore'd to th' Imperious Bank of Amſterdam,

The Countrey has reapt a liberall crop of all

Their hopes, fancy their Garners in Whitehall.

The Loyal Ruſticks ſcarce a Pſalm will ſing,

Unleſſe each Stanza chaunt the name of King.

The chaſteſt Virgins uneſpous'd, unwo'd,

Feel Throes of joy, and think themſelves beſtow'd:

Law and Religion (ſick twins) gaſping lay,

Now that protects this, while for both ſhe pray.

The Muſes (O Heavens) in their ſackloth ſlain!

Are by three Graces brought to life again.

Burdens are balms; tax now, Sir, for your good,

Not our Eſtates, but Lives; not Coyn, but Blood:

Bleſt Halcyon dayes! if any thing annoyes

Your Kingdomes now, 'tis that you kill with Joyes,

Your Return had made three Realms one Sacrifice,

Had not their guilt allay'd their Extaſies.

Monarch of Hearts, the ſumme of Heavens Expence,

Heir by Succeſſion, King by Providence;

Heaven Crown your VViſdom, which has quencht our Warrs,

Not by ſubduing Rebels, but the Starrs.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Crouch, John, fl. 1660-1681.. Date: 1660  

