## (unknown project)

# A choice collection of rare secrets and experiments in philosophy as also
rare and unheard-of medicines, menstruums and alkahests : with the true secret
of volatilizing the fixt salt of tartar / collected and experimented by the
honourable and truly learned Sir Kenelm Digby, Kt., Chancellour to Her Majesty
the Queen-Mother ; hitherto kept secret since his decease, but now published
for the good and benefit of the publick by George Hartman. — Choice collection
of rare secrets and experiments in philosophy

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=1)

A CHOICE COLLECTION OF RARE SECRETS AND EXPERIMENTS IN Philosophy.

AS ALSO Rare and unheard-of Medicines, Menstruums, and Alkahests; with the
True Secret of Volatilizing the fixt Salt of TARTAR.

COLLECTED And Experimented by the Honourable and truly Learned Sir Kenelm
Digby, Kt. Chancellour to Her Majesty the Queen-Mother.

Hitherto kept Secret since his Decease, but now Published for the good and
benefit of the Publick,

By GEORGE HARTMAN.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by William Cooper, at the
Pelican in Little Britain; and Henry Faithorne and Iohn Kersey, at the Rose in
St. Paul's Church-yard. 1682.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=2)

## TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, ROBERT, Lord Paston, Baron of Paston, Vicount and
Earl of Yarmouth.

My Lord,

IT is not my intention, nor indeed my Ta­lent, to Celebrate those Excellent
Virtues, which shine so eminently bright in your Lord­ship: For they are
Themes only fit to be treated on by the strongest Pen, and their Native Worth
and Resplendency are their own suffici­ent Panegyricks.

Yet such is the Veneration I have for the Excellent Qualities and Endowments
of your Noble Mind, and those Heroick inclinations, that move your Honour to
make such exact, diligent, and curious search into all the Secrets and
Mysteries of Nature, and encourage all others that Labour therein, that I
cannot for­bear being so vain as to publish my resentments thereof to the
World. These Reasons, My Lord, together with the consideration of your inbred
Candour and Generosity, encouraged me to the boldness of committing this small
Treatise to your Honours Patronage and Pro­tection: To whom I know it will be
more [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=3) welcome,
as containing in it the Choice Ob­servations, both in Physick and Chymistry,
of that Famous Man, and great Privy Coun­cellor of Nature, Sir K. D. A Name,
My Lord, that hath peculiar Charms with it, to recommend all that are under
its great shadow, to the value and consideration of all the dili­gent, the
Learned, and the Honourable: So great a Person (may I assume the vanity to say
so) I had the Honour and Happiness for several Years to Serve, beyond the
Seas, as well as in England, and to attend on him mo [...] particularly in the
Production of many of h [...] incomparable Experiments, and so to contin [...]
till his dying day; when he left with me tho [...] Choice things contained in
this little Treatise.

And since I fear they suffer diminution  [...] their Worth and Beauty, by
passing throug [...] my mean Hands, and weak Managery, thought I could make no
better Atonement than by recommending them to receive R [...] ­cruits and
Reinforcements from the Splendo [...] and Eminency of your Illustrious Name.
To[?] that end therefore I take the Boldness to pro­strate them at your
Honours Feet, where a [...] in all Humility lyes

Your Honours Most Obedient, and Most Devoted Servant, George Hartma [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=3)

## TO THE READER.

Courteous Reader,

THIS Trea [...]ise contains some of the Choicest Collections of the Famous Sir
Kenelm Digby (some whereof have been wrought by his own hands, some
commu­nicated to him by Learned Men of all Na­tions) in praise whereof no more
need be said, but, that they are his; either of his production, or of his
approbation. I shall therefore, omitting other Artifices and In­sinuations,
only satisfie the Reader with all the clearness and ingenuity I can, how I
came by them; and thereby I question not, but I shall very successively
recommend this Collection of them to all Ingenious Lovers of Art, whose Ears
the Fame of the Worthy Author hath reached.

To this End I must acquaint him, that I had the Honour several years to wait
upon Sir Kenelm, and to have several of his Ma­nuscripts in my Custody, more
particularly this with others was committed to my
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=4) Charge, when
my Worthy Master intended a Journey to France for his Healths sake, and to
settle his Affairs there: And he had Progressed in his designed Journey as far
as Cittenburn, when a violent Distemper forced him back again to his own House
in Covent-Garden; and in three days after his return, left the Learned World
to lament the loss of so great a Man. And here besides his in­comparable self,
his Friends and Countrey lost also the benefit of his Famous Library he had in
France (which for want of his be­ing Naturalized) fell into the French King
[...] hands, who bestowed it upon a Gentleman, and it was sold (as I was
credibly informed) for [...] ten thousand Crowns. In which no doubt were
Manuscripts of his own, of very great worth and rich value, and might have
much obliged the World, had they fallen in­to the hands of Generous and
Communica­tive Men.

But it was my happiness to have, among some other Manuscripts of his, the sole
Pro­priety of this Choice Manual, which con­tains rare and profitable Secrets
in Philoso­phy and Chymistry, delivered with more perspicuity and plainness
than is yet to be found in any Chymical Book: Yea, such, that any
understanding Reader may with great facility be conducted as with an
Ariad­nean [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=4)
Line into the most intricate and hither­to fatigating Arcana of Chymistry.
Here are the true Menstruums and Alkahests, and that hitherto hidden Secret of
Volatilizing the fixed Salt of Tartar without any Heterogene Substance, being
the true Vegetable Men­struum; with many other rare and unheard­of Medicines,
some whereof I had a mind to reserve for my self, and not to Publish them
during my Life, because of the great Experience, and the good Success I have
had with them in desperate cases; but Impium est ta [...]ere, quae si
promulgata essent, multo­rum misere decumbentium, in levamen ex­tarent. 'Tis
Impious and unchristian to for­bear the Publication of those things, which
being rendred Publick, will effectually re­dound to the Advantage and Comfort
of mi­serable Men.

I have Translated most of these Secrets out of the Latine, French, German, and
Ita­lian Tongues. And if I have committed any indecencies against the Idiom of
the English Speech, I hope the Candid Reader will for­give a Foreigner. As for
any Ornaments and Embellishments of Language, as the Work requires no such
Painting, so the Pub­lishers Foreign Stile and mean Talents are not able to
afford it.

I have no more to acquaint the Reader
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=5) with, but
that these Secrets had been Com­municated to him long before, but that have
been most part of my time since my Excellent Masters Decease, abroad:
How­ever, I hope they will be now kindly en­tertained. For it is the height of
my Ambi­tion to make the Memory of my incom­parable Master to Live, who was my
pri­vate, and the Worlds publick Benefactor, which can no where do so with
such Advan­tage as in his Learned Works, for thereby being dead he yet speaks
and instructs.

And though it be no addition to his Glori­ous Name, yet for the Wit and
smartness of the thing, and the Readers diversion, I shall conclude here with
that Elegant Epitaph made on him by the Ingenious Dr. Farrar, which is as
followeth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=5)

### AN EPITAPH UPON The Honourable and Truly Noble Sir Kenelm Digby, Kt.
Chancellour to Her MAJESTY THE Queen-Mother.

UNder this Tomb the Matchless Digby lies;

Digby the Great, the Valiant, and the Wise:

This Ages Wonder for his Noble Parts,

Skill'd in Six Tongues, and Learn'd in all the Arts.

Born on the Day He Dy'd, Th' Eleventh of June,

And that Day Bravely Fought at Scandaroun [...]

'Tis Rare, that one and the same Day should be

His Day of Birth, of Death, and Victory.

R. F.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=6)

## THE INDEX.

A.

  * ANimation and Preparation of Common ☿. Page 26. 83, 84, 85.
  * Aurum Potabile, from the Marchioness de Beck. 245.
  * A. R. Philosophical. 94.
  * An unheard-of Arcanum. 188.
  * An Aethereal Aurum potabile. 177.
  * The Arcanum of Flamel, Arte [...]ius, and Pon­tanus, &c. 117.

B.

  * BUtter of  (antimony) to extract the Tincture of ☉. 61.
  * Butter of  (antimony) without Sublimate. 78.
  * A Work with Butter of  (antimony). 58.
  * A Precious Balsam. 264.

C.

  * CAlx of ☉. 129.
  * Cosmetick prepared out of ☽. 132.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=6) Coppels how to make. 140.
  * A Work upon Cinaber. 52.
  * Cray-Fishes to engender. 131.
  * A great Corroborant and Sudorifick. 173.
  * Convulsion Fits to Cure. 226.
  * Cancers to Cure. 231.
  * A Laxative and Emetick Cream of Tartar. 248, 249.

D.

  * THE Danes Work, wrought by Sir K. D. 33.
  * Monsieur Dandre's Work with ☉, ☿, and Sul­phur-vive transparent, with Observations thereupon. 5.
  * A great Diaphoretick of  (antimony). 213.
  * Decoction Sudorifick. 216.
  * Dropsie to Cure. 200, 201, 24.
  * Deafness to Cure. 262.

E.

  * EXtraction of ☿ of  (antimony). 65. 72. 75. 77. 79, 80, 81.
  * Elixir of ☉,  (antimony), & ☿. 69.
  * Elixir of ☉ & ☽. 70.
  * Elixir Album. 16.
  * Elixir Rubrum. 71.
  * Elixir of Sulphur. 210.
  * Extraction of ☿ of ☽ or ♄. 73.
  * Essence of Sulphur. 209.
  * Epilepsie Cured by Sir K. D. at Frankfort. 197, 198.

F.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=7)FLux or Looseness to Cure. 257.
  * Fixation of ☽ into ☉. 116. 21. 26. 62. 65.
  * Monsieur R's. Fixation of ☿ by the Salt of ♄. 103.
  * To fix a quarter part of ☽ into ☉. 52.
  * Mallus his Process to fix ☽. 63.
  * Fixation of ♄ into ☽ with good Profit. 43
  * Fixation of ☿ by the Salt of ♄, by Captain Zeigler. 49.
  * Fixation of ☿ of  (antimony). 44. 46, 47.
  * Fixation of Common Sulphur, and its Tin­cture. 193.
  * Fixation of ☿ into ☽ by the Salt of ♄ & ☽, by Monsieur de R. 103.
  * A great Febrifuge. 220, 230. 216.
  * Riverius his Febrifuge. 223.
  * A Furnace for many Uses, &c. 138.

G.

  * To burn holes in Glasses. 136.
  * Gout to Cure. 260, 261.
  * The Eagles Gluten, or ☿ of the Wise. 178.

L.

  * LApis Ignis. 242.
  * Laudanum Germanicum. 266.
  * Liquor Mercurial with ♃. 229.
  * Lauremberg's Observation upon Angelus Sa­la his Synopsis of Aphorisms. 115.
  * The Lunar Pills against the Dropsie. 199.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=7) A Lunary Emetick. 230.
  * Lac Sulphuris. 211.

M.

  * MAtthews his Work. 19.
  * Mercurial 🜄. 160.
  * A Minera of ☉. 41.
  * Minera of ☿ of  (antimony), ad infinitum. 74.
  * The Menstruum C [...]licum Exuberatum. By Dr. Clodius. 156.
  * Mercury of all Metals. 16. 81.
  * To make Metals Vegetate visibly. 130.
  * Concerning May Dew. 116.
  * A great Medicine. 238.
  * A rare Medicine for an Ague. 205.
  * Metalline Menstruum. 178.
  * A great Medicine, &c. 238.
  * An Universal Medicine of ☉ and  (antimony), &c. 167.

O.

  * OYL of Talc. 132. 135.
  * Oyl of ☿. 126.
  * Oyl of ☉. 231.
  * An Operation that Monsieur de Loberye wrote from Monsieur John's Mouth. 122.
  * An Operation with a Martial Regulus of  (antimony). 60.
  * Observations about Snyder's Secret. 17.
  * Operation upon Saturn. 87.
  * Oyl of Sulphur. 207.
  * An Operation with Spirit and Salt of Urine, ☽, and ☿ Precipitate, wrought by Sir Ke­nelm's Operator. 153.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=8) A Precious Oyl of  (antimony). 217.
  * An Operation upon Jupiter. 104.
  * Monsieur Van Outer's Secret. 8. 11.
  * An Operation upon Regulus of  (antimony), by Mon­sieur Toysonnier. 60.
  * An Operation with ☉ and ☿ of  (antimony); wrought by Monsieur Chambulan, and given me by him. 65.
  * An Operation upon ♄, sent me by Monsieur Boucaud. 87.

P.

  * A Short and clear Description of the Phi­losophers Stone. 107.
  * The Countess of Kents Powder after Sir K. D. Method. 125.
  * An Excellent Panacea. 218.
  * Sir K. D's. Sympathetical Powder. 270.
  * Cornachinus his Medicinal Powder. 247.
  * Plaister of Lead. 258.

Q.

  * QUintessence of ♄, an Universal dissol­vent. 88.

R.

  * A Reality upon ☽. 45.
  * A Reality from Abbot Boucaud. 101.

S.

  * THE Volatile Salt of Tartar. 252.
  * Saunier's Work, wrought by Sir K. D. 31.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=8) Snyder's Secret, as he himself gave it to Sir K. D. 16.
  * Salt fusible. 59. 16.
  * The best way to make Spirit of Urine. 236.
  * Sigillum Hermetis. 227.
  * Scrofula's to Cure. 232. 234.
  * The true Sulphur of  (antimony). 218.
  * Stone to Cure. 205.
  * An Excellent Physical Salt. 254.
  * A white Spirit of Sulphur to dissolve ☽ and ☿. 166.
  * The best and easiest way of making a Spirit of Sal armoniack. 250.
  * The Metalline Stone of a Spiritual Luna [...]y. 191.
  * An Excellent Sudorifick. 231.
  * Sol and Luna out of ♃. 105.
  * Sulphur of ☉. 121.
  * A particular Spirit of Nitre. 85.

T.

  * TIncture of Mars. 55.
  * Tincture of ☉ by  (antimony). 64.
  * Tetters or Herps to Cure, &c. 236.
  * Tincture of ☽. 65.
  * Transmutation of ☿ into a Regulus. 128.
  * Tincture of fixt Sulphur. 193.
  * A Tincture of the Flowers of  (antimony). 255.
  * The true Tincture of Coral. Ibid.
  * Tincture of Glass of  (antimony). 164.

V

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=9)VOlatilized ☽. 22.
  * Venus into ☽. 123.
  * The great Work out of Virgin Earth. 37.
  * A Work Copied out of the Original of Mon­sieur de la Violette's own hand, whereof he made great account. 13.
  * The Secret to Volatilize the fixt Salt of Tar­tar. 147. 151.
  * Monsieur Vignault his Process with ☉ and ☿. 24.
  * A subtil Volatile 🜄 from Sulphur. 208.

W.

  * WAter of Paradise, &c. 179 to 186.

### An Explication of the Characters which are used in this Book.

  * ☉ Gold.
  * ☽ Silver.
  * ♂ Iron.
  * ☿ Mercury.
  * ♃ Iupiter.
  * ♀ Venus.
  * ♄ Lead.
  * (antimony) Antimony.
  * 🜹 Sal armoniac.
  * A. F. Aqua Fortis.
  * A. R. Aqua Regis.
  * S. V. Spirit of Wine.
  * 🝞 Sublimate.
  * 🝟 Precipitate.
  * aaa Amalgama.
  * 🜄 Water.
  * 🜂 Fire.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, ROBERT, Lord Paston, Baron of Paston, Vicount and Earl of Yarmouth.
  * TO THE READER.
    * AN EPITAPH UPON The Honourable and Truly Noble Sir Kenelm Digby, Kt. Chancellour to Her MAJESTY THE Queen-Mother.
  * THE INDEX.
    * An Explication of the Characters which are used in this Book.
  * 1\. CHYMICAL SECRETS.
    * 1.1. How to fix ☽ into ☉ by ☿ and ☿ Precipitate.
    * 1.2. My Process is such.
    * 1.3. A Work with ☉ and ☿ that Monsieur Dandre helped to work in Piedmont, in great quantity: Given me by him, June 1660.
    * 1.4. Some Observations about the said Monsieur Dandre's Work.
    * 1.5. Monsieur Van Outer's Secret, Physician of Brussels, with ☉ and Butter of Antimony.
    * 1.6. The Multiplication of the Powder.
    * 1.7. The Projection.
    * 1.8. A considerable Work with ☉ and ☿.
    * 1.9. A Work Copied out of the Original of Monsieur de la Violette's own Hand, whereof he made great Account.
    * 1.10. Snyder's Secret, as he gave it me himself the 22 of July, 1664.
    * 1.11. The following Observations are from another Learned Man, with whom Sir Kenelm did confer at his return from Bristol, concerning the said Snyder's Work. Who saith thus.
    * 1.12. A great Secret of the said Mr. Snyder's Powder.
    * 1.13. Matthews his Work.
    * 1.14. To fix ☽ into ☉.
    * 1.15. An Observation about Volatilised ☽.
    * 1.16. A Process from Monsieur Vignault, with ☉ and ☿, &c.
    * 1.17. Fixation of ☽, wrought by Father Bening de Baune, and by him communicated to me.
    * 1.18. Observations.
    * 1.19. A 🜄 which changes ☿ as red as Blood, which abideth the Fire.
    * 1.20. Saunier's Work, as I wrought it.
    * 1.21. The Danes Work.
    * 1.22. Opus Magnum ex Virginea Terra.
    * 1.23. A Miniera of ☉, wrought by a Person of Quality in Champagne.
    * 1.24. Fixation of ♄ into ☽, with good Profit.
    * 1.25. To fix ☿ of antimony, or the Common ☿.
    * 1.26. A Reality upon ☽.
    * 1.27. Fixation of the ☿ of antimony, as Monsieur de la Noüe wrought it at Paris.
    * 1.28. Preparation of the Powder, with which Claudius de Montrouge, and Abbot Oberye at Paris fixed ☿ of antimony.
    * 1.29. A Process to fix the Common ☿ by the Salt of ♄; wrought by Captain Ziegler at Ments, and sent me by him.
    * 1.30. An A. F. to be used in this Work.
    * 1.31. A Work upon Cinaber, wrought by Monsieur Sauvage.
    * 1.32. Tincture of Mars.
    * 1.33. To fix a quarter part of ☽ into ☉.
    * 1.34. A Work with Butter of antimony.
    * 1.35. An Excellent fusible Salt.
    * 1.36. Another fusible Salt.
    * 1.37. An Operation with a Martial Regulus of antimony, wrought by Monsieur Toysonnier.
    * 1.38. Butter of antimony to Extract the Tincture of ☉.
    * 1.39. To fix ☽ into ☉; given me by an Intimate Friend, who told me that he wrought it as followeth, taking his hints out of Lully's Experiments.
    * 1.40. Mallus his Process to fix ☽: Wrought by Monsieur Ferrier, and given me by him, 1660.
    * 1.41. To fix ☽ by a Mercurial Water.
    * 1.42. Monsieur Bertault's Tincture of ☉ by Venus.
    * 1.43. To fix ☽ into ☉.
    * 1.44. Another Tincture of ☽.
    * 1.45. An Operation with ☉ and ☿ of antimony: Wrought by Monsieur Chambulan, and given me by him.
    * 1.46. Fermentation.
    * 1.47. Elixir of antimony, ☉, and ☿.
    * 1.48. Elixir ex ☉ & ☽.
    * 1.49. Elixir Album.
    * 1.50. Elixir Rubrum.
    * 1.51. The best way to Extract the ☿ of ♀.
    * 1.52. To Extract ☿ of ☽ or ♄.
    * 1.53. To make a Minera of ☿ of Antimony, ad Infinitum.
    * 1.54. Another way to Extract the ☿ of Antimony by an A. R. Given me by Monsieur Carton.
    * 1.55. To Extract the ☿ of antimony, or of ♄. Wrought several times by Monsieur Van Outre, Physician of Brussels.
    * 1.56. Butter of antimony without Sublimate, to Extract ☿ of antimony.
    * 1.57. To Extract the ☿ of antimony with this Butter, proceed thus.
    * 1.58. Another way.
    * 1.59. To Extract a ☿ out of ☽.
    * 1.60. Another way to Extract the ☿ of antimony.
    * 1.61. Mercury of all Metals.
    * 1.62. A great Secret, ☿ of antimony, and other Metals, ad infinitum.
    * 1.63. To prepare the Common ☿, so that it will have all the Qualities and Properties of ☿ of antimony, and will be as Powerful to Volatilize ☉.
    * 1.64. Another Excellent Preparation and Animation of ☿.
    * 1.65. Another way.
    * 1.66. Another.
    * 1.67. Another.
    * 1.68. Another.
    * 1.69. About a particular Spirit of Nitre.
    * 1.70. An Operation upon ♄: Sent me by Monsieur Boucaud.
      * 1.70.1. The Philosopher's Epilogue.
    * 1.71. Quintessence of ♄; the Universal Dissolvent.
    * 1.72. The Philosophical Aqua Regis.
    * 1.73. Composition.
    * 1.74. The said Abbot sent to Sir K. D. also the following Process, which he saith he had from an intimate Friend, who assured him that it was a Reality.
    * 1.75. The said Abbot sent also the following Process in a Letter from Paris.
    * 1.76. An Operation upon Jupiter.
    * 1.77. ☉ & ☽ ex ♃.
    * 1.78. A short and clear Description of the great Philosophick Stone.
      * 1.78.1. The first Operation.
      * 1.78.2. The Second Operation.
      * 1.78.3. The Third Operation.
      * 1.78.4. The Fourth Operation.
      * 1.78.5. The Fifth Operation.
      * 1.78.6. The Sixth Operation.
      * 1.78.7. The Seventh Operation
    * 1.79. A Note from one that wrought the Stone.
    * 1.80. Lauremberg's Observations upon Angelus Sala his Synopsis of Aphorisms, 1624. in Quarto, pag. 4.
    * 1.81. Concerning May Dew.
    * 1.82. Flamel, Artefius, Pontanus, Zacaire, &c. Their Arcanum.
    * 1.83. To prepare a Ferment or Sulphur of ☉.
    * 1.84. An Operation that Monsieur de I'Oberye wrote from Monsieur John's Mouth.
    * 1.85. Venus into ☽: Sent me by Monsieur de Beaulieu.
    * 1.86. The Multiplication.
    * 1.87. To fix the 🜹 for this Work.
    * 1.88. To fix the Arsenick.
    * 1.89. To fix the Sulphur for this Work.
    * 1.90. Oyl of ☿.
    * 1.91. To prepare the ♀ for this Work.
    * 1.92. To prepare the Salt of Tartar for this Work.
    * 1.93. To prepare the ☽ for this Work.
    * 1.94. Transmutation of ☿ into a Regulus.
    * 1.95. Calx of ☉.
    * 1.96. A pretty Curiosity, To make Metals Vegetate visibly.
    * 1.97. To engender Cray-fishes.
    * 1.98. To make Oyl of Talc.
    * 1.99. An Excellent Cosmetick prepared out of ☽.
    * 1.100. Another way to make Oyl of Talc.
    * 1.101. Another way to make Oyl of Talc.
    * 1.102. To burn holes in Glass.
    * 1.103. An Explanation of this Figure.
    * 1.104. Directions how to Coppel in this Furnace; and first, how to make a Coppel.
  * 3\. CHYMICAL SECRETS. The Second Part.
    * 3.1. A Real and True way to Volatilize the Salt of Tartar, and Corporifie Spirit of Wine, as it was wrought by a Noble Person beyond Sea, and by him Communicated unto me.
    * 3.2. The Dutch-mans Process of Volatilizing Salt of Tartar, and Corporifying Spirit of Wine, is thus:
    * 3.3. He maketh his red Calx of ☉ thus:
    * 3.4. Elixir ex vino & Sole.
    * 3.5. Monsieur Toysonnier wrought thus:
    * 3.6. The Menstruum Coelicum Exuberatum, to dissolve ☉, and all Metals, and carry them over the Helm. Wrought by Dr. Clodius, and by him Communicated unto me.
    * 3.7. To prepare a most Excellent Medicine with this Mercurial Water, proceed thus:
    * 3.8. The Lunary 🜄 of Paradise, or the Coelestial Eagle of the Lunar Sphere, which is Lullys true Spiritual Lunary.
    * 3.9. Water of Paradise of Saturn, or Iupiters Coelestial Eagle.
    * 3.10. About Vitrum Antimonii, and the Tincture of it.
    * 3.11. A white Spirit of Sulphur to dissolve ☽ and ☿; given me by Monsieur Bugneau.
    * 3.12. An Universal Medicine, from ☉ and antimony, &c.
    * 3.13. To prepare the ☿ for this Work.
    * 3.14. To prepare the Tincture of ☉ for this Work.
    * 3.15. The Dissolvent.
    * 3.16. To prepare the Spirit of Wine, fit for this Tincture of ☉.
    * 3.17. A great Corroborant and Sudorifick, wrought by Monsieur Du Closs, Physician at Paris; given me by him the 16th. of August, 1660.
    * 3.18. His Menstruum is thus made:
    * 3.19. The Metalline Aureal 🜄, or the Aethereal Aurum potabile, which is a very great Medicine for the Gout: It is the true Hermaphroditick Bath.
    * 3.20. The Eagles Gluten, or ☿ of the Wise, or Metalline Menstruum; with which and Lions Blood is made the Metalline Stone.
    * 3.21. Water of Paradise, or of the Hermetick Eagle, whereof are made unheard-of Medicines, and Powders of Projection.
    * 3.22. Water of Paradise of Common ☿, or Hermes his Eagle, of the Terrestrial and Coelestial ☿.
    * 3.23. The Antimonial 🜄 of Paradise, or the Hermetick Coelestial Eagle with two Heads.
    * 3.24. Water of Paradise of Venus and Mars, or ♀. and ♂ Captivated, whence cometh Cupid, or the Solar Panacea.
    * 3.25. The thrice Noble Water of Paradise, or Apollo Medens.
    * 3.26. An unheard-of Arcanum, or new and unheard of Lunary, wherewith is made the Elixir, or Metalline Stone.
    * 3.27. To make the Metalline Stone per se of this Spiritual Lunary.
    * 3.28. Monsieur Barkly's fixation of Common Sulphur, and the Tincture thereof, which is an Excellent Medicine in all affects of the Breast and Lungs.
    * 3.29. The Countess of Kents Powder, as it was prepared by Sir Kenelm Digby's Order in his Operatory.
    * 3.30. A very Efficacious Remedy against the Epilepsie, or Falling-Sickness, wherewith Sir Kenelm Digby Cured a Ministers Son, named Mr. Lichtenstein, at Francfort in Germany, in the Year 1659. to which I was an Eye-Witness.
    * 3.31. Another for the same.
    * 3.32. The Preparation of the Silver Pills against the Dropsie, as they were prepared by Sir Kenelm Digby's Order in his Operatory.
    * 3.33. Directions for the Use of these Silver Pills.
    * 3.34. Another Drink.
    * 3.35. Another Experimented Remedy for the Dropsie, whereby several Persons have been Cured, as I have been assured.
    * 3.36. Another Excellent Remedy against the Dropsie.
    * 3.37. The Copy of a Letter from Abbot Boucaud from Paris to Sir K. D. wherein he relates in what manner he Cured himself of the Stone, and of a Quartan Ague.
    * 3.38. A Process, how to make a most Excellent Oyl of Sulphur in abundance; sent also by the said Abbot Boucaud to Sir K.
    * 3.39. A subtil Volatil Water from Sulphur, which will Dissolve ☉.
    * 3.40. An Excellent Essence of Sulphur for the Breast, and for the Lungs.
    * 3.41. An Excellent Elixir of Sulphur.
    * 3.42. Lac Sulphuris.
    * 3.43. A great Diaphoretick of Antimony.
    * 3.44. The Sudorifick Decoction.
    * 3.45. A most Excellent Medicine against all sorts of Agues and Fevers, &c.
    * 3.46. A Precious Oyl of Antimony.
    * 3.47. A most Excellent Panacea of the true Sulphur of Antimony.
    * 3.48. A great Febrifuge.
    * 3.49. Another great Febrifuge, which is said to be Riverius his Febrifuge.
    * 3.50. Another Febrifuge.
    * 3.51. Another Febrifuge, which is thought to be Riverius his true Febrifuge.
    * 3.52. A Certain and Experimented Remedy to Cure the Convulsion Fits in little Children; as also for the Epilepsie, the Cholick, and for the Spleen, &c.
    * 3.53. Sigillum Hermetis, Or, a great and Experimented Medicine, which hath done great Effects in the Cure of all sorts of Agues and Fevers. It was given to Sir Kenelm Digby by an able Physician, who had done Wonderful Cures with it.
    * 3.54. A Mercurial Liquor with Jupiter.
    * 3.55. Monsieur C. his Lunary Emetick and Febrifuge, &c.
    * 3.56. To make a most Excellent Sudorifick of the aforesaid Butter, that will Cure the Leprosie, and the Venereal Disease, proceed thus:
    * 3.57. An Oyl of ☉, wherewith Monsieur Belieur, a Famous Chirurgeon at Paris, Cured Cancers, all old Ulcers, Cankers, and Venereal Sores, &c.
    * 3.58. Doctor Havervelt his Remedy, wherewith he Cured the Evil or Scrofulaes, Cancers, and Old Ulcers.
    * 3.59. Another for the same.
    * 3.60. A most Excellent Physical Salt, as it was prepared in Sir Kenelm's Laboratory.
    * 3.61. The best way to make the Spirit of Urine is thus:
    * 3.62. Sir Kenelm Digby's Excellent Remedy for Tetters, Herps, and Ring-worms, Scabby Itches, &c. as it was prepared by his Directions for his own use for a Tetter.
    * 3.63. A great Medicine, wherewith Wonderful Cures have been performed to my knowledge.
    * 3.64. Lapis ignis, for the renovation of Mankind, by the three Principles of Nature, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.
    * 3.65. To make the Salt of Antimony.
    * 3.66. To make the ☿ of antimony for this Work.
    * 3.67. Composition of the said Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.
    * 3.68. The Marchioness de Beck, her Aurum potabile, which she much esteemeth.
    * 3.69. Cornachinus his Medicinal Powder, as it was Prepared by Sir K. Digby's Order in his Laboratory.
    * 3.70. A Laxative and Emetick Cream of Tartar.
    * 3.71. Another most Excellent Laxative and Emetick Cream of Tartar.
    * 3.72. The Volatile Salt of Tartar, as I have often made it, which is an Excellent Remedy.
    * 3.73. A Physical Salt.
    * 3.74. A Precious Tincture of the Flowers of Antimony.
    * 3.75. An Excellent and true Tincture of Coral.
    * 3.76. An Excellent Extract of Mars, for Diarrhaea's and Fluxes.
    * 3.77. Sir Kenelm Digby's Remedy for the same, as it was prepared by his Order, and much used.
    * 3.78. Sir Kenelm Digby, his Excellent Plaister of Lead.
    * 3.79. Dr. Stephen's Plaister for the Gout.
    * 3.80. A very good Oyntment for the Gout; and the running Gout, Aches, Numbness, and pain in the Ioynts, &c.
    * 3.81. A Certain and Infallible Remedy to prevent and Cure the Fits of the Gout.
    * 3.82. Mr. Locher, an Apothecary of London, his Excellent Oyl for Deafness, which he gave to Sir K. D.
    * 3.83. Another Experimented Remedy for the same.
    * 3.84. A most Precious Balsam of great Vertue.
    * 3.85. Laudanum Germanicum: Being a singular Preparation of Matthew's, or Dr. Starky's Pills:
    * 3.86. The Tincture of Antimony is made thus, according to Basil Valentine.
  * 4\. Postscript.
    * 4.1. The Preparation of Sir Ken•lm Digby's Sympathetical Powder, as we prepared it every Year in his Laboratory, and as I prepare it now, is only thus:

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=9)

## 1\. CHYMICAL SECRETS.

### 1.1. How to fix ☽ into ☉ by ☿ and ☿ Preci­pitate.

HAving Written so many Proces­ses, and made so many Tryals, and heard so many
Discourses of Learned Men upon this Subject, I will give you an Account of an
easie Method that I have resolved upon for accomplishing this Work. Namely,
That all imperfect Metals and common ☿ may be transmuted into ☉ by one and the
same Me­thod; to wit, by Maturation and Coction, and not by Generation; for
that which is generated, is no more that which it was be­fore it was
generated: And that which is [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=10) Corrupted, is no
more that which it wa [...] before it was Corrupted.

But the baser Metals, after they are trans­muted into ☽ or ☉ are still Metals
never­theless as they were before, and the trans­mutation of their kind is
done by changing their accidental form, not their substantial, the perfection
whereof is Maturity; for by Maturation the Metal is brought to a highe [...]
degree of Perfection.

Now, imperfect Metals are Maturated by external heat, which digesteth their
cru [...] Humidity; yea, ☉ it self may be furthe [...] perfected, and exalted
in colour, as whe [...] the Stone is made of it, it will communi­cate this
Maturity to imperfect Metals.

And Common ☿ is extracted out of Me­tals three several ways; namely, by C
[...]mentation and Digestion, by Fermentation and by Tincture. As for
Cementation, tha [...] concerneth onely the digestion of ☽ into ☉ but not the
other too imperfect Metals, no ☿ either, which is crude, and too much ali
[...] nated from the Maturity of ☉.

By Cementation the Humidity of ☽  [...] brought to Muturity. There are severa
[...] sorts of Cementation, namely, by Salts, A [...]loms, Vitriols, and
Metalline-waters: Bu [...] often-times instead of digestion ☽, they bu [...]
[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=10) it; so
that this way of making ☉ is with more loss than profit.

But there is no better way than ☿ and red Precipitate, which I have learned by
the afore-mentioned Operations.

### 1.2. My Process is such.

TAke ℥ij. of ☽, make an Amalgama of it with Mercury by A. F. as you know, wash
this Amalgama very well in se­veral waters, then press out so much ☿, that
there remain but ℥iv. of it with the ☽, which maketh ℥vj. in all. Add to it
℥vi. of good red Precipitate, and grind all to an impal­pable Powder; which
put into a Matrass, and digest it with a gentle heat in Sand, so that the ☿ do
not Sublime, but that it may Calcine the ☽, and leave it in Powder, for if you
give too great a heat, it will reduce the ☽ into a Body.

After three days Digestion, take out your Powder, and grind it as before, so
that if there be yet any quick ☿, it may be morti­fied. Digest it again as
before, and with the same degree of heat for three days more; then take it out
and grind it again, then di­gest it only for two days by four degrees of heat,
which you must change every two hours, to the end, that by the last degree of
[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=11) heat all
the ☿ and ☿ Precipitate may preci­pitate the Powder of ☽, which will begin to
grow white.

Reiterate the addition of ☿ and ☿ Pre­cipitate in the same quantity as before.
Di­gest two days more by four degrees of heat, as before, and the Powder will
grow per­fectly white.

Then by the same Operation reiterated it will begin to be of a Citrine colour,
and fixed.

And thus by reiterating the Digestions, you may give it what degree of this
colour you please; for the oftner you digest it with the said ☿ and ☿
Precipitate, being separa­ted from it again by the last degree of heat, the
more the Powder will be of a Citrine Colour.

Then melt your Powder with Borax, and you shall have ☽ at 24 Carrats, without
diminution of the first weight of the ☽ which will be rather increased. All
may be ac­complished in the space of One and Twenty days.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=11)

### 1.3. A Work with ☉ and ☿ that Monsieur Dandre helped to work in Piedmont,
in great quantity: Given me by him, June 1660.

MOnsieur Dandre saith, he wrought thus: Make carefully an Amalgama of ℥j. of ☉
in Calx, with 7 or 8 of Purified ☿, then squeeze out so much ☿, that their
remain ℥iij. of ☿, and so there be ℥iv. in the Globe: To this add ℥j. of
Sulphur-vive, which is clear and transparent in pieces, (in Italy, where he
wrought this) and grind all very well toge­ther, (in this consisteth the main
part of the Secret, for at every time you are to em­ploy three or four hours
in grinding) then put the Matter into a Matrass, and give a gentle heat, the
Glass unstopped, till the moisture and smoak is exhaled out. Then let the Fire
go out, and when the Matrass is cold, seal it Hermetically, and set it to
Sub­lime by degrees of Fire, till all that will, be Sublimed, which will be
done in 20 or 24 hours. Then the Vessel being cold, break it, and take out the
Matter, and grind all together a long time, both that which is Sublimed, and
that which is in the bottom, adding ℥j. of new Sulphur-vive, then Sub­lime in
the same Method as before; repeat this seven times at the least, adding ℥j.
[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=12) of
Sulphur-vive every time, and the mat­ter will become a brown yellowish reddish
Powder, which will be very fusible, and even in the grinding it will relent,
as though it grew moist: You will have ℥iv. of fixed Matter, which project (in
parcels) upon ℥x. of ☽ in good Fustion, then put it to the Coppel, and
separating 🜄 and you shall have ℥iv. of pure ☉.

You can work but ℥j. of ☉ in one Glass, but you may put fifty, or more Glasses
in one Sand Furnace with a large Bason of Copper in Sand.

### 1.4. Some Observations about the said Monsieur Dandre's Work.

THE Operation was made in an Atha­nor, with the Registers at the end, the hole
through which the heat was communi­cated, was about the bigness of a brick,
the plate which held the Sand was of Iron, and contained 32 Matrasses, sixteen
on every side: The Tower was in the middle, where­in the Coals sunk down by
degrees. They did not mix the Powder with Wax, nor any thing else in
projecting, but only wrapt up in Paper, it did enter, and disappear
im­mediately without smoaking. The Matrass ought to have 2 third parts empty.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=12) The
Amalgama was made thus: They took ℥ix. of ☿ and heated it in a Crucible, until
it begun to smoak, then they set it upon hot Ashes, and cast therein ℥j. of
Du­cats cut in small pieces, and made hot in a Crucible, then stirred it until
the ☉ was swal­lowed up by the ☿: Then took it off, and let it cool. They did
not wash the said Amalgama: They used common ☿ only mixed with Quick-lime, and
then Distilled in a Retort.

The Sulphur was transparent and yel­low like Amber, in pieces, and to be had
at Carmagnole, Turin, Cony, Mondevic, Saluce, Genes: It is a Sulphur-vive,
cost four, five, or six pence a pound. The Sand they used was round River-
sand, and the Matrass was never red in the Sand: They never put above ℥j. of ☉
in one Matrass, nor never above ℥x. of ☽ at every Pro­jection.

(Hartman.) These Observations were communicated to Sir Kenelm by Abbot
Bou­caud, but the Process was written by Sir Kenelm himself from Monsieur
Dandre's mouth.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=13)

### 1.5. Monsieur Van Outer's Secret, Physician of Brussels, with ☉ and Butter
of Anti­mony.

TAke equal parts of  (antimony) Mineral, and ☿ Sublimate, and a little Sal
armoniac, make Butter thereof: Draw the Spirit from this Butter, which
rectifie again. (Note, that this Butter, being exposed to the Air, draws from
the same what it needeth in an hourts time, and thereby is much increased in
quantity: That which it draws is the hid­den Food of the Life of Man, and all
the Beings in the World. And this Butter is the true Magnet which draws it in
its purity.) Then put this Spirit into a Glass Cucurbite, of a convenient
bigness, fit a Head to it with Limbec and Receiver; lute well all the
junctures, and put it thus to putrifie in Ashes for two Months, in which time
the Matter will become as red as Blood, and afterwards very black, sticking to
the sides of the Ves­sel like glutinous Soot, and the Ethereal Spi­rit
ascendeth and passeth into the Recipient in form of a Spirit, and in Body of
fusible Salt, whereof you must also draw the Spirit, and separate them by
Distillation with a very gentle fire, until you see a red and sparkling fire
upon the Matter, which is a sign of its [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=13) Maturity, and
that you have obtained the Philosophical ☿, which is the true Univer­sal
Dissolvent, then let it cool. That which resteth in the bottom of the
Cucurbite, is the Terra damnata.

Take ℥vj. of this Menstruum, and put it upon ℥j. of ☉ in very thin plates,
which will speedily as dissolved, and they will unite in­timately, as being of
the same Nature. You must take great care that you lose nothing of the
Spirits; it must be done in a Matrass with a Glass stopper, exactly fitted;
and being well sealed and luted, digest it with a Lamp fire, with a very
gentle heat in the begin­ning. After fifty days digestion, you must feed and
imbibe your Matter with the said Menstruum, whereof you must have store, for
to multiply your Work. So soon as you have put in the said Dissolvent, you
must stop it again immediately, and seal it as be­fore, then digest fifty days
more, the heat a little increased; which time being ex­pired, you must again
feed your Matter with the Virginal Milk a little more than the first time,
continuing the digestion, the heat a little stronger. Re [...]terate the
Imbibition seven times, and your Matter will become more vigorous, and will be
able to bear stronger Food from time to time, and to bear stronger heat, which
nevertheless must [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=14) not be hastened,
but well governed, after the Example of the Operation of the Rays of the Sun
in the Spring and Summer, for the Nourishment and Maturation of Vege­tables.
But you must observe, that at the two last imbibitions, there must be but 35
days distance from the one to the other in­stead of 50 before. At the five
first imbi­bitions you shall see from time to time the wonderful effects of
Nature, by the internal vertue of the Matter, and by all the Signs written in
Flammel, La Tourbe, Le Rosaire, or Iubilation of the Soul, and in all those
Authors that have possessed this rare Know­ledge, which will appear
infallibly; to the proportion whereof you must increase the fire, and that is
left to the discretion of the Operator. You must observe, that as the Matter
multiplieth in vertue and quantity at each imbibition, and always more and
more, it might become so fusible, that at last it might penetrate the Glass;
so that if you judge convenient, you need not imbibe quite seven times, that
you may run no hazard; for you may afterwards multiply the Pow­der in the same
manner, and carry it ad in­finitum. And to perform all this, there needeth no
more than about nine Months time, and without much trouble or care.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=14)

### 1.6. The Multiplication of the Powder.

TAke ℥j. of the Powder to ℥iij. of ☉, melt them together, and leave them until
all be reduced to a Powder, which will be done in three days at the most; and
thus you may carry it ad infinitum, and that which is made thus, hath the same
vertue as the first.

### 1.7. The Projection.

TO Project upon ☿ you must heat it in a Crucible, until it cast a black smoak,
then cast one grain of the said Powder upon ten or twelve Ounces of ☿. And
projecting upon other Metals, they must be in fusion, and they will render in
proportion accord­ing as they abound in ☿.

### 1.8. A considerable Work with ☉ and ☿.

TAke ℥viij. of ☉, melt it in a Crucible with three times as much Tin-glass,
mix them well together, then cast it out, and beat it into as small pieces as
you can: Take three times the weight of your mixture of good Sublimate, which
put in the bottom of a large Cucurbite, and upon that put the said mixture;
set the Cucurbite in an Earthen [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=15) Pot, which put
into an Iron Pot with Sand; fit a head with a Limbeck and Receiver to it, lute
all well, and give a gentle heat at the beginning for two hours; then increase
the heat by degrees, at last a very violent fire of reverberation, during
eight hours; then let it cool, and open the Vessel, and you shall find your
Tin-glass in the Receiver in the form of Crystals, with the Sublimate, and the
☉ will remain in the bottom of the Cucurbite, in the form of light dry
Flowers, very fair to behold, and will be much opened and attenuated.

Dissolve this ☉ in eight parts of A. R. Distill it off, and put the same
quantity of new A. R. upon it, and Distill it off as be­fore. Repeat this
three times, at the third time the ☉ will be so opened, that it will ascend
with the water, and stick to the sides of the head of the Alembick; so the
same will seem to be full of golden Stars.

Dissolve this ☉ again in eight parts of A. R. Dissolve also by it self twelve
Marcs of ☿ in A. F. Put these two dissolutions to­gether, and let them stand
to settle 24 hours, the ☉ and ☿ will be precipitated indistin­guishible, in
the form of a black Spunge, and will be essentially and radically U­nited.

Distill off the water to dryness, you will [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=15) find at the
bottom a gray Powder, which take out, and put it into a Matrass, and pour upon
it good Oyl of Vitriol, so much as may cover it the breadth of four fingers;
Seal it herm [...]tically, and digest for twenty days. Then open the Matrass,
and let the humidity exhale by a strong heat in Sand: Break the Glass, and
grind the Matter with a little Borax, then melt it, and you shall have at
least eleven Marcs of ☉ (a Marc is ten Ounces.)

Monsieur Carrier gave this Work to his Uncle, Monsieur Ferrier, having had it
from an intimate Friend of his, who had arrived to great Wealth by it.

Hartman.) The said Monsieur Ferrier did communicate this Process to Sir Kenelm
at Paris, 1660. when he returned from Ger­many, at the time of the Kings Happy
Re­stauration.

### 1.9. A Work Copied out of the Original of Mon­sieur de la Violette's own
Hand, whereof he made great Account.

TAke ℥iiij. of the purest and finest ♃, and ℥viij. Spanish ☿ purified with
Salt and Vinegar, make an Amalgama. Then take red Minium and Aes stum of each
℥iiij. Danzick Vitriol lbj. reduced to half a lb. [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=16) by Calcination,
grind and mix these all well together, and put them into a Retort coated, and
pour upon it one pound and a half of the following A. F.

Take Vitriol two pound, which reduce to one lb. by Calcination, which put into
a Retort, and pour upon it a good A. F. made of Vitriol and Nitre, Distill it
S. A. and you shall have an A. F. fit for this Work, which having poured upon
the said Matter, Distill it off, and it will be very ponderous. Break the
Retort (being cold) and you will find on the sides of it, and up­on the Caput
Mortuum, a very red and pon­derous Sublimate, which take off.

Take the half of the Caput Mortuum, and as much of Bay Salt decrepitated,
re­duce all to a fine Powder with the said Sub­limate, and then put all into a
new Retort, and pour upon it the Distilled A. F. Distill it as before, and the
said A. F. will come off very red, and the Sublimate will be more red, and
more ponderous than before, and will rise very high at this time. Keep this
Water very carefully, break the Retort, and take both the Feces and Sublimate,
and re­duce it to Powder, and Sublime it by it self without A. F. and the
Sublimate will mount but upon the surface of the Feces, which separate, and it
will have acquired more [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=16) redness, and
will be almost fixed. Put this Sublimate into the said A. F. and it will
dissolve it speedily: Distill or evaporate the A. F. in Sand, and the
Sublimate will re­main in the bottom like a deep-red Oyl. Put into this Oyl
℥iij. of the fixed Sulphur of Vitriol, made according to Art; put it into a
Matrass with a short neck, and digest in Sand, until all the moisture is
exhaled.

Then take an Amalgama made with one part of ☉ and two parts of ☽ Calcined with
Salt, and four parts of Spanish ☿ (washed with Salt and Vinegar;) then squeeze
out so much ☿ as you can from the Amalgama, then wash and dry this Amalgama,
and pour upon it by little and little of the above-said A. F. let it stand
half an hour, then pour on more of the Water as before, and you will see the
Amalgama dissolve visibly, and will be reduced to a very red Powder.

Note, that once in half an hour you must pour on some of the said Water, and
all will be done in less than half a day. Digest it half a day longer in Sand;
then break the Vessel, take out this Precipitate, and melt it with a little
Borax, and you shall have ☉ at 24 Carats.

Note, that if you take equal parts of ☉ and ☽ to your Amalgama, you shall have
in­crease yet fourty or fifty per Cent. more.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=17)

### 1.10. Snyder's Secret, as he gave it me himself the 22 of July, 1664.

TAke Nitre eight parts, Sulphur four parts, and Tartar two parts: Reduce all
into a fine Powder, and mix them well. Then melt one part of pure ☉ and three
parts of purified Regulus of Antimony, in a Crucible; than add to them three
parts or more of the said Powder, let it stand in the fire until you see a
light Skin upon it, then pour it into an Antimony-horn. Take the Regulus in
the bottom of the Horn, and melt it again, and cast more of the said Powder
upon it: Repeat this so often until all the Regulus be consumed; dissolve all
the scums of the said Regulus, and make a laver thereof, which filter, and
precipitate with an Acid, which edulcorate; edulcorate also the Feces which
remained in the filter, put these things edulcorated together, with half the
weight of Flowers of Sulphur, and cal­cine them well: Then draw the Salt from
it with distilled Vinegar (which will be a gol­den Salt) draw as much of the
said Salt from it as you can.

Take one part of this Salt, and two or three parts of good Butter of Antimony
well rectified, mix them well in a Matrass, one [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=17) part filled, and
the other two parts empty: Seal it Hermetically, and digest it with a gentle
heat; it will grow black and putri­fie in the space of three days; continue
the digestion until the Powder be fixed.

### 1.11. The following Observations are from another Learned Man, with whom
Sir Kenelm did confer at his return from Bristol, con­cerning the said
Snyder's Work. Who saith thus.

THis Operation may be abbreviated, in fermenting it with ☉ as followeth: Make
a Spirituous Regulus of  (antimony), as you know, which is precipitated Butter
of  (antimony) and ☿, adding to them Soap and Salt of Tar­tar. Take of this
Spirituous Reg. three parts, and one part of ☉, melt them toge­ther, and cast
it by little and little into the Sulphurous Salt Enixe, & totus solvetur,
effunde, solve, filtra, precipita totam mate­riam in Sulphur pulcherimum:
Reverberate this Sulphur with flowers of Sulph. or if you will, dissolve it
again, and precipitate; draw the Salt from this Sulphure with di­stilled
Vinegar; add to this Salt or Golden Vitriol, three times its weight of Butter
of  (antimony); digest them together (donec cessent co­lores.) You may
multiply the Work in qua­lity, [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=18) in dissolving
the Powder in Salt Enixe, and Precipitating often: And you may mul­tiply it in
quantity, in mixing it with new Butter of  (antimony), wherein you have
dissolved the said Salt, or Golden Vitriol. Note, Tha [...] this Work will be
more excellent if it b [...] done with ☿ of  (antimony), and Spirituous Reg.
[...] may be also abbreviated in purifying very well the Butter of
(antimony). Note, That th [...] Work is a Mineral water, which is coagu­lated
by its own Sulphur. Note also, Tha [...] if you take the Golden Sulphur
without Reg [...] the work will be yet shorter: Note, Th [...] in the
Multiplication, if the Powder onl [...] be dissolved in Butter of  (antimony),
the Operatio [...] will be shorter.

### 1.12. A great Secret of the said Mr. Snyder's Powder.

DIssolve ☉ in Sal Enixe, and exalt  [...] with Sulphur of  (antimony), then
cast in conu [...] in salem rubicundum; (see that no Coals fa [...] in.) Keep
the Salt so long in the fire, th [...] it remain fusible: Grind it, and let it
me [...] in a Matrass; add a grain or two of th [...] Powder, let all melt in
a strong fire twel [...] or twenty hours, and this Powder will b [...]
multiplyed; pour out, dissolve, and filte [...] put therein ☽ and ☿, they will
be transm [...]ted into fine ☉.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=18) Or,
Precipitate the Liquor with Salt into a Golden Sulphur, which digest longer
with Butter of  (antimony). Or, preserve the Sulphur, and ferment it again
with dissolved ☉, as is said, in Salt Enixe, and in a Matrass, that the Powder
may go ad infinitum.

### 1.13. Matthews his Work.

TAke Common Cinaber ℥xij. Crystals of ♂ ℥ij. Common ☿ Precipitate, made by A.
F. and reverberated until it be red, ℥j. Oyl of Vitriol ℥xv. First, reduce the
three hard Ingredients into a most fine Powder; then grind it upon a Marble
stone with a lit­tle of the Oyl of Vitriol, adding the said Oyl by little and
little, until it become like Pap; which put into a low Cucurbite (ta­king care
that it do not touch the sides of the said Cucurbite, because it would
endan­ger it to break) and put upon it the rest of the Oyl of Vitriol, and
stir the Matter well with a stick of Glass (which must be massy and not
hollow) that all may be well mixed together; digest it with a gentle heat for
eight days, so that nothing may go over through the Limbeck: Then distill as
much as you can of the Oyl of Vitriol, and take the Matter out of the
Cucurbite, and grind it again; put the distilled Oyl upon it again, [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=19) and distill as
before, without digesting it; repeat this fourteen or sixteen times. At last,
distill as much of the Oyl as possibly you can; and that the remaining Matter
may be thick, and conveniently handled, put into it ℥v. or vj. of filings of
☽. Then melt twenty Ounces of ☽, and project your Matter upon the same (being
in fusion) in fifteen or twenty parcels, staying every time, before you
project until that which you pro­jected be well entred and incorporated with
the ☽, and that it be very clear: After all is projected, leave it in good
fusion for an hour or two; then put it to Coppel, and af­terwards to
Separating 🜄, and you shall have about ℥jss. of pure ☉.

The Crystals of ♂ are made thus:

Upon filings of ♂ put Oyl of Vitriol, then pour common 🜄 upon it, and the
fi­lings will dissolve; filter the dissolution, and evaporate the Liquor usque
ad pelliculam; set it in a cold place, and it will shoot into Crystals, which
require no further Purifica­tion.

The Oyl of Vitriol for this Work is made thus: Take Danzick Vitriol, dissolve
it once in 🜄, filter and congeal it; then Calcine it gently, until it be
white: Then distill it in Retorts S. A. forcing it very strongly at last.
Dephlegm this Oyl in a low Cucur­bite, [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=19) and that which
remaineth in the Cucurb. (which will be of a dark red) must be pas­sed through
a filter of wool in a Glass Fun­nel, and the wool will imbibe the unctuosity
of the Oyl, which if it were not separated from it, might hinder its
Operation.

### 1.14. To fix ☽ into ☉.

THE 15th. of November, 1660\. Mon­sieur Iohn Commandaire told me, that Signeor
Lucca (from whom he now came) had taught him a shorter, and easier way of
doing his work, thus:

Take the Mother-liquor of Salt-petre, (which is the salt 🜄 that remaineth
after as much is shot into Nitre as will shoot) and let it run once through a
filter of washed Sand to purifie it; then evaporate it to dry­ness: Grind the
remaining Salt very fine, and set it in a Cellar, or other moist place to
dissolve into 🜄 by the Air; filter that by a woollen Languette, coagulate,
grind, dis­solve, and filter it. Repeat this seven or eight times, that all
foulness may be severed from this fixed Salt of Salt-petre. Then it will
easily give its pure Spirits, and not be­fore. Put this into Retorts, not
above half a pound into each Retort; distill first with very gentle 🜂,
increasing it by degrees, at [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=20) last, strong 🜂,
as when you distill A. F. The distillation will be performed in twenty four
hours: Then dephlegm it carefully; when the drops come Acid, cease. In the
mean time purifie the fixed Salt remaining after the distillation, by grinding
it small, dissolving in humido, filtring, and congeal­ing. Repeat this twice
or thrice; then put one part of this fixed Salt to three parts of the Spirit,
and to this Composition put a tenth part of pure ☉, and though it were in an
Ingor, it will dissolve it speedily. Pu [...] this into an Egg, and Seal it
Hermetically, and digest it, it will putrifie, and grow en­tirely black; then
pass all the due colours, during which time increase the heat by de­grees, and
when it requireth strong heat, use Coal.

### 1.15. An Observation about Volatilised ☽.

MOnsieur de L'oberie, and Mons. de l [...] No [...]ë wrought the first Process
upon ☽ (which is after those upon ☉) that is in the handgrif of Bas. Valent.
which maketh the fourteenth Book of his Test. But instead of a due Calx of ☽,
they took one made with A. F. (the ordinary made of Vitriol and Nitre) and
Precipitated it with Salted 🜂 (Salt dissolved in Common 🜂) and for [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=20) the rest, did as
the Process teacheth; which was Reported to me thus. Put upon this Calx of ☽
(they had ℥iv.) (after it is well dulcified by often ablutions with fair 🜄,
till no Saltness or Spirits appear to remain) so much fresh A. F. as to swim
four fingers breadth over the Calx of ☽: Distill off the A. F. then cohobate
again; do thus four times: At the last distillation give strong 🜂, you will
have a gray substance like Mar­ca [...]ite. Beat it to Powder, and put
distilled Vinegar upon it, to swim four fingers over it; digest two days, then
boyl it three or four hours, after which, distill away all the distilled Vin.
and there should have remained blew Crystals, but they were white without
tincture: So having failed in their expecta­tion, they would reduce their ☽
back in a body, therefore dulcified it well with distil­led Vinegar and fair
🜄, and put it into a Cruc. to melt with a little Borax, and a little Nitre,
and a thick smoak flew away, and in the end there remained but ℥ij. of ☽.

Consider, if this course, and, if need be, digesting longer (at last) with
distilled Vi­negar and Oyl of Tartar, 🜹, and Salt of Urine, &c. Then
distilling with Tartar and Calx-vive, might not make ☿ of ☽.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=21)

### 1.16. A Process from Monsieur Vignault, with ☉ and ☿, &c.

TAke ℥j. of ☉, aaate it with ℥iv. of ☿; grind this aaa, and[?] wash it well:
Then put it into an earthe [...] Pot with its cover to shut it very close,
which cover must be like a Funnel at the top [...] Put it to a gentle 🜂 in
Sand for twenty four hours, then give it a strong 🜂 for twenty four hours
more, that the Matter may ascend and descend; then take out your Matter
(loosning it from the bottom where it sticketh fast) and grind it, and aaate
it again with the same ☿, and proceed all as before. Repeat this Work six
times, always with the same ☿, which by degrees will become Earth, and will
stick no more to the bottom; you must leave it in Sand every time twenty four
hours before you grind it again; after the sixth time give it strong 🜂, so
that it may be red-hot in the Sand for fourty eight hours, and it will be a
red Powder, which multiply by mixing with it its weight of ☿, grinding and
di­gesting it as before; and in three times twenty four hours it will be in
Powder; and if you will multiply it again, proceed as before, with equal
weight of ☿. And to make it into a Tree, do thus: When you have made [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=21) the aaa, and
ground and washed it, then put it into a Matrass, which stop only with Paper;
then digest it continually, and the said ☿ will ascend and descend: And when
you see that at last it becomes hard and heavy, sticking to the neck of the
Matrass, put it down with a Quill, and it will become a Tree, which will be
red. Note, That your ☿ must be well purified first, and then sub­limed with ☉
and ☽, taking ℥ij. of ☉ to one pound of ☿, for it will be much the better, and
will be sooner done. If you mix ℥ss. of ☉ with ℥ss. of the said Powder, and
grind it well with ℥ij. of ☿ revived from Cinaber, and animated with ☉, as is
said, and digest it fourty eight hours, you will do more in fifteen days, than
otherwise in two Months, and the ☉ will not stick to the bottom of the Pot:
You must continue the digestion as is said above, and at the end strong 🜂.
The ☉ will serve for to animate the ☿, and to melt it, and reduce it into a
Calx, for to aaate it with animated ☿, ta­king ℥j. of ☉ to four of ☿.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=22)

### 1.17. Fixation of ☽, wrought by Father Bening de Baune, and by him
communicated to me.

FIrst, he animated Common ☿ for this Work, thus:

Take ℥iv. of Common Sulphur, melt it in an Earthen Poringer, then cast into it
by little and little lbj. of ☿ (purified with Salt and Vinegar, and squeezed
through Chambo-leather) stir it continually; then take it from the fire, and
keep it stirring untill it is reduced to a black Powder, which grind, and add
to it lbj. of  (antimony) in Powder, and lbss. of Quick-lime also in Powder;
mix all toge­ther, and put it into a coated Retort, of such a bigness, that a
third part may re­main empty. Distill it, and let the Nose of the Retort lye
in a Poringer full of 🜄, distill by degrees of 🜂, as you do A. F. the ☿ will
distill into the 🜄: Mix this ☿ again with new Materials, and distill as
before. Repeat this Operation with the said ☿ seven times, every time with new
Materials.

Take of this ☿ ℥iv. aaate it with ℥j. of ☉; wash the aaa so often, that the 🜄
come from it clear, then dry it. Put this aaa into a Matrass, and digest
twenty four hours in Ashes: Then take it out, and grind it [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=22) in a Glass
Morter, and add to it ℥xx. of the said ☿; grind them well together, then wash
it and dry it, and put it into a Retort, and distill over all the ☿ in Sand.

Take ℥viij. of this ☿, aaate it with ℥j. of a light Spungy-calx of ☉; wash
this aaa well with warm 🜄, then dry it, and put it into a Matrass; Seal it
Hermetically, and digest it in Sand the space of twenty four hours: Then grind
it again with ℥viij. more of ☿, and digest as before. Repeat this Operation
once more with ℥viij. more of ☿, so that there be ℥xxiv, of ☿ to one of ☉. Put
them into three several Matrasses, which Seal Hermetically, and put them to a
sup­pressing heat in an Athanor, for the space of two Months: Then put all
into a Retort, and distill it in Sand, with a heat of Sup­pression, so that
the 🜂 above be stronger than that below, and if any of the ☉ remain in the
bottom of the Retort, you must aaate it with twenty four parts of ☿, and
distill it as before, until all the ☉ be distilled over. Repeat the same as
before, untill the ☉ hath taken in sixty parts of ☿, and if it taketh but
twenty four of ☿, the ☉ will be better, and your ☿ will be animated.

Take ℥j. of Calx of ☽, and three or four of your ☿ animated, aaate them
together, wash the said aaa with warm 🜄, then divide [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=23) it into two
parts, and put them into two Matrasses; Seal them Hermet. and digest in an
Athanor with very gentle heat for fourty or fifty days, then increase the heat
for fourty or fifty days more: Then continue the di­gestion with the third
degree of heat (stron­ger yet) unto the end of eight Months, counting the time
of the first and second de­gree already past. Then digest a Month longer by
the four degrees of 🜂, which will make it nine Months in all.

The Calx of ☽ is made of equal parts of ☽ and Regulus of ♂ melted together,
and re­duced to Powder. Note, that the Reg. is not to be reckoned; so that you
must take ℥ij. of this Powder.

### 1.18. Observations.

THE Athanor was of a digestive Fur­nace, with a Tower for the Coals, and
between both, there were two Registers of heat, the one gave the heat under
the Ves­sels, and the other above: The Matrass stood in Sand in a Bason of
Copper, which held ten or twelve Matr. At the beginning the 🜂 was given only
below, and so gen­tle, that the ☿ never Sublimed. The Bason with the Matr. was
covered with a cover like a Dome, and after that the heat was given [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=23) also above, and
that stronger than before: And it ought to be always continued with­out
interruption. After nine M. digestion, all the ☽ will be transmuted into ☉,
and be­sides that, you shall have an augmentation of a third part of ☉.

Note, That you must not put above ℥ij. of Matter into each Matrass.

The ☉ which he used in this Operation, was three times purified by
(antimony).

He told me since, that the greater pro­portion of Reg. you put to the ☽, the
better your work will succeed, and you shall have the more ☉, and the sooner.

Hartman.) The said Father B. de B. was the Apothecary in the Convent of the
Capu­chins at Lyons: He was an able Chymist, and had been for some Years
Operator with the Chancellor of France, in his Laboratory. When I went from
Paris to Italy, after Sir Kenelm's Death, passing through Lyons, I went to see
him in the Convent of the Capu­chins, where I had some Discourse with him
concerning this work; he confirmed it to me, assuring me that he had done it,
and that it was a real truth, and that is all I know of it.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=24)

### 1.19. A 🜄 which changes ☿ as red as Blood, which abideth the Fire.

MAke an A. F. of equal parts of Vitriol and Nitre, which cohobate and di­still
three times upon its Caput Mort.

Take of this A. F. ℥iij. ℥j. of ☿, and ℥ij. of Sulphur-vive; put all into a
Retort, let it stand twelve hours, then distill it, and co­hobate so often,
till you see the ☿ as red as Blood, which will be in five or six times; then
bring it into a Powder, which imbibe with Oyl of Roman Vitriol, dry and imbibe
it three times: Then divide this Powder into eight payts; then take ℥j. of ♄,
which put to Coppel, when it boyleth, put into it a Ducat of ☉, then put into
it one of the eight parts. Drive it off, and you shall have ℥j. of fine ☉.

Hartman.) This Process was written in the French Tongue; at the bottom was
writ­ten Probatum, the 2d. of July, 1658. The Process saith, it must be done
on Thursday and Friday, and at the Full of the ☽.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=24)

### 1.20. Saunier's Work, as I wrought it.

PUrifie ☉ three times by  (antimony); then reduce it into a subtil Calx, by
Calcining it five times with Sulphur and ☿: Then burn S. V. upon this Calx,
and reverberate it again, that all the extraneous Spirits may be driven away.

2\. Sublim ☿ seven times with Vitriol and Salt, reviving it with filings of ♂
after every 🝞mation.

3\. Make an A. R. S. A. out of the fixed Salt, after the extraction of Salt-
petre, which after some days must be dephlegmed with great care, and
rectified, so that it have neither phlegm nor terrestrial feces.

Dissolve ℥j. of your ☉ in as small a quan­tity of this A. R. as you can,
keeping the Vessel well Sealed (and therefore it ought to be large) in a very
gentle heat in B. M. where it must be digested (after the dissolu­tion) for
some days: The dissolution being very clear, decant it from the white
re­sidue.

Dissolve ℥ss. of fusible Salt in as small a quantity of the said A. R. as you
can (which is not done suddenly, but by digestion) and being clear, mix these
two dissolutions to­gether, namely, that of the ☉, and of the [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=25) Salt, and if any
thing 🝟tate to the bottom, keep it in digestion with a gentle heat (the
Vessel close stopped) until all is dissolved and clear; then keep it in the
same digestion for fifteen days. Then with a very gentle heat abstract the
phlegm, until a Spirit ascend; then cease, and put into the Vessel ℥ss. of the
🝞mate before mentioned (in very subtil Powder) shut the Vessel again
immediately, and put it in digestion as be­fore, until the 🝞mate is well
dissolved. Then dephlegm again the dissolution; in do­ing of which you ought
to attend very di­ligently, lest there come over some part of the ☉ and ☿,
which now easily will be raised with the A. R. And this you may know, not only
by the drops falling yel­low, but also by trying with a white wool­len cloath,
which the drops will stain yellow if the ☉ ascendeth. Then Seal it
Herme­tically, and digest in Horse-dung: After six Months we opened the
Vessel, and with a gentle heat distilled off the Liquor, and the remaining
Golden Salt we projected upon restricted ☽, and for ℥j. of ☉ we had seven.
Another Vessel, after twelve Months dige­stion, rendred ℥x. of ☉ for one put
in: And so to two and twenty for one.

I do not remember all the time precisely, but I should think, it would be
better, after [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=25) sufficient
digestion in Horse-dung, to coagu­late the Matter in dry heat until all be
com­pleatly fixed, and then multiply the Matter by the same Process, as you
did with ☉.

The fusible Salt is made thus: Dissolve Salt (first well purified) in the said
A. R. distill and cohobate until it is fusible.

The restriction of ☽ you will find in a Book Published by Iohn Saunier, which
he calleth, the almost fixation of ☽, because it hath the weight and sound of
☉.

Hartman.) This Process was wrought by Sir K. D. himself, as the Title sheweth;
it was written in Latine in his own hand, and the words are his own.

Abbot Boucaud told me at Paris, that he knew Sir K. had wrought it.

### 1.21. The Danes Work.

CAlcine plats of ♂ and ♀ with Sul­phur; then grind them to subtile Powder,
which boyl in 🜄, filter and eva­porate, usque ad pelliculam, and put it to
Crystallize in a cold place: Then purifie these Crystals by dissolving them in
🜄, fil­tring and evaporating.

Make also a Sulphur of the said Metals, by boyling Plats with Vitriol and 🜄
in a Kettle, and the Sulph. will adhere to the Plats.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=26)Purifie ☿
first by Dist. and then by boyl­ing it in an Earthen Pot with Vitriol, Ashes,
and Powder'd glass well mixed together, and boyled until you see the ☿ appear
upon the Surface of the Matter: Then let it co [...]l, and grind all well
together again, and boyl it as before. Repeat this three times: Then take of
this ☿ four parts, of the Sulph. of ♂ and ♀ ana one part, grind them well
to­gether until they be well incorporated; then 🝞m and grind again what is
🝞med with that which remained in the bottom, and 🝞m as before. Repeat this
seven times: Then is the ☿ prepared for this Work.

Distill an Oyl s. a. out of the Vitriol of ♂ and ♀ joyned together, which will
be Blood-red.

Make a light and Spungy Calx of ☉, by Calcining it four or five times with
Sulphur and ☿. Take of this Calx ℥j. and of the ☿ prepared ℥iv. Make an aaa,
which grind very well; then add of the Sulphur of ♂ and ♀ ana ℥ss, grind them
well together with the aaa; then put it into a Matrass of such a bigness, that
three fourth parts may remain empty, stop it slightly with Paper, that some
moisture from the ☿ may exhale, (which otherwise might hinder the 🝟tation of
the ☿) give 🜂 by degrees, first in Ashes, and then in Sand, but so gentle,
that the ☿ [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=26) may never rise,
but that it may be always in a disposition to 🝞m, which you may know by a
little Cloud upon the sides of the glass, such as appears when one breatheth
upon a Looking-glass.

The end of the digestion is, when you see the Matter converted into a very red
🝟tate and glittering, which endureth a very strong 🜂. Then take it out
(being cold) and grind it with four parts more of the said ☿; and the same
quantity of the said Sulph. as before; digest as before, until all be
converted into a red 🝟tate as before, ex­cept that it will be of a darker
colour: Grind this 🝟tate with the Oyl of Vitriol before­mentioned until it be
like a pap: Then put it into a Cucurbite, and digest for fifteen days, then
distill it, and the Phlegm will come over; and the Matter remaining dry in the
bottom, you must grind again with new Oyl, and proceed in all as before.
Repeat this so often, till the Oyl come off as sharp as it was put on, which
is a sign of Satura­tion: Then digest this Matter in Sand until all be
resolved into a very red Oyl in ap­pearance (which in a cold place will
con­geal into a hard and brittle Matter.) At last give very strong 🜂 for
three days, in which time the Matter will be entirely fixed, except a small
quantity, which will be ex­haled.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=27)Project
this Matter upon ☽ in fusion equal parts. Thus far reacheth my Experience; but
the Dane told me, that if this Matter were Amalgamated again with new ☿
prepa­red, and in all things proceeded as before, taking this Matter for the
Foundation, in­stead of the ☉ which you took at first, it would become a
Medicine, which in Pro­jection would convert a great quantity of ☽ into ☉. And
the oftner you should do this, the more Power it would have in Pro­jection.

Out of ℥x. of this Matter, and as much ☽, I had ℥xvijss. of perfect ☉.

Hartman.) Dr. Astell, an English Phy­sician, shewed me a Copy of this Process,
which Sir K. D. had given him, who had assured him that he himself had wrought
it, and that it was true: And having ℥x. of fixed Matter, he divided it into
ten parcels, and having melted ℥x. of ☽, he Projected the said parcels one
after another upon the same; then left it in fusion for three hours, then cast
it in Ingot, which having weighed, he found the quantity of ☉ above mentioned.

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=27)

### 1.22. Opus Magnum ex Virginea Terra.

TAke reddish rich Virgin Earth in ♈, im­pregnate it with ☉, ☽, serene and dew,
till the end of May: Then imbibe sprink­lingly with dew gathered in May, and
dry in ☉, expose all Night to the ☽ and Air, se­curing it from Rain. Still
when it is dry, imbibe and turn the Earth often. Continue this till 🝞mation.
The hot ☉ (especially in the Dog-days) will make a pure Salt shoot up, which
mingle back into the Earth, by turning it all over. Then distill by gra­duated
🜂 as A. F. forcing all the Spirits over at last; you must give fourty hours
🜂, extream at last. Put all the Liquor and Salt that cometh over, to digest
and circu­late a Month in fimo, in a great Ballon close shut. Then seperate
the several substances out of this Chaos; first, cometh an extream subtil,
ardent, Aethereal Spirit, then white ones with veins like S. V, then Flegm.
Thus far in B. in a Cucurbite, then in a Retort: Then white fumes, then red
ones, and a reddish brown Salt remaineth in the bottom, and a Volatile Salt
will be 🝞med about the neck of the Retort, as also to the head and sides of
the Cucurbite. Then purifie every substance by it self; the fixed Salt by
Solu­tions [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=28) in the Flegm,
Filtrations, and Con­gelations, till it be perfect pure, clear, and cast no
more Feces: The Volatile Salt by often Sublimations: The first Spirit by
thrice distilling, and the fixed white and red Spirit likewise, both together.
Now joyn all the three parts, beginning with the fixed Salt, whereof take
three parts, and one of the fixed Spirit; digest eight days, distill in Ashes,
and the Liquor will come off like Flegm. Imbibe with more fixed Spirit, and
repeat this till all of it be coagu­lated with the Salt. Then put one part of
this to three of the 🜹, taking it all, and hu­mect them with the Volatile
Spirit. Digest eight days or longer, then distill in a Cucur­bite; a stinking
flegm will rise, and a pure Salt 🝞m up, and if any Spirit distill over, keep
it, putting it to the rest of the Spirit. Then add more of the fixed Salt to
it which hath not 🝞med, making it one third to the 🜹, which humect with
Spirit as before, cir­culate and 🝞m, and the 🜹 will be increased. Do thus
till all the fixed Salt be 🝞med. Cir­culate the remaining Volatile Spirit
with the 🜹, till all the Spirit be converted into 🜹, and nothing but a
stinking flegm come a­way. Then 🝞m this Salt by it self, till it leave no
Feces, and be most white, trans­parent, and pure, which will be in four or
five times.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=28)Take seven
parts of this 🜹, and one of pure ☉ in leaf, Seal it Hermetically, and digest
in B. The Matter will become a green 🜄, like an Emerauld, with an Ori­ental
esclat: (and in a Retort will pass all over, leaving a few grains of brownish-
gray stiptick Earth, like Tobacco-pipe Earth) And after a while black like
Ink, and continue so two and fourty days; when the blackness beginneth to
wane, put it in dry 🜂 in an Athanor. It will pass the co­lours, and become a
red Elixir, and is now best for Health; but it will not have good ingression
into Metals, till it have been mul­tiplyed four or five times with new 🜹,
taking every time after the first, only three to one; and it will be done
every time after the first in a shorter space. After every fixation of the
multiplication, and the first also, give strong 🜂 for three days, and a black
Earth will separate from the red Powder, lying like a Cake under it. Before
you Project upon inferiour Metals, ferment anew with three parts of ☉ to one
of the Elixir, giving three hours of extream fusion, and all will be red
Powder.

You may proceed in the same manner for ☽.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=29)Note also,
That when the Work of ☉ is at the white, it will Project upon Inferiour
Metals, to make them like ☽, but in truth white ☉, enduring all the tryals of
☉.

If you digest in B. V. ten parts of Pearl in Powder, with one of the perfect
🜹, it will become an Oriental Liquor, whereof a few drops is admirable for
Health.

If you take four parts of such 🜹, and grind it well with pure red Coral in
Powder one part, and 🝞m, putting what riseth up­on as much of fresh Coral,
repeating this four or five times, the 🜹 will be red like a Ruby, and an
admirable Medicine. All the Corals will dissolve in a Cellar.

If you grind one part of it with ten parts of green Venice Talc, and put
distilled dew upon it, six fingers over, and digest in fimo, all the Talc will
dissolve, and a splendid Oyl of rare effects swim upon it.

Hartman.) Sir Kenelm D. said, that a Person of Quality beyond the Sea (whom he
named) wrought this Process, and it hap­pened at that time that his Wife was
dange­rously Sick, and like to die; she was given over as a dead Woman by the
ablest Physici­ans: Upon that he opened the Vessel, and gave her one grain of
the Elixir; whereupon she Recovered. and lived many Years after it in perfect
Health.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=29) This
Process, and Saunier's Work were to­gether in a small bundle of Papers tied up
to­gether by it self; upon the out-side of it were written the following
words, Perfumes, Cu­riosities, My great Arcane of this Note.

### 1.23. A Miniera of ☉, wrought by a Person of Quality in Champagne.

TAke Sulphur-vive lbss. melt it in an Earthen Poringer, then squeeze into it
lbj. of ☿; stir it continually until the ☿ ap­pear no more in the Sulph. Then
let it cool, and grind to Powder, which digest in a Matrass for two days with
a strong 🜂. Then take it out, and grind it again; add to it its double weight
of filings of ♂; mix them well together, and put them in a Re­tort, and
distill over all the ☿: Mix this ☿ again with new Sulphur melted as before;
digest in a Matrass as before for two days, in the mean time grind the filing
of ♂ (that you distilled the ☿ from) and wash them well from all the foulness
and blackness; Then dry them and grind them again with the Sulphur and ☿, and
distill them in a Re­tort as before. Repeat this so often, till the filing of
♂ come to be of a yellow Golden colour, which will happen at the seventh
distillation: Then take this ☿ and put it in [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=30) a Retort, and
distill only ℥j. of it, and with the remaining ℥viij. make an aaa with ℥j. of
☉, digest this aaa in an Athanor for nine Months, it will pass all the due
colours, and will become a Miniera, as followeth. To this ℥ix. of Matter put
℥iij. of ☿ prepared as before, and digest, and in six weeks you shall have
℥xij. ready to melt: And to these ℥xij. add ℥iv. more of ☿, and digest, and in
six weeks you shall have ℥xvj. of Miniera, Note, that you must always use a ☿
pre­pared, as was said for the multiplication of the Miniera: For if you
should take crude and unprepared ☿, you would have but an ordinary 🝟tate
after one or two multiplica­tions.

Note, That the filing of ♂ is to be chan­ged after three times, and new to be
taken, which is to serve also three times: After which six times, you must
joyn both the parcels of filing, and use them both at the seventh time, and if
the sign given you (of the yellow Golden colour) happen not at the seventh
time, continue and repeat your Operation, with all your filing, until it do
appear. When your Miniera is compleated, it will be a deep-red Powder, very
shining, and at every time it is to become such: If you multiply it with crude
☿, it will lose its lustre after twice, and not increase in fixed Metal.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=30)The first
time, you must put into one Glass no more than ℥j. of ☉, and ℥viij. of ☿; But
when the Miniera is made, you may work even to fifty Ounces in one Glass,
keeping always your due proportion.

### 1.24. Fixation of ♄ into ☽, with good Profit.

MElt lbj. of ♄, then put in ℥ss. of ☽, and some scories of ♂, and a little,
red Arsenic; keep it in a strong 🜂 for three or four hours or more. Then the
Cr [...]ble being cold, break it, and take out the Mat­ter, and put it in a
new Cruc. which must have a little hole in the bottom; put this Cruc. in a
wind Furnace, and melt the Mat­ter again, putting under the Furnace a Ba­son
with 🜄 to receive the Matter as it melt­eth and runneth through the Cruc.
Take this Matter and melt it again with the same quantity of ☽, and new
scories of ♂; keep it in fusion as before. Reiterate this Ope­ration ten or
twelve times, until the ♄ is very hard, being impregnated with ☽; then put it
to Coppel with ℥j. of ☽ to every lb. of this Mixture.

The goodness of the Operation consisteth in the fixation of the ☿ which is in
the ♄ by the Sulphur of ♂: Therefore you must keep the Matter a long time in
fusion, that the [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=31) Sulphur of ♂ may
act strongly upon the said ☿.

### 1.25. To fix ☿ of  (antimony), or the Common ☿.

TAke ℥j. of ☉ in leaf, and ℥iv. or v. of ☿: Make an aaa, which put in a
Retort, and digest it in Horse-dung for eight days, then distill in Sand,
giving strong 🜂 at last, and the ☉ will go over with the ☿, and if any of it
remain in the bottom, aaate it with the same ☿, and digest three or four days,
and then distill as before, and all the ☉ will go over with the ☿, and you
shall have a ☿ well animated.

Take ℥iij. of this ☿, aaate it with ℥j. of ☽; grind the aaa, and put it in a
Ma­trass half luted; digest for eleven days by graduated 🜂, and all will be a
red Pow­der.

Take ℥iij. of this Powder, and project it upon ℥j. of ☉ in fusion, and all
will be trans­muted into ☉.

Then take the remaining ℥ of Powder, and aaate it with ℥iij. of the ☿
animated; di­gest as before, and in nine days your Pow­der will be perfected
as before. Take these ℥iv: of Powder, and unite it with ℥xij. of new ☿
animated; digest without ☉, and you will have a perpetual Miniera; part [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=31) whereof you may
reduce to a Body when you please, by projecting it upon ☉; and the other will
serve for a Ferment, which will never fail, being it self all ☉.

This ☿ animated may be fixed without ☉, by a gentle heat, being it self a
liquid ☉; but to shorten the Work, you may add ☉.

### 1.26. A Reality upon ☽.

TAke ℥ij. of ♀ in thin Plates, and ℥j. of small Nails, put them in a Cruc. in
a Furnace, and when they are very red, cast in some Sulphur upon them at
several times, that they may melt well; when they are like Paste, cast in some
(antimony), and stir it with an Iron Rod to make them well incorporate: Leave
it in good fusion for five or six hours, stirring it sometimes. Then take out
the Cruc. and let it cool; then break it, and you shall find but a little Reg.
at the bottom, but many yellow lumps at the top, which beat to Powder. Then
melt ℥ij. of fine ☽, and project ℥iij. of the Powder; stir it with an Iron
Rod, keep it in fusion for eight or ten hours. Then put it to Coppel, and
se­parating 🜄, and you shall have fine ☉.

Hartman.) This Process is also confirmed with a Probatum.

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=32)

### 1.27. Fixation of the ☿ of  (antimony), as Monsieur de la Noüe wrought it
at Paris.

TAke ☿ of  (antimony) and ☉ ana ℥j. Oyl of Vi­triol ℥vj. Distill to dryness;
take what is 🝞med, and joyn it again to the Feces, and put the Oyl upon it
again that distilled over; distill as before. Repeat this so often, till
nothing more 🝞m, distilling every time in a new Retort; at the twelfth or
fifteenth distillation, all the Matter will remaim in a red Powder.

Take Sulphur-vive, and Ashes of Alican ana equal parts, of which make a lixive
with common 🜄; filter and evaporate, and you shall have a Sulphurious Salt:
Take of this Salt and of the said Powder ana gr. vj. ☿ of  (antimony) ℥j.
filings of ☉ ℥ij. mix and grind all well together, and put them into a Matr.
with a long neck; make a 🜂 about the mid­dle of the neck of the Matr. in an
Iron pan with a hole in the middle through which the neck of the Matr. may
pass; let this 🜂 be stronger than that below; continue the 🜂 for six hours:
Then cast your fixed Matter into a Bath of ☉.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=32)

### 1.28. Preparation of the Powder, with which Clau­dius de Montrouge, and
Abbot Oberye at Paris fixed ☿ of  (antimony).

THey melted ℥iv. of Sulphur in an earthen Poringer, then they squeezed into it
through a leather ℥j. of ☿ of  (antimony) made of Regulus of  (antimony), 🜹,
and ☿ 🝞mate (the ☿ of  (antimony) without addition had been better, but they
had none) and whilst the one squeezed the ☿ into the Sulphur, the other kept
stirring continually with an Iron Spatul so long until the ☿ did no more
appear in the said Sul­phur, and that all was converted into a grayish Citrine
Powder (the colour is va­riable, according as you govern the 🜂, some­times it
will be red like Cinaber.)

To this Powder they took ℥j. of ☉ in Calx, and ℥j. of the Salt that is found
in the Pots at the Glass-Houses, which Salt they dissolved, filtred, and
congealed: They grinded all well together, the Powder, the ☉, and this Salt:
Then they put all into a Retort, and put upon it ℥xxiv. of good Oyl of Vitriol
well rectified; to this Retort (be­ing put in Sand) they adapted a large
Glass-receiver, the junctures being well luted, and the lute dry, they
distilled by degrees of heat, at last gave strong 🜂. It was ten or twelve
[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=33) hours
before the Oyl came over. All being cold, they broke the Retort, and took out
the Matter which remained in the bottom, which they did put into a new Retort,
pour­ing upon it the Liquor with the flowers of Sulphur which were in the
Recipient: Then joyning again the Receiver, and luting well, and the lute
being dry, they distilled as be­fore. They reiterated this Operation twenty
times, grinding every time the Matter, and joyning it with the Liquor and
Flowers.

At the twentieth distillation, the small quantity of Liquor that came over,
was al­most all flegm; then they took out the Mat­ter that remained in the
Retort, and put it into a Viol, which they stopped very close, and kept it in
a dry place, because that so soon as it felt the Air, it grew moist.

With this Powder they fixed the ☿ of  (antimony), which being mixed with the
Calx of ☉, and held in the hand, grew so hot, that they were not able to hold
it in their hands, no more than a piece of Iron red-hot, as every one of them
made Experience, casting it in­to a Bason full of 🜄, which they had stand­ing
by for that purpose.

They wrought the said Fixation in an Iron barrel of a Gun, thus. They put
about sixty grains of the aforesaid ☿ only, (be­cause they had no more) into
the said Barrel, [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=33) then they gave
the 🜂, first above for two hours, and afterwards below for one hour, keeping
that above always stronger than that below; then they heard the said ☿ begin
to roar, and make a noise in the Barrel; then they cast into it a little more
than one grain of the fixative Powder, wrapt up in paper; and then they
continued the 🜂 for seven or eight hours, after which time they heard no more
noise at all; then they judged that the Work was done, and let the 🜂 go out;
and the Barrel being cold, they found about twenty grains of good ☉, which
endured all the Trials of ☉.

Hartman.) This Relation is of Sir K. himself, written in the French Tongue.

### 1.29. A Process to fix the Common ☿ by the Salt of ♄; wrought by Captain
Ziegler at Ments, and sent me by him.

MElt ♄ in an Iron pan, let it be red-hot, then cast in some Salt, stir it
until it be reduced to Powder; sift this Powder finely, and that which will
not go through the size, must be Calcined as before: Then edulco­rate this
Powder with warm 🜄, and you shall have a Calx as white as Ceruse, which put
into a Matrass, and extract the Salt out of it with distilled Vinegar s. a.
after three [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=34) or four days
digestion, decant the distilled Vinegar, and put on fresh; digest as before,
shaking the Vessel often: Repeat this three or four times, or so often, till
the Sp. of V. hath extracted all the Salt. Then put all your Sp. of V.
together and filter it, then distill it off in a Retort, until you see the
Salt of ♄ remain in the bottom like deep­red Oyl, which being cold, will be
white like Sugar-candy: Grind this Salt, and put it into a Matrass, and
extract it with Sp. of V. as before. Repeat this purification three or four
times, and you shall have a Salt of ♄ well prepared for this Work.

### 1.30. An A. F. to be used in this Work.

TAke Salt ℥iv. Nitre lbj. mix them well together with lbijss. of Powder of
bricks; put all in a Retort, and distill by gradua­ted 🜂, forcing over the
Spirit strongly at last: The distillation will be performed in sixteen or
eighteen hours.

Take ☿ seven parts, fine ☽ one part; make an aaa, which put into a Retort, and
pour upon it so much of the A. F. as may cover it a large fingers breadth: Let
it stand twenty four hours, then distill it in Sand; when it is cold, cohobate
the distilled A. F. upon it again, and distill as before. Repeat [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=34) this three or
four times; then break the Re­tort, being cold, and take out the aaa, which
grind to a fine Powder, and put it in an Iron pan, and hold it over a coal 🜂,
stirring it continually with an Iron Rod, un­til it be almost red-hot, and
that it be con­verted into a red Powder, like red 🝟tate. Take of this red
Powder two parts, and of the aforesaid Salt of ♄ one part, reduce them to a
fine Powder, which put into a Matrass, and digest it in Sand for eight days:
Then put it to Coppel, and you shall have half your aaa fixed into fine ☽.

Hart. When Sir K. D. was at Franckfort in Germany, where he lived a year and
half, in the Year 1659. he went often from Franck­fort to Ments (being four
German Leagues distance) to Visit the Prince Elector there: Then he conversed
also with this Captain Ziegler, who was a famous Chymist. And when Sir K.
returned to England about the time of the Kings happy Restauration, the said
Captain sent him this Process written in the German Tongue, assuring him that
he had done it: He said, that the ☽ which he got, he put to separating 🜄, and
he had some ☉ out of it. He said also, that he thought this Salt of ♄ would
fix ☿, in ☉ if the aaa were made with ☉ instead of ☽.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=35)

### 1.31. A Work upon Cinaber, wrought by Monsieur Sauvage.

TAke Nitre and 🜹, ana, which dissolve in Rain 🜄; filter and evaporate to
dryness: Then grind this double Salt to sub­til Powder; take a large Crucible,
in the bottom whereof put a bed of Quick-lime in Powder, upon that put a bed
of this Salt, cover it with another bed of Quick-lime the same quantity as
before, taking two parts of Quick-lime to one of Salt. Cover the Cruc. with
another, without luting them; put this in a Bakers Oven after the Bread is
drawn, let it stand as long as there is any heat in the Oven; when the Oven
hath been heated again, and the Bread drawn, set it in again; do this three
times: Then keep it in a strong 🜂 for six hours, and being cold, take it out,
and put it into 🜄, and let it boyl in an earthen Pot eight or ten walms. Then
filter it hot, and evaporate to a dry Salt, which put in a strong Bottle, and
keep it close stopped in a dry place: Then take two parts of this Salt, and of
Salt of ♄ one part, mix and dissolve them in distilled Vi­negar.

Then take Cinaber, pulverize it, and make a Paste thereof with the yolk of an
[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=35) Egg; of
this Paste make little Cakes in the shape of the heads of Horse-shoe-nails;
make them pretty thick, and put them in an earthen Pot, pouring upon them of
the aforesaid dissolution, so much as may cover them the breadth of three or
four fingers; boyl this together until it come to be like Honey: Put more
distilled Vinegar upon the Cakes, and boyl it as before. Continue this for
three days; then wash the Cakes in fair 🜄, and you will find them something
Metal­lized. Filter the 🜄, and evaporate to a Salt, which will serve again
for the same use, adding Salt of ♄.

Take of the fixed Salt without Salt of ♄, and of good Venice Ceruse ana equal
parts, grind and mix them well together; then put a bed thereof about the
thickness of a Crown, into an Iron Box, then put a bed of Plates of ☽ upon
that, and then the Powder again upon the ☽, the same quantity as before; upon
that put a bed of your lumps of Cina­ber, then Powder, then Plates of ☽, then
the Powder again; and thus continue stra­tifying until your Box be full, the
Powder being the first and last: Then put on the cover of the Box, which you
must fasten, and secure, it well with Iron hooks. Then you must have another
Box of Iron, made big enough to contain the first, and that there [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=36) be the space of
a fingers breadth between, at the bottom, on the sides, and at the top; the
Boxes must be square, and you must have two Iron hoops made in the shape of a
Crown with crankles; put one of them into the bigger Box, turning the teeth or
crankles downwards, upon which set the lesser Box; put some pieces of Iron on
the sides, to keep the lesser Box at an equal distance from the sides of the
bigger: Then put on the other hoop upon the lesser Box, keep it down with some
heavy thing whilst you pour in some melted ♄ into the bigger Box, so much as
may cover the lesser Box a fingers breadth. Then put on the cover of the
bigger Box, and fasten it with Iron hoops and wedges to keep it close: Then
the Box being yet hot, put it into an Athanor where the 🜂 is kind­led, let
the Registers be shut, so that there be but a very moderate heat, such as
where you may endure your hand; continue the first degree for three days, so
that all that while the ♄ may be but melted, then increase the heat for three
days more; and so in­creasing the heat every third day, continue in all three
weeks; the last three days the 🜂 must be very vehement. Then let all cool,
and take out your lumps, and reverberate them with very gentle heat for twelve
hours, and they will be of a whitish-gray colour. [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=36) Then melt ♄ in a
Cruc. and cast these lumps into it, digest this Matter together for three
days, then put it to Coppel. Note, that if you cast this Mass into melted ☽,
and digest it three days before you Coppel it, you shall have more profit than
if you test it without digesting it.

Note also, that if you will continue your Work, you need not use any more
Plates of ☽, but only the Cakes as they are, and be­fore they are
reverberated, using them in­stead of the ☽, being pulverized, and they will be
the more fixed, and the profit will prove very considerable.

You must have of ☽ and Cinaber ana ℥vj. and of the double Salt and Ceruse ana
℥iv.

### 1.32. Tincture of Mars.

DIssolve filings of ♂ in A. F. made of Vitriol, Nitre, Allom, and Cinaber;
then pour upon this dissolution distilled Vi­negar, double the weight of the
A. F. shake it well together, and digest in B. for three days, then decant the
clear, and filter it; evaporate it gently: Then grind it with two parts of ☿
🝞mate, Sublime the ☿ from it four times; then dissolve it again in distilled
Vinegar, and evaporate it gently; then dis­solve it in distilled Rain 🜄, and
congeal it [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=37) gently: Repeat
this last solution till it is not corrosive upon the Tongue; then in ℥iv. of
Rectified Spirit of Vitriol dissolve ℥j. of this Sulphur of ♂, and ℥ij. of
Sulphur of ☉ made the same way, except the first solution of the ☉, which must
be an A. R. made of Salt, Nitre, and Vitriol; mix these two last solu­tions
together, and digest in fimo, then co­agulate it gently, dissolve again in
Spirit of Vitriol, and coagulate: Repeat this seven times, and if any feces
remain at last, leave them out. Try this Medicine upon a hot Plate of ☽, if it
penetrate and tinge it through­ly without smoking, it is a sign of its
per­fection; but if it smoak, you must dissolve it again, and gently
coagulate. Then melt ℥j. of ☉, and cast upon it by little and little ℥j. of
this Medicine, and when all is enterd and incorporated with the ☉, cast it in
In­got, and you shall have a Matter as brittle as Glass, and transparent like
a dark Gra­nade stone, and fusible as ♄. Then melt fine ☉ and fine ☽ ana, and
project of this Medicine upon it, and you shall have pure ☉.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=37)

### 1.33. To fix a quarter part of ☽ into ☉.

TAke filings of ☽ ℥j. aaamate it with ℥iv. of ☿, put this aaa in a Retort, and
distill off the ☿; take the ☽ and re­ aaamate it with the distilled ☿; distill
as be­fore. Repeat this three or four times, and the ☽ will be a Powder
impalpable. Take 🜹 and Cinaber ana ℥jss. ☿ 🝞mate ℥ss. grind and mix them
well together with the ☽: Then 🝞me it with gentle heat, mix what is 🝞med
with that which remaineth in the bottom, and Sublime as before. Then take both
Feces and 🝞mate and mix it with Sul­phur of ♀ and Crocus Martis, and of a
Re­gulus made of  (antimony), ♂, and ♀, ana ℥ss. grind all together with a
little 🜹. Then Sublime it four times with gentle heat, adding every time a
little 🜹, because it openeth the body of ♂ and ♀, and uniteth them with the
☽. Then grind all well together, and digest it in the following 🜄. Take
Nitre, Vitriol, ana lbj.  (antimony), Sulphur, Verdigrease, and Auri­pigmentum
ana ℥iv. Make an A. F. of this, s. a. Or take common A. F. lbj. distill and
cohobate it three or four times upon the said Materials, giving strong 🜂 at
last: Then put your Powder into a Retort, and pour upon it so much of the A.
F. as may [[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=38)
cover it the breadth of three fingers, distill it off with a gentle 🜂, then
cohobate and distill three or four times: Then put fair 🜄 into the Retort,
and digest for five or six days in Sand; then evaporate to dryness: Then take
out this Matter and pulverize it, and weigh it. Then melt as much ♄ as you
have Powder, and cast your Powder upon it by parcels, melt it with a strong
🜂, then let it stand in the 🜂 until the 🜂 go out of it self; then take it
out, and you will find a Regulus in the Cruc. which Coppel, and then put the ☽
to separating 🜄, and you shall have a fourth part of fine ☉.

### 1.34. A Work with Butter of  (antimony).

THE Work, which Monsieur Perdussin of Lyons communicated to P. A. Dieu­doné,
is to make a Butter of  (antimony) with  (antimony) Mine­ral, and ☿ 🝞mate,
ana lbj, Of this take ℥ij. and digest it in a Matrass sealed Hermetically in
an Athanor, and it will putrifie, growing as black as pitch; then pass the
Colours: That done, take one part of leaf ☉, and three of this Powder; grind
them well to­gether, and digest as before, it will become black as at first,
and pass all the Colours. This proportion of ☉ for ferment, you may divide
into several parcels, for several times, [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=38) so each
Revolution will be shorter, when the whole dose of ☉ hath fermented the first
stone: This product serveth for ferment to multiply in quantity and quality.
The P. wrought the first part, and had perfect pu­trefaction.

### 1.35. An Excellent fusible Salt.

P. Benin de Beaune maketh his fusible Salt thus: Decrepitate and Reverberate
Salt, then dissolve it in fair 🜄, filter and congeal. Repeat all this Work
four or five times: Being perfectly pure, dissolve it in Spirit of Vinegar,
filter and congeal; re­peat this with distilled Vinegar once again: Then it is
perfectly fundant.

### 1.36. Another fusible Salt.

DIssolve Salt in Rain 🜄, filter and con­geal; when the 🜄 is almost
evapora­ted, and that the Salt falls to the bottom, take it out with a wooden
Spoon by little and little, until the 🜄 is exhaled: Grind this Salt (being
very dry) and reverberate it in an Earthen Vessel close luted; let the Ves­sel
be red in the 🜂, but the Salt must not melt; so soon as you see the Vessel
red, let it stand until the 🜂 is gone out: Then grind [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=39) it and
reverberate it as before; dissolve and congeal as before. Repeat this until it
is perfectly fundant. Note, that you must not decrepitate your Salt.

### 1.37. An Operation with a Martial Regulus of  (antimony), wrought by
Monsieur Toysonnier.

HE made a yellow Martial Regulus thus: Ignifie ℥iv. of Nails in a Crucible,
then put upon it ℥viij. of good  (antimony), and give strong 🜂 in a wind
Furnace, to make all melt well, which to promote, cast in some Salt-petre,
then cast it in an  (antimony) Horn, and separate the Feces from the Reg.
Ignifie ℥ij. of Nails more, and cast thereon the Feces (this Work must be done
presently after the first) adding Salt-petre to make all melt well and clear:
Then cast it in a Horn, and separate the scories from it, and wash it clean;
it will be first white, but after a day or two will be yellow within as well
as without.

Take of this Reg. and of ☽, ana ℥ss. melt them well together (he poured a
little ☿ in them when they were near ready to con­geal, and stirred with an
Iron Rod, but the Mass took in little above ℥j. of ☿.) Beat it to Powder, add
to it eight or ten parts of ☿, and grind exceedingly till they incorporate,
(which required about twelve compleat [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=39) hours, often
heating the Matter and Instru­ments.) Then squeeze away so much ☿, that there
remain only six parts; digest it three days in Sand by degrees, at last, very
hot. Put the remaining Calx to Coppel with four charges of ♄, adding a little
fresh ☽ to make it work better. Put the Mass, au depart, and you shall have
twenty six gr. of good ☉.

Hartman.) The said Monsieur Toyson­nier was Sir Kenelm's Operator; he was a
French-man, and a very able Chymist, Sir K. brought him over with him from
Paris, 1660.

### 1.38. Butter of  (antimony) to Extract the Tincture of ☉.

DIgest Butter of  (antimony) six weeks or two Months, and then put it upon a
well opened Calx of ☉, and digest it, and the B. will extract the Tincture of
☉, which digest, &c.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=40)

### 1.39. To fix ☽ into ☉; given me by an Intimate Friend, who told me that he
wrought it as followeth, taking his hints out of Lul­ly's Experiments.

HE made a Mercurial 🜄, as he teacheth, by his Vessel with three Bouls in
three Furnaces (which Mercurial 🜄 will return again into running ☿ after a
little digestion) and to this he put some pure white Salt of Tartar, and some
☿ 🝟tate, that had been 🝟tated by it self with three or four Month [...]
digestion, and some Calx of ☽ exceedingly well opened, and very subtil: This
he di­gested a good while, and drew off the 🜄, and cohobated several times,
after which he did put some Tincture of ♂ unto it, and digested and cohobated
anew; and in the end he found almost all the ☽ converted into ☉, that endureth
all Tryals, but it was a little pale. In Lully you may find Directi­ons to
make all the things that were used in this Work. The Salt of Tartar, was but
the fixed, reduced to its highest purity; but it should have been Volatilised,
and made to pass over with the Mercurial 🜄, to acuate and animate it. He
believeth the great Work is to be made with a Mercurial 🜄, animated with a
Volatile Salt of Tartar, to [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=40) serve for a
Menstruum or Alcahest to dissolve ☉ and ☽. Weigh well what Lully saith of
these things.

### 1.40. Mallus his Process to fix ☽: Wrought by Mon­sieur Ferrier, and given
me by him, 1660.

TAke an A. F. made of equal parts of Vitriol and Nitre, pour of it upon
Sulphur and 🜹, ana (four parts of A. F. to one of Powder) distill it off to
dryness, and make Sublime what will. Melt ℥iv. of ☽, cast upon it ℥ss of
Sublimed Salt when the ☽ is in good fusion: After it is entred cast in Ingot,
melt again; and project a new Packet of Salt, doing all as before: Do this
four times, so spending ℥ij. of Salt upon ℥iv. of ☽. Then put it au depart.

### 1.41. To fix ☽ by a Mercurial Water.

MAke Mercurial Water by means of an Earthen Retort that hath a Pipe or Spout
behind in the upper part, through which you cast in the  (antimony) when the
Retort is red-hot. Take of this 🜄 (well rectified) ten parts, and one of a
well rectified Oyl of Vitriol; distill them together, till they be perfectly
united: Then take of this Men­struum [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=41) ten parts, and
one of a well Calci­ned ☉; digest them together in a Matrass (Sealed
Hermetically) until the ☉ is well dissolved: Then take it out, and put the
Matter into a low Cucurbite, and distill un­til the drops come Acid. Then let
it cool, and put the Matter into a Matrass, Seal it Hermetically, and digest
in an Athanor, un­til it be perfectly fixed into a red Powder.

### 1.42. Monsieur Bertault's Tincture of ☉ by Venus.

TAke Sulphur and Borax, ana, melt them together three times, grinding the
mat­ter every time; then melt ☉ and ♀ ana, and cast upon them of the said
Composition, until the ♀ be reduced to aes ustum; then cast in Ingot, and beat
it with a Hammer, to cause the aes ustum to scale off from the ☉. Then melt
this ☉ again, and project as be­fore. Repeat this three times, and you shall
have a ☉ as red as blood, and this Tincture will hold the Test.

Note, that when you beat your ☉, if you see that the aes ustum do not all
scale off from the ☉, you must melt it again, and project more of your
Composition until it come all off in scales, and be all separated from the ☉,
which it ought to do at every time.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=41)

### 1.43. To fix ☽ into ☉.

DIstill from ☿ 🝞mate a Spirit, wherein dissolve an aaa of ☉ and ☿ into a
white Powder, which digest in Ashes until it be as red as Cinaber. Then
dissolve it in A. R. into a red water, which reduce again to Powder, which
project upon ☽.

### 1.44. Another Tincture of ☽.

DIssolve ℥j. of ☉ in A. R. and ℥iij. of ☽ in A. F. Precipitate them, and then
unite them together, and distill their Spiritual Essence, which by degrees of
heat fix into a Blood-red Powder, which tingeth ☽ into ☉.

### 1.45. An Operation with ☉ and ☿ of  (antimony): Wrought by Monsieur
Chambulan, and given me by him.

TAke lbiij. of good Salt of Tartar, Cal­cine it, so that it be glowing hot for
twenty four hours, in a Pot close luted; then dissolve it in flegm of Brandy,
filter, and evaporate; Calcine it again as before, dissolve and congeal as
before. Repeat all this Work four or five times, or until it leave [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=42) no more Feces in
the filter: Then Calcint this Salt again for six hours, and then pul­verize it
whilst it is yet hot, and put it in a large Cucurbite, and pour upon it by
little and little of good Nants Brandy, so much as may cover it the breadth of
four fingers, cover it with a blind head, or with another Cucurbite, that may
enter into it, lute well the junctures, and digest in warm Sand for six days;
then put on a head with a Lim­beck and a Recipient, and distill over with a
gentle heat all the S. V. then let it cool, and pour on fresh Brandy, digest,
and di­still as before. Repeat this Operation five or six times, or so often
till your Salt of Tar­tar remain in the bottom like a red and trans­parent
Oyl, which will be very fiery and penetrating, reducing all Metals into
run­ning ☿, being first duly prepared; keep this Oyl close stopped.

Then take lbviij. of the Ashes of burned Vines, whereof make a strong Lixivium
with lbxx. of fair 🜄, then in lbxij. of this Lixivium; dissolve lbj. of Salt
of Tartar, filter this dissolution, and digest it in Sand with a strong 🜂 for
some time; then call into it lbj. of Regulus of  (antimony), that hath been
melted and purified six or seven times with Tartar and Salt-petre, and then
reduced to a subtil Powder: Make it boy [...] for six hour, [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=42) until the
Lixivium be very red and stinking; then let it settle and cool, and decant the
clear, and wash the Powder with fair 🜄, then dry it, and grind it upon a
stone, im­bibing it with the red Oyl of Tartar before-mentioned, until it be
like a Pap, then dry it, and imbibe it again, and grind as before. Repeat this
so often till the Powder hath ta­ken in double its weight of the said Oyl of
Tartar: Then put this Matter in a Body with a blind head, lute well all the
junctures, and digest in fimo for twenty days; then take it out, and you will
find your Powder converted into running ☿, which wash well with hot 🜄, then
with Salt and Vine­gar, and then with fair 🜄, then squeeze it through Chambo-
leather. Then take ℥x. of this ☿ of  (antimony), and ℥x. of Common ☿ that hath
been distilled over in a Retort with Tar­tar and Quick-lime, and then washed
with Salt and Vinegar; mix these two Mercuries together and squeeze them
through a leather, then put them in a Cucurbite, lute another, Cucurbite upon
it, and digest in fimo for fifteen days, then put a head to it with a Limbeck,
and distill in Ashes, and all the Common ☿ will distill over drop by drop
[...]s 🜄, and the ☿ of  (antimony) will remain in the bot­tom like a clear
Oyl, and will be of a fra­grant scent: Rectifie the 🜄 in Ashes, and [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=43) the Oyl with a
stronger ℥ in Sand, and keep them by themselves. Then melt ℥j. of ☉, and ℥j.
of ☽, then cast in Ingot, and beat it into leaf, or reduce it into fine
filings, and make an aaa with ☿, distill this aaa in a Retort until all the ☿
is distilled over; then put this aaa in a Matrass, and pour upon it ℥x. of the
Mercurial Water before-men­tioned: Digest it, and in a few hours all will be
dissolved. Put this dissolution in a Retort, lute a Recipient to it, and
having luted well the junctures, distill in Sand, and all will distill over
except a few black Feces; dephlegm it with a gentle heat in B. M. di­stilling
untill nothing more come over. Take of that which remaineth in the bottom of
the Cucurbite ℥iv. put it in a strong Ma­trass, and put to it ℥viij. of your
Oyl of ☿ of  (antimony); Seal it well, and digest it with a Lamp 🜂 in Ashes,
and in fourty days all will be fixed into a red stone; then take out the
Ma­trass, and put it to a strong 🜂 in Sand to Sublime it for twenty four
hours, and all will melt like an Oyl, which will congeal in a cold place into
a red stone.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=43)

### 1.46. Fermentation.

TAke ℥iv. of this red stone, pulverize it, and stratifie it with ℥j. of ☉ in
leaf be­tween two Crucibles well luted; put this to a Circulary 🜂 by degrees
for six hours, then cover it with Coals, so that it may melt and unite well
together: Project ℥j. of this Powder upon ℥x. of boyling ☿ (well puri­fied)
and all will be converted into a Me­dicine, which will project upon great
quan­tity of ☿, transmuting it into fine ☉.

### 1.47. Elixir of  (antimony), ☉, and ☿.

TAke good Mineral  (antimony), mortifie it with ra­dicated Vinegar; then
separate its Quintessence with pure S. V. With that Quintessence dissolve ☿
duplicatum of  (antimony), that both become an Oyl, which unite with a subtil
Calx of ☉, and bring them to an in­combustible Oyl, which will transmute ☿
into ☉.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=44)

### 1.48. Elixir ex ☉ & ☽.

DIssolve O (well purified by  (antimony)) in A. R. then reduce it into a
blood-red Oyl with radicated Vinegar, and Tartarised S. V. Then with this Oyl
imbibe a natural Sul­phur of ☽, and fix them by graduated 🜂. This is a high
Projection upon ☽.

### 1.49. Elixir Album.

SUblime ☿ three times from Vitriol and Salt-petre, then in hot Sand fix it so,
that in strong heat it may not rise, which may be performed in three weeks
time: Then Cal­cine it in a close Reverberatory 🜂, and it will be ready for
solution. Then take the Water which distilled over in Subliming the ☿, and
dissolve in it a little 🜹, and ☿ 🝞 mate, with this solution mix Calcined
Vitriol to the thickness of Honey, digest in fimo o [...] and twenty days:
Then distill by degrees: little at a time (for it yieldeth a very fiery
Spirit) let the Recipient be large. When all is come over that will, rectifie
it; then in this Spirit dissolve the afore-said fixed ☿, so is the Menstruum
prepared.

Then take a white Calx of ♃, pour up­on it so much of this Menstruum as will
[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=44) cover it,
let it stand eight days as before [...] Repeat this till the Calx will take in
no more of the said Menstruum, then let it stand till it become first black,
and then white, Sub­liming it self above the Caput Mortuum, from which
carefully separate the white, and that is Sulphur naturae Iovis, which put
in­to a little Matrass and fix it, (which may also be done by frequent
🝞mation) make also Sulphur naturae ☽ in the same manner, and with the same
Menstruum, which dis­solve into Oyl in B. with which imbibe the said Sulphur
naturae Iovis untill it be fusible, and then it will transmute ♃ into ☽.

### 1.50. Elixir Rubrum.

TAke Vitriol of ♀ well purified by Solu­tions and Coagulations, unite it with
Liquor of ☿ 🝞mate and 🜹, then distill a 🜄 from it in Ashes; then having
stood (cold) twenty four hours, distill more 🜄 from it. Repeat this until the
remaining Matter be well broken; then joyn all the distilled wa­ters to it
again, and digest it in fimo for 40 days: Then distill its Spirit, with which
imbibe the remaining Earth; dry it with a gentle heat, then imbibe again, and
dry as before: Repeat this till the Earth hath im­bibed all its 🜄. Then
distill it, and you [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=45) shall have a
Philosophical ☿, and what Sub­limeth is the Sulphur, which keep apart. Repeat
the imbibition and distillation, till no more Sulphur will ascend; with this
Sul­phur imbibe half its weight of the ☿, put them into a Matrass, which Seal
Hermeti­cally, and fix them together; and this Work must be repeated four
times, every time with the same proportion of the said Philo­sophical ☿. Then
fix this Matter in a Ves­sel Sealed Hermetically by degrees of 🜂, and all the
colours will appear one after ano­ther, until it become white, and lastly, to
an incombustible red.

Take one part of this red Powder, cast it upon ten parts of Sublimed ☿, set it
to pu­trifie for thirty days, and it will become Oyl, which being Projected
upon boyling ☿, will transmute it into pure ☉.

The said red Powder being infused in Wine over Night, and drank in the
Morn­ing, Cureth most Diseases in Mans Body.

### 1.51. The best way to Extract the ☿ of ♀.

SUblime Flowers of  (antimony) after Glauber's way, in great quantity, in
casting the  (antimony) in Powder upon kindled Coals in a Furnace with many
Pots one upon another, wherein the Flowers settle. The Flowers which are
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=45)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=46)

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=46) in the
last or highest Pots must be received into running ☿, by distilling them in a
Retort with two parts of Soot, and one of black Soap. Those in the middle, by
black Soap and Salt of Tartar: Those that are in the lowermost Pots, by Soap
only, with a little Salt of Tartar, not much, lest it should reduce the
Flowers into Regulus.

The Furnace must be round, and well made every where, then set a cover upon it
like a Funnel, and the Pots upon that; then fill the Furnace with Coals, and
let them be well kindled before you cast in the  (antimony), that the Flowers
may be pure and white; then cast in the  (antimony) through a hole, which must
be on the side of the cover: And thus you shall Sublime lbj. of Flowers in an
hour. (See the first Figure.)

The Process teacheth to set fifteen or six­teen Pots one upon another; but I
think five or six may do as well.

### 1.52. To Extract ☿ of ☽ or ♄.

DIssolve filings of ♄ in A. F. one part, and fair 🜄 two parts, Precipitate
the Calx with Salt of Tartar, then add crude Tartar to this Calx, and boyl
them toge­ther a long time; at last, revive it with hot 🜄, and you shall have
a fluid and running ☿. [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=47) In the same
manner you may proceed with ☽.

### 1.53. To make a Minera of ☿ of Antimony, ad Infinitum.

TAke of the ☿ revived from the Flow­ers above-mentioned ℥viij. Sublime it with
Salt and Vitriol, according to Art: Then take of this ☿ Sublimate and
(antimony) in fine Powder, equal parts, mix them well to­gether, and distill a
Butter thereof, giving gentle fire for four hours, then distill with a strong
fire, and the ☿ will distill in great quantity. Note, that when the Butter is
come over, before you increase the fire to drive over the ☿, you must change
the Re­cipient, putting on another full of water impregnated with 🜹. Then
take the Cina­ber and mix it with black Soap and a little Salt of Tartar; then
distill, and you shall have near the whole quantity in running ☿. That which
remaineth in the bottom is the true Sulphur of  (antimony), of which make a
Lixi­vium with 🜄, and Precipitate the Sul­phur.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=47)

### 1.54. Another way to Extract the ☿ of Antimony by an A. R. Given me by
Monsieur Car­ton.

TAke Salt-petre of the first boyling with­out refining it any more, and
Vitriol and 🜹, whereof make A. R. after the Dutch way of making A. F. where
they put an hundred pound of Matter into a large Iron Pot with a large earthen
head, to which they joyn a large stone-receiver or a stone Pitcher: The
junctures all well luted with a lute made of Sand, Quick-lime, and Wa­ter:
They gave 🜂 by degrees, at last very strong; the distillation will be
performed in twelve hours. Then let all cool, and take out the A. R. Note,
that in distilling this A. R. if your Recipient be not very large, it will be
needful to keep wet Cloaths doubled upon the Rec. to abate and con­dense the
violence of the Spirits.

Then take  (antimony) Mineral in fine Powder, which put into large Jar-
glasses, such as they keep thin Sweet-meats in, which are as large at the top
as at the bottom: You must have many of these Glasses, but put not too much
into one Glass, pour a good quantity of the A. R. above-mentioned upon this
(antimony); stir and shake them well together by turning [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=48) the Glass in
your hands (several times a day) for ten, twelve, or fifteen days, keep­ing
the Glasses slightly covered with a wooden cover: And if you put these Vessels
to digest in some gentle heat, it will be the better.

Note, that the Secret consisteth in well opening the body of the ☿ by the A.
R. And therefore when the time of the digestion is ended, and that you see the
☿ is dissolved, or reduced into a white Calx at the bottom, stir it well
together, that the A. R. which is at the top, may become as white as Milk.
Then pour off this white Liquor (which containeth in it the Atomes of the
(antimony), which are very light, and are easily raised in the A. R. and are
well opened) and let it settle, until all the white Atomes are settled to the
bottom, and that the A. R. be clear at the top, which decant and put it back
upon the  (antimony), where you poured it off, which was not dissolved; stir
it and digest it as before, then decant the white Liquor as before. Repeat
this until you have reduced all the ☿ into Atomes or white Liquor: [...] Then
put all your white Liquors and dissolved  (antimony) together with the A. R.
into a Retort, and distill first all the A. R. with a gentle heat, until you
see the  (antimony) almost dry, but not hard nor quite dry. Then change the
Receiver, putting [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=48) on another large
Ballon of Glass with four or five quarts of 🜄 impregnated with lbj. of 🜹:
Distill by graduated 🜂for eight hours, then put some coals about the Retort
upon the Sand; give at last very vehement 🜂 above and below, for four hours
more, at last, as vehement as possibly may be, and you shall see the Rec.
filled with white fumes, which will revive into running ☿ in the water in the
Recipient, and part of these white fumes will become a thicker sub­stance,
like melted ♄, and part like Mer­curius vitae; but of what consistence soever
they are, you may easily revive them all in­to running ☿, by washing them in
warm water.

The ☿ of ♄ is made in the same manner, but in greater quantity, taking Oar of
♄ instead of  (antimony) Mineral.

### 1.55. To Extract the ☿ of  (antimony), or of ♄. Wrought several times by
Monsieur Van Outre, Phy­sician of Brussels.

TAke Antimony Mineral, (or a Calx of ♄) in subtil Powder, imbibe it with
Spirit of Salt until it be like Pap: Digest it seven or eight days, or longer;
then di­still to dryness: Then change the Recipient, putting on another filled
with 🜄, impreg­nated [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=49) with 🜹. Distill
it gradually s. a. and you shall have running ☿.

Sir Kenelm.) This Extraction is upon the same Foundation as that which
Monsieur Corton gave me, with an A. R. which he hath done often.

### 1.56. Butter of  (antimony) without Sublimate, to Extract ☿ of
(antimony).

TAke  (antimony) one part, Salt decrepitated two parts, and Vitriol Calcined
to whiteness four parts; reduce all into a fine Powder, mix them well
together, and cast them by little and little into a Retort red-hot through a
Spout in the upper part of the Retort, as Glauber teacheth; or distill it in a
Glass Re­tort luted, in a naked 🜂, and you shall have a Butter like unto that
which is made of Sub­limate.

Note, that you may rectifie this Butter for other Operations with Soot and
Coal-dust.

[[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=49)

### 1.57. To Extract the ☿ of  (antimony) with this Butter, proceed thus.

PRecipitate this Butter with warm 🜄, then dry the Powder, and mix it with one
part of black Soap, and two parts of Soot; distill in a Retort into a
Recipient full of 🜄 impregnated with 🜹, and you shall have a running ☿,
which is the Sperma of ☿ of  (antimony).

### 1.58. Another way.

TAke the Precipitated Powder of the a­fore-said Butter of  (antimony), and dry
it gently, then mix it with ℥iv [...] of Tartar, and ℥viij. of Quick-lime, and
℥ij. of 🜹; distill this in a Retort s. a.

Note, that the Calx of ☽, and that of ♄ may be Precipitated with Butter of
(antimony), and then a running ☿ may be distilled from them.

### 1.59. To Extract a ☿ out of ☽.

DIssolve ☽ in A. R. and then Precipi­tate it with Spirit of Urine, or with a
dissolution of 🜹 dissolved in distilled Vine­gar, and it will attract what
there is of ♀ [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=50) in the ☽, and
the remaining Calx of ☽ is the running ☿, which is transmuted into ☉ by the
Sal Enixe.

### 1.60. Another way to Extract the ☿ of  (antimony).

TAke lbj. of  (antimony) in subtil Powder, boyl it in a Lixivium made of
Quick-lime and Pot-Ashes, let it boyl for two hours, then let it settle, and
decant the clear; then put more Lixivium upon the  (antimony), boyl it as
before. Repeat this so often till there be no more Sulphur in the  (antimony),
which you may know by pouring distilled Vinegar into the decanted Lixivium,
when there Precipitates no more Sulphur, or when it changes no more. Then
edulcorate well the residue of the  (antimony), and dry it, then grind it with
℥iv. of Salt of Tartar, and as much of 🜹, and ℥viij. of Vitriol; put this to
Sublime with a gentle 🜂 at first, and at last very strong 🜂 for seven or
eight hours, and all will be Sublimed.

Make this Sublimate, and mix it with equal weight of Quick-lime, distill it in
a Retort into a Recipient almost full of 🜄 impregnated with 🜹, and you shall
have a running ☿ of  (antimony). In the same manner you may Extract the ☿ of
♄, taking Calx of ♄ instead of  (antimony).

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=50)

### 1.61. Mercury of all Metals.

TAke Salt of Tartar, and Powder of Pebble-stones, mix them well together, and
cast them upon burning Coals, and there will ascend a Spirit, which must be
received, which hath a Vertue to convert the Calx of Metals into running ☿.

### 1.62. A great Secret, ☿ of  (antimony), and other Metals, ad infinitum.

TAke ☿ of  (antimony), Sublime it with Salt and Vitriol in the ordinary
manner, with­out Calcining the Materials. Take of this ☿ 🝞mate, and
(antimony) in Powder, ana; distill a Butter thereof: Then take the Cinaber,
and grind it with that which resteth in the bot­tom of the Retort, and distill
a ☿ thereof, which will serve for the like Work. Let the Butter resolve in the
Air into a Liquor upon a Marble stone, or upon Glass in a moist place, then
pour of this Liquor upon  (antimony) in a Cucurbite; digest in Sand for two
days, then distill it, and there will come over a red Oyl with the flegm,
which is the Sulphur, or ☿ of  (antimony), or a natural Oyl of  (antimony):
For if you leave this Menstruum with the Oyl in the open Air for two or three
[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=51) hours,
the Oyl will Precipitate to the bot­tom in a red Powder, which will burn like
common Sulphur. Mix this red Powder with two parts of Soot, and one of Soap,
put it in a Retort, and distill it, and it will revive into running ☿, which
will distill in­to the Rec. which must be almost full of 🜄 impregnated with
🜹.

In the same manner you may also Extract ☿ out of other Metals, mixing this Oyl
with their Calx, Soot and Soap. The said Men­struum will serve again, putting
it upon new  (antimony), Extracting new Sulphur from the same, or red Oyl,
which Precipitateth into Sul­phur, as was said, or into running ☿ by
Re­vivification. And in this manner you may make a perpetual Minera of ☿ of
(antimony), and of other Metals, ad infinitum.

Note, that other Metals must be in very subtil Calx well opened, that the said
Men­struum may act the better upon them.

Note, that if the Salt of the Earth be well Extracted, and reduced to a Salt
Enixe [...] wonderful Operations may be done with it; and if you take of this
Salt Enixe and of Vi­triol, and make a Sublimate thereof with ☿ of
(antimony), and then a Butter of this ☿ 🝞mate and  (antimony) Mineral, and
joyn this Butter with one part of the Lunary Butter, made as was taught, and
with that make a dissolution of ☉, [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=51) you will have an
Aurum potabile, and an universal Medicine; and without doubt a Powder of
Projection upon baser Metals. This Matter is an admirable Chalybs or Mag­net
of the Spirit of the World, being expo­sed to the open Air for some time, and
then put in a Vessel, and Sealed Hermetically, and digested for fourty days
(or fifty) you will see such effects, as will promise a happy success, and yet
better, if you add the Sulphur of ☉ drawn with Regulus of  (antimony): But
this requires the Conduct of an able Operator.

### 1.63. To prepare the Common ☿, so that it will have all the Qualities and
Properties of ☿ of  (antimony), and will be as Powerful to Vo­latilize ☉.

AMalgamate lbij. of ☿ with lbj. of ♃, thus: Melt the ♃ in a Crucible, then
take it off from the 🜂, and being near ready to congeal, pour the ☿ upon it,
and stir them well together with a stick, then cast it into fair 🜄. Then with
these lbiij. of aaa, grind lbiij. of filings of ♂, and lbiij. of  (antimony),
and all being well mixt, put it in a Retort, and distill over all the ♀ into a
Recipient full of 🜄.

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=52)

### 1.64. Another Excellent Preparation and Anima­tion of ☿.

TAke of Martial Regulus of  (antimony) ℥iij. and ☉ ℥j. melt them together, and
make a Regulus, which pulverize, and then grind it with common ☿, then distill
it seven times, and you shall have a ☿ very pure, and fit for any Operation.

### 1.65. Another way.

AMalgamate lbss. of ☿ with lbj. of ♃ in a Crucible, and being cold, grind with
it lbss. of filings of ♂. Then distill over the ☿ with a strong 🜂.

### 1.66. Another.

GRind ☿ with  (antimony), Quick-lime, and Tar­tar, then distill it.

### 1.67. Another.

TAke ☽ one part, Regulus of  (antimony) two parts, melt them together; then
reduce it in­to very fine Powder, which grind and aaate with ☿, then distill
seven times.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=52)

### 1.68. Another.

JOyn ☿ with Sulphur in the form of a Cinaber, then add Salt of Tartar and
Soap, to the consistence of a Paste, whereof make little Balls, which distill
in a Re­tort.

### 1.69. About a particular Spirit of Nitre.

IT is not a common Spirit of Nitre, but it is a Spirit, which by many
cohobati­ons and distillations rendreth its own Body Volatile in the form of
Snow, which melts with the least heat, and is congealed by cold; and that is
that Acetum acerrimum, which dis­solveth all Metals, and reduceth them to
their first Matter, and perfect Metals being dissolved therein, will be
coagulated, and perfectly fixed, which will change other im­perfect ones into
perfect by Projection.

Take ☽ and ☿, q. v. aaate them toge­ther, then mix this aaa with half its
weight of ♀ 🝞mate, then put it in a Retort, and pour upon it of our Acid
Spirit, and the Matter being well dissolved therein, distill and cohobate upon
the remaining Body so often, till all the Matter be converted into a [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=53) Volatile Spirit,
and nothing remain in the bottom; that which doth not ascend, must be made
Volatile: Then dissolve that Vo­latile again in more of our Acid Spirit, and
distil and cohobate so often upon that which remaineth in the bottom until all
be fixed again, and this fixed Matter render again Volatile, and the Volatile
fix again, until it be tingent and penetrating, and be a fu­sible Salt abiding
in the 🜂.

You must have the Spirit of Natural fu­sible Salt, which is the Principle of
all Me­tals, Vegetables, and Animals; this Spirit being purified and re-united
with its Body (also purified) renders its Body Volatile, and uniteth it self
unseparably with it, and be­cometh a Volatile fusible Salt like Butter, which
congealeth being cold: This Butter dissolveth all Metals, as warm 🜄
dissolveth Ice, and is the true Matter of the great Work, and the
Philosophical ☿.

To prepare the Universal Spirit, which is the Universal Salt, you must purifie
and rectifie it well, and by its means, Volatilize its fixt Body, (also
purified.) For to ren­der the fixt Volatile, the quantity of the Vo­latile
must exceed the fixt; and also to fix the Volatile, the quantity of the fixt
must exceed the Volatile; but the long digestion supplies the quantity of the
fixt, because that which [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=53) is naturally
fixt is contained (although chan­ged for the present) in the Volatile: But the
addition of ☉ (which it dissolveth, and uniteth it self radically with)
shortneth the time, and hastens the fixation: And then to ren­der it from
Volatile fixt by a long digestion; when it is Volatile, it will pass over in a
Retort like Oyl, which will congeal, being cold, and melt with heat; 'tis the
Sperma of Metals. For to fix it the better and the sooner, you must add ☉, and
digest.

### 1.70. An Operation upon ♄: Sent me by Monsieur Boucaud.

#### 1.70.1. The Philosopher's Epilogue.

SOlution and Ablution are one and the same thing, for by Calcination the Bo­dy
is divided into small parts; by putre­faction it is corrupted, and when it is
distil­led, it is reduced into its first Matter, and re­maineth dissolved.

Congelation is a Fixation, Re-union, or Coagulation of the Volatile and
dissolved Body.

By Reduction and Fixation, when this Body is Sublimed, it fatneth, and
resolveth, uniteth, and at last is perfectly coagulated. Thus in these two
Solutions and Coagula­tions, [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=54) are contained
Ablution, Reduction, and Fixation.

### 1.71. Quintessence of ♄; the Universal Dis­solvent.

DIstill fifty or sixty quarts of Vinegar, and before you distill the Vinegar
you must evaporate a fourth part of it, which is nothing but flegm; and for to
render this distilled Vinegar more dissolving, it should be distilled once or
twice from Lees.

Take lbxij. or xv. of good English Li­thargy of Silver, reduce it into fine
Pow­der, and put it into Matrasses of three or four quarts a piece, put lbj.
into each Ma­trass; then pour upon the Powder so much of the distilled
Vinegar, as may cover it the breadth of six Inches; then put them in
di­gestion, with the second degree of 🜂 for two days, shaking the Matrass
three or four times a day, in which time the distilled Vi­negar will be of a
yellow colour, and very sweet. Then decant this distilled Vinegar impregnated
with the Essence of ♄, and put on fresh upon the Lithargy; digest as before;
then put in all the decanted Vinegar and fil­ter it, and distill in several
Cucurbites with a gentle heat three parts of the distilled Vine­gar; put the
remainder in a Cellar, and in 24 [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=54) hours the
greater part of it will be congeal­ed into a substance like Ice; it will
suffice if you distill it off to a Syrup: Then upon this Syrup, pour new
distilled Vinegar, about the same quantity as before, digest twelve hours;
then distill off about the quantity you put on: Put new distilled Vinegar upon
the residue, somewhat more than the first time, digest and distill as before.
Then pour upon it about half the quantity of the said distilled Vinegar that
you put on before, digest and distill as before. Repeat this di­gestion for
twelve hours, and distillation so often, till you find that the distilled
Vine­gar come off in the beginning of the distil­lation so strong as it was
before, which is a sign of a perfect attraction of the universal dissolvent
made by the distilled Vinegar.

Then put your Gums which remained in the Cucurbites into one or several large
Ma­trasses, which stop and lute well, that no­thing may exhale; then put to
digest in B. vapor. or in fimo (which change every six days) for twenty or
thirty days, more or less; for the sign of a sufficient digestion is, when the
Matter cometh to be black, and that it acquireth as it were a stinking scent,
which is a sign of its Mortification, by which it ought to acquire a new Life,
and a Spiri­tual vesture. Then divide this Matter or [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=55) Ceruse into
several parts, which put into se­veral Retorts, which you may do by causing
the Matter to melt with some gentle heat, and then pouring it hot into the
Retorts, for it easily congealeth by cold; and if any of it congeal about the
necks of the Retorts, make it melt, and run down; the Retorts must be of such
a bigness, that at least four parts of them may remain empty. Then distill off
all the flegm with a very gentle heat in Sand, and so soon as you perceive any
Fumes or Vapours, cease, and let all cool; then change the Recipient, putting
on a large one, and having well luted it, and the lute dry, give the 🜂 by
degrees, at last very strong and vehe­ment, until you see no more fumes come
over, but that an Oyl or Gum as red as Blood distill over. Take the feces
remain­ing in the Retorts (which will look like black Ashes) and extract the
Salt out of them with distilled Vinegar, as you did with the Lithargy, which
Salt will be in long Rocks like Rock-Salt-petre; and this Salt will be more
subtil than the first: Distill this Salt in a Retort, putting what distilleth
to the first Liquor; out of the feces extract again the Salt, of which distill
also the Spi­rit in a Retort. Proceed thus until the re­maining earth, or
Caput Mortuum giveth no more Salt. Then take all your Spirits, [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=55) and mix them
together, and put it in a large and high Cucurbite, which cover with a double
paper Oyled and dryed; tye it well about the neck of the Cucurbite with a
pack­thread, then put on the head, and lute well the junctures, put on a
pretty large Reci­pient, with a narrow and a short neck; di­stil in B. vapor.
and the Aethereal Spirit will pass over through the paper, and the flegm will
stay behind, because it cannot pass through the Oyled paper; and if your
Spi­rit be not subtil enough, you may rectifie it once or twice with new Oyled
paper; then keep it in a Vessel close stopped in a cold place: Then take off
the Oyled paper, and distill the rest of the Liquor to the consistence of a
red Syrup; put the Cucurbite with the Syrup in a Cellar, and in two days time
there will be many little Crystals very white, which separate, and wash them
in the flegm, and they will be white and pure: Then put the flegm to that
which remained in the Cu­curbite, and distill to a Syrup, which put in a
Cellar to Crystallize as before: Cleanse and wash the Crystals to whiten them,
then put them together upon white paper to dry them for two days in the
shadow; then put them in a Cucurbite narrow and somewhat high, and pour upon
them of the afore-mentioned Aethereal Spirit, so much as may [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=56) cover it the
breadth of three or four fingers [...] digest twenty four hours, then distill
in B. M. All the Spirit will come over, and in the bot­tom will remain a clear
and transparent Gum, upon which pour again the distilled Spirit; digest and
distill as before. Repeat this cohobation and distillation four times, at the
fourth time the said Gum will distill over in the form of an Oyl as white as
snow, swimming upon the Spirit: This Oyl is the ture and only dissolvent of ☉,
separate it from the Spirit by a Funnel. And thus you shall have the
Philosophical Menstruum, the Vegetable, and Mineral Salt, Aurora Dianae, and
the true Philosophical ☿, and the preci­ous 🜄, dissolving the two Luminaries
into a Physical dissolution, with which you may prepare Medicines both for
Health, and for Projection to transmute Metals, which will be both short and
easie, as followeth.

'Tis not enough to have the Menstruum or Philosophical 🜄, for it serveth only
for an Agent or a means to excite the Vegeta­tive quality which is hidden and
buryed in the occult Secrets of the Metalline Nature. And it doth not suffice
only to know that ☉ maketh ☉, and ☽, ☽; but it cannot ren­der them apparent,
except the said Bodies be first discontinued, that is to say, that this
Metalline form be reduced into subtil parts [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=56) attenuated, for
to be afterwards opened and reduced into Calx, of which this Menstru­um easily
draweth the fixt grain or Sperma, the Principle of Vegetation.

Prepare then a slight, spungy, well opened, and attenuated Calx of ☉, which
put in a small Cucurbite, and pour upon it so much of the afore-mentioned
white Oyl as will co­ver it a fingers breadth; digest two or three days with a
gentle heat, then distill over all the Oyl, then pour the Spirit upon the
Calx: Then pour upon this Matter four or five times as much of the above-
mentioned Spi­rit; digest twenty four hours, and the Spirit will be tincted of
a pure red colour, more red than any Ruby, which decant, and dry the remaining
Matter, and pour upon it the same Oyl, and digest twenty four hours, and it
will be very red. Repeat this so long till your ☉ will yield no more tincture.
Then Circulate all your Tinctures in a Pelican for thirty days, and then
separate the clear from an Hypostace which will be at the bottom, and you
shall have the true Aurum potabile, which will be of an admirable vertue,
ta­king three or four drops of it at a time in a little Sack, or other fit
vehicle.

But for the Work, you must separate the Spirit by distillation in Balneo,
until the Tincture remain in the bottom in consist­ence [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=57) of an Oyl, upon
which cohobate the Spirit, and distill as before: Repeat this seven or eight
times, and the said Tincture will remain like an Oyl that will congeal no
more, which is the Philosophical Aurum po­tabile, having a Vegetative vertue,
being sown in its own Earth, which is the Calx of ☉, prepared as shall be
taught hereafter.

### 1.72. The Philosophical Aqua Regis.

TAke Nitre and 🜹, ana ℥iij. reduce them to fine Powder each by it self, then
mix them well together, and put it in a Re­  [...]t of three or four quarts,
and distill in Sand into a very large Recipient, the junct­ures well luted
with paper, and paste made of Flower and 🜄; for if you should take  [...]
stronger Lute, all would break: Give the 🜂 by degrees, untill you see white
fumes in the Recipient in half; an hours time all will come over; then let it
cool, and you will find in the Recipient about ℥jss. and about the neck of the
Retort a Sublimed Salt, which proceeds from the 🜹, which will not dissolve
except in hot 🜄; the Retort being cold, take out the Caput Mortuum as well as
you can, and the Retort being found, put in fresh Matter the same quantity as
before; repeat this till you have 🜄 enough. Then digest [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=57) this 🜄 in Ashes
in an Alembick with a gentle heat to separate the flegm from it, which will be
insipid; then distill the rest in a Re­tort, and keep it for use.

Take ℥j. of ☉ well purified by  (antimony), be [...]t it into thin Plates, cut
them small, and put them in a Crucible and ignifie them: Put ℥vj. of ☿ in
another Crucible, heat it until it begin to smoak, then take it from the 🜂,
and pour it upon the ☉, stir it well toge­ther with a stick until it be well
aaamated, then cast this aaa into a Marble Mortar, grind it well, pouring on
fair 🜄 to wash it from all its blackness and foulness; then squeeze out so
much ☿ of this aaa as you can: Then grind this aaa with equal weight of
prepared Salt; put it in a Retort, and di­still over all the ☿ in Sand into a
Recipient half full of 🜄: The ☿ being all over, in­crease the 🜂 for four
hours, so that the bot­tom of the Retort may be always red in the Sand; then
let all cool, take out the Re­tort and pour hot 🜄 into it, and let it stand
so for an hour, and the 🜄 will dissolve the Salt; pour it out, and pour more
hot 🜄 up­on the Matter; do thus three or four times? Then pour out the ☉ with
the 🜄 into a Poringer, which will be every subtil Pow­der; dry it gently, and
put it in a Matrass, and pour upon it of the above-mentioned [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=58) A. R. about ℥vj.
stop the Matrass with Cot­ton only, and put it to digest in hot Ashes, and in
a few hours it will all be dissolved into a Liquor of an Orange colour,
[...]leaving some impure Earth at the bottom: Upon this dis­solution pour of
the ☿ which you drew off by distillation about twice the quantity of the ☉,
digest it for two or three days, or so long until the ☿ be all dissolved, and
the 🜄 be clear like Rock 🜄, and the ☉ be in the form of a light Spunge in
pieces, swim­ming in the 🜄; separate the 🜄, and wash the ☉ with Salt 🜄
filtred, then wash it in fair 🜄 so often till it be well edulcorated, then
dry this Powder of ☉, and it is pre­pared. For to attenuate it further, and to
render it more Spungeous, mix it with double its weight of Sublimed 🜹, grind
them well together, and put them in a small Cu­curbite with its Head, and
Sublime in Sand all the 🜹. Then grind this 🜹 again with the ☉ and Sublime it
once more, so will the ☉ be well attenuated and opened, and fit to be joyned
with the Vegetable Salt. Then put this Powder of ☉ into a Poringet of stone-
ware, not glazed, and pour upon it some good Oyl of Tartar, dry it gently, and
pour more Oyl upon the Powder, and dry it as before: Repeat this till you have
employed ℥iv. of Oyl of Tartar to ℥j. of [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=58) ☉; then put it
into a Matrass with a short neck, stop it close, and put it in an Iron Pot in
Sand, then cover the Pot with any other Pot, and give 🜂 of reverberation, so
that the ☉ may be red in the Matrass, but not melt; continue the 🜂 in that
degree for 48 hours. Then take out the Matrass, and wash the Matter with hot
🜄 till the ☉ be well edulcorated, then dry it, and imbibe it again with fresh
Oyl of Tartar; reverbera [...]e it as before for 48 hours. Repeat this Work
twice more, and you shall have a very light and Spungy Calx of ☉.

Hartman.) Note, That instead of this Calx of ☉, you may take one prepared, by
Calcining it with flowers of Sulphur, as Sir Kenelm Digby prepared it for
Saunier's Work, which see in its place.

Then imbibe it once with Oyl of Tartar, and proceed in all as before.

Having reduced the ☉ into an Oyl, it will be necessary to have an Earth of its
own nature, to make it grow, and produce the Fruit which we expect of it.

Now this Calx of ☉ shall serve for an Earth to receive this Seed. But since
that in all Bodies there are three things, to wit, the Soul, the Spirit, and
the Body; that which hath a Body, cannot receive the Soul, except it be opened
by the Spirit: It will [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=59) then be
necessary to reduce the ☉ into a Spi­rit, which is done by reducing it into ☿,
its first and nearest Matter; which to perform, proceed thus:

Take ℥j. of ☉ well purified by  (antimony), re­duce it into thin Plates, cut
them small, and put them in a Matrass, pour upon them ℥vj. of our
Philosophical 🜄, keep it in digestion till the ☉ be all dissolved, then
distill of [...] the 🜄, which cohobate again, and distill as before. Repeat
this three or four times, then distill off about three parts of the 🜄, expose
the rest with the Vessel to the open Air, and the ☉ will congeal into
Crystals, which put in a Glass Bottle, and stop it ve­ry close, and keep them
in a dry place un [...] they be dry; then grind them with twice [...] much 🜹
Sublimed with Salt; put this into a large Matrass, and pour upon it by drop
[...] of good Oyl of Tartar, the double qua [...] ­tity of the ☉, or until it
be of the consist­ence of thin Mustard; then Seal it Her me [...] ­cally, and
keep it in digestion with a gentle heat for two and fourty days, during which
time the Matter will putrifie and smell ve [...] strong, and you shall see all
the Colours ap­pear successively; take a little of it and was [...] it well
with warm 🜄 several times, then be­ing dry, put some of it upon a thin Pl
[...] red-hot, and if it melt without smoaking,  [...] [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=59) is a sign that
it is all Mercurial, and well prepared; but if it smoak, you must keep it in
digestion untill that sign appeareth: Then wash and edulcorate it well from
all Saltness, and dry it very gently; then mix it with seven parts of prepared
Salt, put it in a Cucurbite, which put in Sand, and give a gentle fire for
twelve or fourteen hours, then increase the fire, and continue that de­gree as
long; continue the Sublimation un­til all the Philosophical Calx be Sublimed:
Then gather carefully with a feather this Sublimate, and put it in a Glass
Mortar with warm 🜄, grinding it with a Glass Pestle for an hour or two, then
let it settle, and pour off the 🜄, put on fresh hot 🜄, and grind it untill
the Matter come to be of the consist­ence of Mustard; then add good White-wine
Vinegar, and grind it until all be con­verted into running ☿.

### 1.73. Composition.

TAke ℥ss. of your Calx of ☉ prepared and attenuated, as was said, put it in a
Glass Mortar, and pour upon it ℥iij. of the S [...]lary ☿; the ☿ will suddenly
swallow up its Body, as one drop of 🜄 mixeth it self with another; then
squeeze out so much ☿ of this aaa; that there remain but about two parts
[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=60) of ☿
with the ☉. Put this aaa in a Philo­sophical Egg, and pour upon it by little
and little of your Oyl of ☉ before-mentioned, hold it over a gentle 🜂, and
stir the Matter with an Iron Rod, that all may well mix and incorporate,
pouring on so much of the said Oyl, that it be of the consistence of thin
Mustard, and then you shall suddenly see marvellous things, when the Soul of
the said [...] ☉ (which is its Oyl) entreth into the Body of the ☉, by means
of the Spirit, which is the Solary ☿, and that by means of the said Soul, the
Spirit uniteth with its Body, of three being made one; stop the Vessel
speedily, because of the fumes. The Body of the ☉ which was dead before, being
by this only and admirable means animated, dig­nified, and filled with a
Vegetative Life, will thereby acquire an inward Power of Multiplication, as
well as the Sperms and Seeds of all Animals and Vegetables, and be made fit to
grow and produce Fruit, (being sowed in a fit Earth) which it could not do
before, because of that default. The Vessel being Sealed Hermetically, put it
in Ashes in a brass Vessel in the shape of half a boul; digest it with a Lamp
🜂. As for the time, and the colours, mark what Trevesan saith of it; for at
the end of fourty days you shall see the blackness: Continue the first [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=60) degree of heat
to whiteness, which will appear within four Months: then augment the 🜂, and
continue until it come to be of a Citrine colour, and then threre will be no
more danger. Increase the 🜂 to the fourth degree, and continue that, till
your King ta­keth his Robe, and that the Matter suffer Ignition without
smoaking.

Hartman.) This Process was sent to Sir K. D. in a Letter from Paris, by Abbot
Bou­caud, with the following words. Sir, I have sent you here inclosed a great
Work upon ♄, which Monsieur de Rouviere hath given me; it cometh from a Man
who ha­ving been carried away, and kept close in a Castle, made at last his
escape, and was con­ducted to the Duke D'Elboeuf, and Mon­sieur de Rouviere
found the said Process un­der his Boulster.

### 1.74. The said Abbot sent to Sir K. D. also the following Process, which
he saith he had from an intimate Friend, who assured him that it was a
Reality.

TAke of a very good Oar of ♄ that was never wet, or instead of it, take a true
and natural Mineral Lithargy, not Artifi­cial; pulverize it an grind it upon a
Marble stone with distilled 🜄, several times distilled. [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=61) Put your Oar of
♄, or Lithargy in one or more Cucurbites, and pour upon it of the aforesaid
distilled 🜄, or distilled Dew, so much as may cover it the breadth of seven
or eight singers, cover it with a blind head, and lute well all the junctures,
and digest for fourty days with a gentle heat, shaking the Vessel often; when
you perceive that the Menstruum is coloured, decant the clear, and put on
fresh 🜄, or take new Oar or Lithargy and extract as before; filter the
Menstruum and distill it with a very gentle heat. Take this Salt of ♄ and put
it in a Matrass, digest it with a Lamp 🜂 with six small wicks, and it will
dissolve of it self, and there will settle to the bottom some im­purity or
feces; break the Matrass (being cold) and take the pure part and put in into
another Matrass, dissolve it by digestion as at first, separate the pure from
the impure. Repeat so often till this Salt leave no more impurity. Then keep
it carefully, until you imploy it in the following Work.

Take of this Salt ten parts, and one part of ☉ Mineral that hath not been
melted, put them together in a Matrass, Seal it Her­metically, and digest with
a very gentle heat, and there will loosen it self from the Salt of ♄ some
Spirits, which by falling down again will dissolye the ☉ by little and [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=61) little, and
there will separate it self yet some feces which are not useful for this work,
which you must separate. Take what is clear and transparent, and put it in a
Philo­sophical Egg, Seal it Hermetically, and di­gest it with a Lamp 🜂 with a
gentle heat, continue the digestion without ever increa­sing the heat, &c. The
said Abbot said, that this was all he could have, or know of this Work
hitherto.

### 1.75. The said Abbot sent also the following Pro­cess in a Letter from
Paris.

MOnsieur de R's. Operation, by which he fixeth ☿ into ☽ with the Salt of
Sa­turn and ☽, is thus. He taketh one part of ☽, and three parts of ☿, whereof
he maketh an aaa, which he putteth in a Matrass, and putteth upon it Saccharum
Sa­turni (made the common way) about a fingers breadth over the aaa; then he
Seal­eth the Vessel, and digesteth it with a Lamp 🜂 with gentle heat,
increasing the heat by degrees, it passeth through all the colours; and of one
Marc of ☽, and three Marcs of ☿, there remained ℥xij. of fixed Matter that
suffered fusion and the Test.

He saith, that there should have remained one Marc of the ☿ fixed, but the
Operation [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=62) was not well
wrought. In another Letter he saith, that there remained ℥iij. or iv. of ☿
fixed into ☽, which endured fusion and the Test.

### 1.76. An Operation upon Jupiter.

DIstill a Menstruum out of Vitriol and 🜹, with which make Sulphur naturae
Iovis: Make also with the same Menstruum Sulphur nat. ☽, which dissolve into
Oyl, and with it insere Sulphur Iovis ad fusibilita­tem, and then project upon
Iupiter.

Dunston thus: Having taken our white Earth, you may putrifie it by it self, or
with the Calx of other Metals, and change its co­lour into a new white or red:
Then ferment it with the Oyl of ☉ or ☽, &c.

Riply (in his Viaticum) thus: Calcine ♃ into a most subtil Calx (for in it
there is pure ☿, not brought to its full perfection by Nature) which is easily
hardened with the Oyl of ☽. Do your Work therefore with Tin (until you are
Rich ) because so the Work is easily done, and at small charge.

Lullius (in his Magia Naturalis) thus: Make Sulphur naturae (without which
no­thing can be done) and thus of any Metal (which he directeth to do in a
very tedious [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=62) way) then
incere it with Oyl of Ferment (as in his Pract. Brev. or Sermocinal) until it
be fluid; then it is a perfect Medica­ment.

### 1.77. ☉ & ☽ ex ♃.

TAke of the filings of ♃ lbj. Salt-petre lbj. mix them, separate the Spirit
from the Anima by combustion, Subliming it in so many Pots as you know:
Dissolve the Caput Mortuum (which will be fixt as a stone, so that you may
strike 🜂 out of it by collision) with ☿, that there may be a Re­gulus made of
it, which pour out and make into Rods, and cement them with store of Calx-vive
on a Circulary 🜂, then Coppel them with Lead, and add to them fine ☽, what
then remaineth upon the Coppel is good, and you will have considerable gain by
it, and by the separation of A. F. you will have three parts of ☽, and one of
☉.

But when you melt your Caput Mortuum of ♄ with  (antimony) into a Regulus, as
before, when you have Precipitated them with Tartar, or mixed them, then put
your Regulus to Coppel, and in it you will find ☉: See that you do not cast
away the Scoria, for you will find Silver amongst it; Coppel it therefore by
it self with the follow­ing [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=63) Powder, so you
will find ☽, which sepa­rate with A. F. (the Powder make thus.)

Take Chelamus (Bay Salt) melt, dissolve, filtre, and coagulate it; melt it
again, and do this Work thrice: Then cast in this Salt into the aforesaid
Scoria (from which you separated the Regulus) after you have put it to Coppel,
so your Work will be done and accomplished speedily, and with great fruit and
profit in the applying the fire.

Hartman.) The Famous Tachenius Re­lates (speaking of the malignity of
Arsenick) that there are some who can burn pure Tin into Powder, which cannot
again be reduced into Tin by Vulgar Art, as other Metals; yet with Arsenick it
is made Scoria, part of which by a singular Skill becometh pure ☽. Sigis­mund
Wan, a Citizen in Voitland, knew and practised this Art of Separation, to his
great benefit; for in the Year 1464 he Builded and Endowed a great Hospital
there, which, as Gaspar Bruschius Relates, is at this day to be seen, with the
Epitaph of the aforesaid Citizen.

Now, that ☽ may be got out of Tin with Arsenick, Clavious proves in his
Apology a­gainst Erastus Second Vol. Theatri Chym. Fol. 39.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=63)A Worthy
Gentleman lately related to me, that he knew one, who told him, that out of
lbss. of Block-Tin he got so much ☉ as he sold for 3s. 6d.

### 1.78. A short and clear Description of the great Phi­losophick Stone.

#### 1.78.1. The first Operation.

TAke Salt prepared, Nitre, and Roman Vitriol, ana lbij. beat them into a small
Powder, mix them, and put them into a Pot upon a slow fire, and moving them,
cause them to melt, that they may be dryed a lit­tle. Then take ☿ taken out of
the Mine­ral, lbj, which being put into a Linnen Cloath, squeeze it and pour
it upon the hot Matter, moving it with a Rod, until the Mer­cury is hid in the
Matter; incorporate the Mass well when it is cooled, in a Marble Mortar; then
dry it all in a Pot very slowly, until it be so dry, that a Sword held over
the Po [...], receive no moisture from it; then put it into a Sublimatory, and
Sublime it first twelve hours, afterwards increase the fire, that all the
Mercury may be well Sublimed, white as snow: So the ☿ lacking nothing of its
weight, will be associated with the invi­sible Sulphur of Vitriol, and purged
from [[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=64) the
Earth and its blackness; and if you will Experiment that Conjunction, you may
se­parate Sulphur of Vitriol from ☿ thus: Take distilled Vinegar, q. v. quench
burning Iron several times in it, let your Sublimate stand therein all Night,
afterwards pass it three times through a filtre, then set it upon a slow fire;
so a black scum will swim above the Vinegar, which take off; then evapo­rate
all the Vinegar with a slow fire, so you will have an Excellent Sulphur of
Vitriol; and the ☿ will remain by it self in the bot­tom.

#### 1.78.2. The Second Operation.

THis teacheth to Extract the Quintessence from this ☿ Sublimate thus: Make A.
F, as follows; Take Salt-petre and Vitriol, ana lbj. beat them, then mix them
together and distill them with a slow fire in a glazen A­lembick on Ashes for
eighteen hours, so that nothing more can distill (but lute all so well, that
nothing exhale;) after the above-said 18 hours increase the fire by degrees,
that the Water may be distilled, and then continue the same degree of heat
until it begin to cease to distill, and so proceed by degrees, until nothing
more can come from it: Let the Vessels cool of themselves, and Seal the [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=64) Recipient with
gummed Wax; and when you have put your Sublimate, being well beat, in a strong
Matrass, pour upon it of this Water to the height of one or two fin­gers
breadth, and immediately obturate it well: Set the Matrass in Ashes on a slow
fire for the space of twenty four hours; and if it be not then dissolved, if
you pour ℥vij. of Water upon it, add of 🜹 well beaten ℥j. or more; close it
up presently, and set it up­on Ashes, so it will be dissolved: It is a very
great Secret. Then abstract all the Water, (the junctures of the Vessel being
carefully stopped) by distillation on a slow fire of Coals, even to dryness:
Afterwards taking off the Cap, cover it straight with a glazen Operculum, lute
it, and when you have in­creased the fire, the Quintessence of Mer­cury and
Vitriol will ascend at the sides of the Vessel; at last make the fire yet
stronger, that all the Quintessence may be well Sub­limed, which, when the
Vessel is cooled, keep carefully: Beat the black faeces, and Sublime it once
more, if perhaps any of the Quintessence remain still amongst it, so you shall
have purged the Mercury, and imbibed more of the Spirits of Vitriol existing
in A. F. Then dissolve and Sublime the Matter (that is Sublimed) twice more
after the same manner, that no impurity may be [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=65) left in it, so
it will be whiter than Snow.

#### 1.78.3. The Third Operation.

Beat this Matter, and put it into an Earthen Urinal well glazed within, which
cover with an Earthen glazed head like to a Paradi, that they may be exactly
joyned together; lute the junctures well, and digest it eight days or more in
an Athanor on a slow fire of Coals; for otherwise it could not be dissolved
into Water.

#### 1.78.4. The Fourth Operation.

PUT your Matter so dissolved into a Ma­trass, close it, and dissolve it in A.
B. into Water with a continual slow heat: Di­still this Water in a little
Alembick on Ashes with a slow fire of a Lamp, and Water of Paradise will be
distilled, (of which alone the stone may be made by the Method after
described) one drop of which poured upon a Plate of any red-hot Metal will
throughly whiten it within and without; (Note, that the like may be done with
the Lunary made of ☽ and ♃ if they be pour [...]d on a Plate of ♀.) After the
water is distilled, some faeces will remain, which contain in them Earth, Air,
and Fire, which you may thus separate [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=65) one from
another: Beat those faeces, and di­gest them in an Athanor, as you did the
Quintessence before, afterwards dissolve them the same way in M. B. At last
distill with a very strong fire in M. B. by an Alembick, a white Oyl, which is
called Air, which when it ceaseth to drop any more, take off the Recipient,
and close well the nose of the Alembick, and so let it cool of it self: Then
set the Alembick with a new Recipient on Ashes, and draw off the red Oyl
(which is called fire) with a strong fire. Cast away the Earth that remains.

#### 1.78.5. The Fifth Operation.

IF you would make a Stone of Paradise alone, or Virgins Milk, you need not
separate the Elements; but if you have se­parated them, do thus: Take of 🜂 or
red Oyl part j. of Air, or white Oyl parts iv. and of Virgins Milk parts viij.
Put them together in a Matrass with a short and nar­row Neck; in two other
Matrasses put of Virgins Milk, q. v. Seal them all Hermeti­cally, and so put
them in an Athanor on a slow fire of small coals burnt till they have ceased
from flaming, and so let them stand till by several colours they attain a
perfect white: Then (if you will have the Stone [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=66) white) you may
take out one Matrass, leav­ing the other two (if you Operate with three at
once:) Then increase the fire sensibly, because your Work cannot easily be
marred, and so proceed by degrees, until the Mat­ter is perfectly red.

#### 1.78.6. The Sixth Operation.

IS Projection. Take an hundred parts of ☿ purged the common way, heat them in
a Crucible, and add to them part j. of the white or red stone, and the whole
will be a Medicine. Then take of this Me­dicine part j. and Project it upon
another hundred parts of ☿, moving it with a Rod, and afterwards melting it.
Further, Project of this, part j. in an hundred parts, and the whole will be ☉
or ☽, according as the stone is which you took: If you will Pro­ject upon
other Metals, melt them, or do them into thin Plates, and on them when they
are very hot Project part j. upon an hundred, and set the Plates in the 🜂 for
some time. If you would augment the ver­tue of the Stone in infinitum,
dissolve it as often as you please in B. M. and coagulate it slowly in Ashes;
let Iupiter and Saturn be melted.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=66)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=67)

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=67)

#### 1.78.7. The Seventh Operation

IS the Magistery of an Athanor, which Build thus: Take of Magisterial Lute,
Potters Earth, Horse-dung, Paper carmi­nated, Hairs cut, make them all into a
Paste with Salt water and Vinegar, and with that Paste build your Furnace;
make a round Wall four fingers breadth in height, with Chimneys, set upon that
Wall an Iron Plate which hath four Supporters, by which it may stay upon the
Wall, leave some distance between the interior sides of the Wall and the
exterior of the Plate, that the heat may ascend by it; then raise the Wall to
the height of five Inches: Then make an earthen Cap, which on the one side
must have a Window and convenient Door, by which you may feel the heat,
putting in your hand at it, (which heat must be so moderate and uniform, that
you may endure to hold your hand in the Athanor as long as you please;) the
Cap must be carefully luted within and without, and set upon the Furnace and
ag­glutinated with Clay: Afterwards, when the Furnace is sufficiently dryed,
set upon it Glass Goblets, and set your Matrasses up­on them. Mind well all
these things, and consider the Figures cut in the Page over [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=68) against this.
Now, by the holes that are made betwixt the Plate and the Wall, you may
increase or diminish the heat at your pleasure. But note, that upon the
Goblets, above the Tripus and the Plate, you may set an earthen Trencher, and
set thereon an Egg, which cover with another Trencher, so that these two
Trenchers joyned together may be lifted up in the Air, and the Egg not touch
the sides of the Trenchers.

### 1.79. A Note from one that wrought the Stone.

I Have had certain notice of one that made the Philosophers stone with Leaf-
gold and a clear 🜄, that looked like Rock 🜄, but smelled strong. He who
wrought it for him (that is, attended the Lamp) said, he had made his Liquor
thrice before it would dissolve the ☉. The last dissolved it by lit­tle and
little, it became a yellow Aureal Li­quor, then thickened by little and
little, at length became a black thick broath, in the end like melted Pitch:
then changed several colours, every one sparkling like Orient precious Stones,
and sparks like fire or Stars rose in the Glass (which was a large Egg Sealed
Hermetically) then fell down again. It was digested in Ashes made of old Bark
of Oak burned (unwashed) and the Au­thor [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=68) said, no other
Ashes would serve. And the heat was never greater, than that he could endure
the back of his hand upon the Ashes, which was caused by a Lamp.

Hartman.) This Relation is of Sir K. D.

### 1.80. Lauremberg's Observations upon Angelus Sala his Synopsis of
Aphorisms, 1624. in Quarto, pag. 4.

HE saith thus: I did so prepare fluid ☿, that without the mixture of any thing
whatsoever imaginable, without any dis­solving Menstruum, it did acquire the
form of a most pure and transparent Liquor; nei­ther hitherto hath it lost
this liquid form, but is so liquid, that you would imagine it had been brought
from a Fountain, and which you will more admire, being tasted, it is void of
all acrimony, and meerly in­sipid; (I add also this) that some Months ago I
reduced English ♃ into a fluid and moist Liquor, without the least addition of
Menstruum, which humidity it not only con­tinually keepeth entirely to this
day, but (so far as I can see) will never lose it.

(Afterwards in the same page, he saith,)

I confess ingenuously, that not long ago, I had the happiness of seeing at a
Friends, and feeling such an unfactitious Liquor (li­quorem [...]) whereby
leaves of Gold [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=69) and Silver were
dissolved into a pliant and fluid Liquor, without any noise or the least
suspition of Acrimony. This Liquor can be no other than congealed Air, without
which the Life of Animals becomes no Life; and there is no Body under the Sun
in that three-fold Kingdom that is destitute of it. I had rather search its
Medicinal Power with silent speculation, than weary People with tedious and
fruitless Discourses.

### 1.81. Concerning May Dew.

MAY Dew is the true Minera of the dissolvent. Aug. This Liquor is such, that
if it be gathered at a certain Sea­son, two Uses, &c. One, that hereby you may
infuse Gold in a Liquor of its proper Seed, when you begin first to dissolve
it, &c. Cosmop. But this 🜄 is said to be the Men­struum of the World:
Speaking of the Ele­ment of 🜄, the Menstruum of the World is tripartite, &c.
the more pure resolved into Air. There is in the Air an Occult Nourish­ment of
Life, which we call Dew in the Night, and in the day-time 🜄, rarefied, who
[...]e invisible congealed Spirit is of more value than the whole Earth, Idem.
The princi­pal Matter of Metals is the Humidity of the Air (the Aerial
Substance) mixt with heat [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=69) ☿ prepared
aforesaid is governed by the rays of the ☉ and ☽ prepared in the Sea; not one
place or one Countrey will afford it you. Experience testifieth, that ☉ is not
sought for save in Mountains, because it can be seldom had in a Plain.

### 1.82. Flamel, Artefius, Pontanus, Zacaire, &c. Their Arcanum.

THis Stone is that about which the above­named Authors employed themselves: It
is composed of the Mineral Gluten, made of ☿ and  (antimony) Mineral, by the
addition of the Solary Ferment thus: Distil the Volatile Crystals or Butter
from ☿ 🝞mate and  (antimony), equal parts: Or distill, or dissolve common ☿
in A. F, Precipitate with Salt-water, and you shall have a very white Calx,
which dry, and joyn it with as much of Calx of ♃, and distill the Volatile
Crystals thereof. These Crystals are the Magnet, by means of which the
Universal form, or Spirit of the World is attracted; which specifieth and
determineth it self in this matter, by resolution in the Air in ♈, ♉, & ♊. Put
this Liquor in a Cucurbite, and digest for thirty days with a very gentle heat
with a Lamp, to the end, that there may be a Natural distillation made of the
attracted Spirit, which will begin to [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=70) come over
invisibly the first or second day, with the Idea of that which it draws, to
wit, the  (antimony), and of ☿, or with a universal Mineral form, tending to
Metallick. This Liquor will continue coming over even unto the end of fifty
days; let not the heat exceed that of ones hand. This Aethereal 🜄 is the 🜄
of Paradise, or the Mineral astrum of Flamel's two Dragons, the one is
Volatile (which is ☿) and the other Rampant, which is the  (antimony), which
do not suffer to be touched nor at­tacked, until their Venemous scum (that is
to say, the Butter) have produced the Spi­rit of the Mercurial-wind, and the
scum of the Red Sea. Note, that within fifteen days this Sea or Butter cometh
to be very red, with a gentle heat of a Lamp 🜂 in Ashes; and this is Flamel's
Red Sea. This Aethereal 🜄 penetrates all Metalline Bodies, (being Lu­minated
and made red-hot) and tingeth them into ☽. Two drops of this 🜄 being
dissol­ved in ℥iv. of Spirit of Wine, maketh a Vir­ginal Milk, whereof the
Dose is a spoonful: It is a very gentle Emetick, because of its crudity, or
rather Mercurial Substance, where­of the vertue Operates upwards, because it
is moist and Airy. It Cures the Epilepsie by the Character, which is imprinted
into it, by the word Fiat, and all astral Diseases, as far as humane
disposition permits. This is the [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=70) Coelestial 🜄
which doth not wet ones hands after its preparation; 'tis the ☿ of ☿, the 🜄
or Centre of the Heart of ☿, and the true extent of  (antimony), but it
requires more Work. Take this 🜄 (you must have a pretty great quantity of it,
and therefore you must have ten, fifteen, or twenty pound of Volatile
Crystals) and put it in a Cucurbite, and with a very gentle heat of a Lamp
distill off all the waterish moistness, which by careles­ness it might have
contracted from the Air: There will remain in the bottom a Gum, a Syrup, a
viscous 🜄, a Radical Mineral moi­sture, which is the Eagles gluten above-
men­tioned, which did fly the space of fifty days continually; by means of
this gentle heat, the Gluten flies no more, but is the flying Crapant and
Zacair's Mercurial 🜄, which is congealed by cold, and liquified by heat. The
Authors before mentioned have digested this Gluten per se in a Matrass
Hermetically Sealed, without the addition of a Solary Fer­ment; but afterwards
they have been forced to ferment the Powder which they made of it. For to
shorten the Work, take seven parts, or nine or ten, or more of this Glu­ten,
unto which by heat joyn one part of ☉ in leaf, or Sulphur of ☉ prepared by the
Salt Enixe (which is best) and digest in an A­thanor, or in Flamel's Furnace
(which is [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=71) very easie)
until all the Matter have passed through all the due colours, and come to be
of a purple Citrine colour; then have you the Metalline Salt, the most high
Tincture, a Treacle made of Venom, a most Excellent Medicine made of the
greatest Poison. This Medicine is multiplyed in quantity by new addition of
the afore-mentioned Gluten; in quality, by dissolving in humido into a
Li­quor, and purifying by digestion, and then by fixation; Experience will
teach other things far better. This Method, although it differs much from that
of the greatest Phi­losophers, as Lully, Trevesan, Cosmopolite, &c. (and being
but particular in compari­son of that high Generalissima) nevertheless it
seems to be Universal in regard of Metals and Minerals. Note, that you may
also ex­tract a white and red. Oyl of that which re­mains, as was said before,
and make a new aurifique stone thereof, which those Authors have not
understood, or if they have under­stood it, they have not spoken of it. Note
also, that this Mineral 🜄 of Paradise, is the Philosophers live ☉, and the ☿
of the Wise, but not the Generalissima: And this 🜄 will serve against all
Maladies, for it drives them out, according to the intention and inclina­tion
of Nature.

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=71)

### 1.83. To prepare a Ferment or Sulphur of ☉.

MAke an aaa of ☉ or ☽, and ☿; grind this aaa, then squeeze it through a
Leather, the Globe remaining in the Leather, you must grind again, and then
put it in a Poringer, covered with another Poringer, and lute them well
together; then put them to a gentle 🜂 for half an hour: Then grind it again,
and digest it between the two Por­ringers as before. Repeat this so often till
the ☉ or ☽ be in Powder impalpable; then incorporate this Powder with fresh ☿,
grind them together, and digest with a gentle 🜂, so that little or nothing
may Sublime, and if any thing Sublime, put it again to that which remains in
the bottom. Repeat this last Operation (adding new ☿, grind and digest as
before) so often, till the whole Body of ☉ or ☽ be converted into running ☿,
and that all may be squeezed through the Leather: Then put this ☿ animated
into a Porringer, which cover, and digest with a gentle heat, so that nothing
Sublime; conti­nue the digestion so long, until you see a thin skin swimming
upon the Matter, which take off carefully (it will be of the colour of ☉ or ☽)
put the Matter upon the 🜂 again, in­crease the heat a little, taking off the
thin [[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=72)
skin as it riseth; continuing so long until the Matter produce no more
thereof: And thus you shall have the Sulphur of ☉ or ☽.

### 1.84. An Operation that Monsieur de I'Oberye wrote from Monsieur John's
Mouth.

TAke the Mother-liquor of Salt-petre, let it run cold through washed Sand,
then filter it by Languetes, then through gray paper: Then evaporate with very
gen­tle heat, putting down the skins as they rise upon the Liquor; the
remaining Salt being dry, grind it, and put it to resolve into Li­quor in a
Cellar, then filter and evaporate as before. Repeat this purification five or
six times, or so often, till it leave no more feces in the filter. If you take
lbx. of this Liquor, you shall have but lbij. ℥viij. of pu­rified Salt: Of
this lbij. ℥viij. you shall have ℥x. of Spirit, by distilling it per se in Re­
[...]orts in Sand; you must put but lbss. of this Salt into each Retort;
deflegm it in B. Take the Caput Mortuum, and grind it, and dis­solve it in a
Cellar; filter, and congeal, re­peating this two or three times: Then being
very dry, joyn ℥iij. of it with ℥j. of the rectified Spirit; digest and
circulate eight days with gentle heat in Ashes, and all will be a 🜄 of the
colour of Amber. Put one [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=72) part of ☉ into
ten parts of this Liquor, and it will dissolve it (cold) in less than a
quar­ter of an hour: Decant the dissolution when it is clear; one drop thereof
taken in a little broath, is a great Corroborant.

Put ☿ revived from Cinaber into the dis­solution [...] of ☉, and it will
become like a Gum, decant the clear, and put the ☿ to dry, and it will become
hard; melt it between two beds of Calcined Egg-shells in a Cruci­ble, and you
shall have good ☉.

### 1.85. Venus into ☽: Sent me by Monsieur de Beaulieu.

TAke fixt Arsenick ℥viij. fixt Nitre ℥iv. Oyl of Tartar prepared, as shall be
taught hereafter, ℥xij. 🜹 fixt, ℥xv. Let them all resolve into Liquors in a
moist place every one by it self; then take these Liquors and mix them
together, and filter them, then put to them ℥iij. of Oyl of ☿, and ℥viij. of ☽
(prepared and dissolved in the Liquor of fixt 🜹 and fixt Sulphur) mix all
well to­gether, and put it in a Matrass, and digest in fimo for fourty days,
changing the dung every eight days: Then decant the clear, and the feces
remaining in the bottom, dis­solve in the Liquor of fixt 🜹, and put it to the
rest of your Liquors; filter it three or [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=73) four times:
Then distill it in a Cucurbite with a gentle 🜂 in B. M. (not boyling) distill
to dryness, and you shall have a white Matter like a stone, and clear like a
Pearl: And to know whether it be perfected, put a little of it upon a red-hot
Plate of Copper, and if it melt like Wax, and penetrate through the Plate
without smoaking, leaving the said Plate white where it hath touched, it is a
sign of an entire perfection; but if you find that it is not yet fusible, and
that it smoak yet, grind it upon a stone with a pint of 🜄 distilled from
whites of Eggs, and distilled three times upon lbj. of Quick-lime, grind it
with the said 🜄, until it be of the consistence of Pap; then put to it four
times its weight of Liquor of fixt 🜹; digest in fimo for eight days only,
then congeal it as before, so is it perfect. Project ℥j. of this Matter upon
lbv. of prepared ♀, and some­time after cast a little piece of Wax into it, at
three or four times; then cover the Cru­cible, and leave it in fusion for some
hours.

### 1.86. The Multiplication.

DIssolve ℥viij. of this Matter in lbj. of the 🜄 of whites of Eggs, then add
℥iv. of Liquor of fixt Arsenick, digest in fimo for fifteen days; then distill
and con­geal [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=73) it as before,
so is it multiplyed. If you reiterate this Multiplication several times, the
Matter will remain in a Liquor, which will project upon great quantity of
Venus.

### 1.87. To fix the 🜹 for this Work.

TAke lbj. of 🜹 in small pieces about the bigness of a Wall-nut; make a Paste
with Quick-lime and whites of Eggs, with which endew the said pieces of 🜹,
let them dry, then stratifie them in a Crucible with Powder of Quick-lime, let
the beds of the Quick-lime be about a fingers thick; then put the Crucible to
a Circulary 🜂, which increase and approach once in a quarter of an hour, at
last, cover it with Coals, and let it stand so for half an hour: Then take out
the 🜹 (the Crucible being cold) and wipe off the Powder of Quick-lime, then
dissolve the 🜹 in fair 🜄, filter and congeal it; dis­solve it in a Cellar
into an Oyl, which keep for use.

### 1.88. To fix the Arsenick.

TAke equal parts of Arsenick and Nitre, grind them, then mix them together;
fill a Crucible half full with this Powder, fill it up with Salt of Tartar;
cover this Cruci­ble [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=74) with another
that hath a little hole in the bottom, lute them, and set them in a Cir­culary
🜂, the 🜂 being half a foots distance from the Crucible; increase and
approach the 🜂 once in half an hour about two inches, and when you perceive
no more smoak come from the Matter through the little hole, put the 🜂 close
to the Crucible, and at last co­ver it with Coals, and keep it so covered for
twelve hours, then let it cool, and grind it, then dissolve it in a Cellar,
and keep the Liquor in a Glass close stopped.

### 1.89. To fix the Sulphur for this Work.

TAke ℥v. of Quick-lime, slacken it in six quarts of fair 🜄, and having stood
twenty four hours, filter it, and put it in a Kettle; then take ℥viij. of
flowers of Sul­phur, tye it up in a Linnen Bag, which hang in the water in the
Kettle, make it boyl for an hour, and you shall have a Sulphur incombustible.

### 1.90. Oyl of ☿.

TAke ℥iv. of Sublimate in fine Powder, put it in a Crucible, and pour upon it
lbj. of fine ♃ melted, stir it well together; then being cold, put it upon a
clean Iron [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=74) Plate in a
Cellar, and you shall have an Oyl or Liquor.

### 1.91. To prepare the ♀ for this Work.

TAke Arsenick one part, decrepitated Salt two parts, pulverize and mix them
to­gether; then stratifie with this Powder some thin Plates of ♀, cement them
for two days, then put them to a strong 🜂 for six hours; then wash these
Plates from the Salts, and beat them to Powder, wash the Powder with Vinegar,
and then with 🜄 two or three times; then with Soap make a Paste thereof,
which put in a Crucible, that hath a hole in the bottom, put this Crucible in
another Cruci­ble, and so melt down the Powder of ♀, and it will run through
the hole into the other Crucible, and you shall have a very white ♀, and well
prepared for Projection.

### 1.92. To prepare the Salt of Tartar for this Work.

TAke equal parts of Tartar and Quick­lime, powder them, and mix them well
together, put this in a Pot, cover it close, and put it in a Potters Oven when
he burns his Pots; then make a Lixivium of it with Rain 🜄, which filter and
evaporate to dry­ness, [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=75) mix this Salt
again with the same quan­tity of Quick-lime, and Calcine it in a Pot­ters Oven
as before. Repeat this five or six times; then dissolve this Salt in distilled
Vi­negar, distill and cohobate so often, till it will no more congeal into a
Salt, but that it remain like melted Wax in the bottom, which pour out, and
keep it for Use.

### 1.93. To prepare the ☽ for this Work.

DIssolve ℥viij. of ☽ in ℥viij. of Spirit of Nitre, then Precipitate with Salt
🜄, the Powder of ☽ being settled, and the 🜄 clear, decant; then edulcorate
the Powder and dry it, then dissolve it again in Spirit of Nitre as before;
Precipitate, Edulcorate, and dry the ☽ as before. Repeat once more, three
times in all, then put it in a Matrass, and digest it eight days in Sand. So
is it prepa­red, and fit to be further prepared, and dis­solved in the Oyl of
fixt 🜹, and fixt Sul­phur.

### 1.94. Transmutation of ☿ into a Regulus.

PRecipitate Butter of  (antimony) with warm 🜄 once, without further
edulcoration; dry it gently, then add a fourth part of ☿, and of black Soap,
and Salt of Tartar, of each as [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=75) much as needeth
to make a Paste, whereof make little Bullets, which put in a Retort well
luted; distill in a naked 🜂, with a strong sudden 🜂, and the Matter being
melt­ed, you shall have a Regulus as white as ☽, which must be melted three or
four times to have it finer and whiter.

### 1.95. Calx of ☉.

MOnsieur Le Febore shewed me a very subtil and Spungy Calx of ☉, he had made
thus: Purifie ☉ to its greatest height, beat it very thin, and cut it into
small pieces, heat one part of them in a Crucible, and six parts of cleansed ☿
in another: Make an aaa in due manner, stirring a while with an Iron Rod, then
throw it into cold 🜄; squeeze out as much ☿ as you can through
Chambo­leather: To the remaining Globe put double as much flowers of Sulphur,
grind them well together: Put this mixture into a capacious Crucible, and
gently burn away the Sul­phur, and evaporate the ☿, reverberating the Calx
three or four hours after all is gone away. Repeat all this Work twenty or
thirty times; then reverberate it under a Mussle with so gentle heat, that it
melt not, the longer the better: Then burn S. V. three or four times from it;
Qu [...]re, Of grinding [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=76) the Calx long
with pure Virgin Honey, then dissolving it in a large quantity of pure
di­stilled warm 🜄, and letting it stand warm till all the Calx be settled to
the bottom: Also of grinding the Calx with purified Salt of Tartar, then
reverberating the Mass, and lastly, dissolving the Salts in warm 🜄, and
letting the Calx settle, as with the Honey: I think it will be a very subtil
Calx, to dis­solve the ☉ in A. R. of Nitre and 🜹; then Precipitating it with
Spirit of Urine, or with a Marinated 🜄, made by dissolving the fixed Salt of
Urine in pure distilled Rain or Spring water.

### 1.96. A pretty Curiosity, To make Metals Vegetate visibly.

CAlcine white and transparent River Peb­bles, extinguish them in 🜄 to have a
Calx thereof, which reduce into subtil Pow­der with equal parts of Tartar and
Nitre (fulminated together) taking double quan­tity of this fusible Salt:
Dissolve this Mat­ter upon a Marble stone or Glass in a moist place, and you
shall have a Liquor, which filter: Take about ℥ij. of this Liquor, put it in a
Viol, and put into it about ℥ij. (or less) of the Calx of any Metal, dissolved
in its Acid Menstruum; Then evaporate to [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=76) the consistence
of a Calx: Let it stand, and so soon as it is cold you shall see the Metal
Vegetate, and shoot out into branches, which will be of different colours if
you put in the Calx of divers Metals: This is fine and plea­sant to behold.
Note, that it is to be ob­served in general, that the cause of Vegeta­tion is
the encountring of an Airy Acid with a fixt Alkali; and it is thus, that
Quick-lime Calcined with common Salt into an Alkali, being spread upon Barren
ground, fatneth it, and maketh it fruitful, causing Vegetables to grow, by
contracting the Acid of the Air and its Volatile Salt.

### 1.97. To engender Cray-fishes.

IT is to be observed first, that to do this Operation well, you must do it at
the increase of the ☽, and in the sign of Cancer, if possible, or at least in
any other Aquatick sign.

Then take a parcel of the said Cray-fishes, taken in Brooks or small Rivers,
being all alive; divide them into two parts, put one part thereof into an
earthen Pot not glazed, cover it with its cover, or with ano­ther Pot, lute
them well, and put them to Calcine for seven or eight hours with a strong 🜂,
until they be well Calcined, and fit to [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=77) be reduced to
Powder in a Marble Mortar: Then take the other Part, (being also all alive)
and boyl them in River 🜄, like un­to that wherein they w [...]re taken, then
pour off the 🜄, which being cold, put it in a wooden Vessel, or of Earth, and
into about a pail full of this 🜄, put about half a hand­ful of the Powder of
the aforesaid Calcined Cray-fishes, stir it well together with a stick, then
let it stand to settle, without stirring it at all, and within a few days you
shall see as it were many Atoms appear in the 🜄, which are the breeding Cray-
fishes, moving in the 🜄; when you see them as big as a small button, you must
feed them with Bul­locks blood, casting a little thereof into the 🜄, from
time to time, which in time will make them grow of their natural bigness. You
must observe, that before you put the 🜄 into the Vessel, you must first put
some Sand into it, so much that the bottom of it may be covered about a
fingers breadth.

### 1.98. To make Oyl of Talc.

TAke one part of Venice Talc, and two parts of pure Nitre, both in subtile
Powder, put them in a Wind-Furnace to Calcine with a strong 🜂 for seven or
eight hours: Then take out the Crucible, and beat [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=77) the Matter to
subtil Powder, and wash it perfectly well with fair 🜄, till you have brought
away all the Saltness of it; then dry the Talc well, and Calcine it again with
two part of new Nitre, all as you did be­fore, and dulcifie the Salt from it.
Repeat these Calcinations, and dulcifications four times, that the Talc may be
perfectly white and well Calcined, and in exceeding subtil Powder: Then put it
into a strong Glass Bottle, half full, and stop it close, and set it in a
great quantity of Ice or Snow, that the extream cold may penetrate into it
(for therein consisteth the Secret) but the Ice or Snow must not actually
touch the Bottle, but it must be set in a Box of Wicker, fit for it, made like
a Cage, that it be all open between the Barrs or Osiers, and in two or three
Months all the Talk will be converted into a pure clear white Liquor, which is
Excel­lent for the Face and Skin, and will make Scarlet white, being dipped in
it.

### 1.99. An Excellent Cosmetick prepared out of ☽.

TAke refined ☽, one part, Sal gemmae, two parts; beat the ☽ into very thin
Plates,  [...]stratifie them with the Sal gemmae in Pow­er in a Crucible well
luted with another [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=78) upon it: Cement
for twenty four hours, then open the Crucible, and if you find the ☽ well
Calcined, it is enough; if not, strati­fie it with fresh Sal gemmae, and
Cement as before: Then edulcorate the ☽ with warm 🜄; then grind it into a
subtil Powder, pour upon this Powder a well rectified S. V. di­gest until the
S. V. is tincted blew; then decant, and put on fresh S. V. Repeat this until
you have extracted all the Tincture out of the ☽. Then evaporate the S. V.
with a very gentle heat (or rather distill it gently) and there will remain in
the bottom of the Cucurbite a Matter like Pomatum: Put up­on this Pomatum a
Spirit of Wine rectified upon Salt of Tartar, and after a little di­gestion,
distill off the S. V. in a Retort, and part of the Tincture will come over
with the S. V. and will leave the Pomatum whiter than it was before. Repeat
this Work with new S. V. (Tartarized) so often, till the S. V. bring over no
more Tincture, and that the Pomatum remain in the bottom as white as Snow,
which is Excellent to whiten the Face.

[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=78)

### 1.100. Another way to make Oyl of Talc.

REduce Talc of Venice into exceeding subtil Powder, mingle ℥ij. thereof with
℥ij. of pure leaf Silver, grind them ex­ceedingly well together, to
incorporate them perfectly well: Then reverberate them for fifteen or twenty
days, after which grind them again very subtilly, and put them in­to a Matrass
of Glass, and set it in fimo for thirty or fourty days, changing the dung
every six or eight days, that the heat may be always in a good degree: You
shall find a pure clear Oyl, which will blanch Pearls, the Face and Skin in
other parts, and do all the things that are said of Oyl of Talc.

### 1.101. Another way to make Oyl of Talc.

TAke of Venice Talc in great pieces, as much as you please, make it red-hot in
the 🜂, then quench it by cessing it into Oyl of Tartar; fire it again, and
extinguish it as before. Do thus two or three times, and it will be throughly
Calcined, so that you may crumble it into small Powder with your fingers; beat
it in a Mortar, and pass it through a fine searse of Silk; what passeth not,
Calcine it in a Crucible, and extinguish [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=79) again: It will
be perfectly Calcined by ex­tinctions in fair 🜄, but then it will require ten
or twelve Ignitions and extinctions.

Take your subtil Calx of Talc (which will be perfectly white) made either way,
and put to it some distilled Vinegar to swim two or three fingers breadth over
it, and put it to digest in very gentle heat eight or ten days, and you shall
see a beautiful Oyl or Cream swim at the top of the Liquor, skim it off, and
dry it with gentle 🜂, and it will be a saline substance, which put into a
Blad­der, and hang it in a Well near the 🜄, but not to touch it, and in a few
days it will resolve into a pure Oyl, which is Excellent for the Face. Or,
with long remaining in a moist place, without putting it into distil­led
Vinegar, this Calx will resolve into Oyl: Try to extinguish the Talc in dew,
&c. (Be sure that in all this Work you touch nothing with Iron.)

### 1.102. To burn holes in Glass.

WHen Mr. Gore would make a hole in the belly of a Retort or Matrass, or
Receiver of Glass, he did thus: Have some Cotton-yarn well Sulphured, lay it
round like a Snake upon the Glass, filling as much space as you would have the
capacity of the [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=79) hole, make a
Circle of Tin, or the like, to keep it in (but be sure there be not the least
moisture upon the Glass, nor that it be very cold, for then it will break) set
the Cot­ton on fire with a burning Coal laid upon it, and so let it burn on,
putting up within its compass the burning yarn (with a Bodkin) if it chance to
stretch, or swell wider than it should, make your heat and burning gentle and
moderate at first, that you may increase it by degrees, by crumbling Sulphur
in Pow­der upon the burning Matter, if you find it needeth.

When it hath burned a while, try gently by touching it with a little stick of
Wood, whether the piece of Glass under the burn­ing Cotton will fall in or
out, but press not too hard, for fear of cracking that which should be whole;
for when it is enough, it will fall in with the least touch, and leave a
compleat hole without any cracks in the Glass besides. If you touch the heated
glass with any moisture, you not only make that which you would have separated
away to fall in, but you will crack and split what you would have remain
solid. You may put a Linnen Cloath in the Glass, for the piece to fall upon,
lest it should break the Glass when it falleth in.

[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=80) A
Description of a most convenient and very useful Furnace, which will not only
serve for many Operations, as Melting, Calci­ning, Vitri [...]ying,
Reverberating, Distilling, Subliming, Digesting, &c. But also for Coppelling,
in small and great quantity, and that with the greatest facility that can be;
so that neither Coals nor Ashes can fall into the Coppel, neither can the heat
of the 🜂 incommodate you by reflecting in your Face and Eyes.

The Fabrick of this Furnace, with its Structure see in the next Figure.

### 1.103. An Explanation of this Figure.

A. IS the whole Fabrick, which may be Built (of good Bricks) about two foot
four inches in length; one foot six in­ches in breadth; and about two foot
four inches high.

B. Is the fire place, which must be round, of the best and hardest Bricks (it
may also be made of a fire stone) it must be eight inches deep, and eight
inches diameter; at the bottom of it you may lay either a close grate, or a
thick Iron Plate full of holes.

C. Is the Ash-hole & Receptacle of the blast or wind issuing from the Bellows,
which must [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=80) be very close,
and the stopper fit the mouth of it exactly, to shut very close, so that the
wind may find no vent any where out but up­wards through the grate; this hole
needeth be but four inches deep, from the grate down to the bottom; the Ashes
must be taken out of it from time to time, that they may not stuff up the
place.

D. Is the Coppelling-place, which may be about seven or eight inches in
length, and six inches wide, and about four or five in­ches deep.

E. Is the gap, through which the flame reverberates from the Furnace into the
Cop­pelling-place, it is about four inches wide, about two or three deep, and
two inches in length.

F. is the Pipe or Chimney, which draw­eth the flame.

G. Is a hole, through which you may put Fewel into the Furnace, to avoid
uncover­ing of it, when it is covered, as it must be when you Coppel; you must
have a stopper exactly fitted to it.

H. Is a hollow place under the Coppel­ling-place, which may serve to put Coals
in.

I. Is an Iron Hoop about an inch high, such as the Refiners use to make
Coppels in, you may have them of what bigness you [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=81) please; at the
bottom are fastened two flat Iron Bars, to hold the bone-ashes, having no
other bottom.

To use this Furnace, you must have a pair of Smiths Bellows, of a midling
size; which (if there be not room in your La­boratory to fix them below) you
may fix above ground, and so they will not incum­ber your Operatory below; and
for the con­ducting of the Wind, you may have a square Pipe of Wood, made like
an Organ-pipe, to come down from the nose of the Bellows through the Wall of
the Furnace into the Ash-hole; and to the pearch you may tye a piece of Rope
with a wooden handle at the end, to pull by in blowing the said Bellows.

In all the Operations I do in this Furnace (even when I Coppel) I use nothing
but small Sinder from the Glass-House, which are not so heady as Charcoal.

### 1.104. Directions how to Coppel in this Furnace; and first, how to make a
Coppel.

TAke such an Iron Hoop, set it upon a sheet of brown paper to save the bone-
Ashes (that else you might scatter;) then fill it with a sufficient quantity
of bone-ashes, first moistened with 🜄, so that they hold toge­ther [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=81) when you press
them in your hand; stamp them well down with the end of an Iron Pestle, and
make the Coppel very close and hard every where, then make it hollow in the
middle, that it may hold the Matter you mean to Coppel without running over;
make it very smooth, then set it into the Coppelling-place, and raise it with
any sifted Ashes, or with a piece of a fire-stone, so that the top of it may
be level with the lower part of the gap. Then cover the Coppel­ling-place with
two bricks, (I use two bricks, because I can lift up one of them to put the
Metal into the Coppel, and leaving the other brick, the Coppel is not all
uncovered, as it would be if it were covered with one whole stone.) Then
having kindled the 🜂 in the Furnace, cover it as before, and blow the
Bellows, and the flame finding no way out, is forced and driven into the
Coppelling-place, where it reverberates upon the Cop­pel, which when you see
that it is well nealed, lift up one end of the hithermost brick, and put in
the ♄, the quantity whereof must be proportioned according to the impurity of
the Matter you mean to Coppel; if it be Ster­ling ☽, you must take four parts
of ♄ to one of ☽; if it be any other mixture of impure Metal, you must take
five, six, or seven parts of ♄ to one of the Metal, according to the [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=82) impurity of it.
Govern the 🜂 so, that the Coppel may always work and flow, and you may leave
a little space between the two bricks, through which you may look into the
Coppel to see how it worketh, and if you see that it requires more flame than
the Sin­ders, or Charcoal will afford, you may put into the Furnace a round
thick piece of wood; but you must observe, that when the Cop­pelling-place is
come to be red-hot all over, and the bricks also that cover it, the Coppel
will then work with a very gentle 🜂, so that then you must blow but gently;
for if then you should give strong 🜂, the Matter in the Coppel would boyl too
fast, and would spat­ter about.

Instead of an Iron Hoop, many times I use but an earthen Porringer, to make a
Cop­pel, filling up the Coppelling-place with any Ashes round about the
Coppel, and find that it doth altogether as well, only that it serves but for
once. Note, that whilst you Cop­pel, or neal the Coppel, you may make
Re­gulus, if you have occasion, or melt any other Metal at the same time. This
Fur­nace doth far exceed any ordinary Wind-furnace; for I can at any time make
a par­cel of Regulus, or melt any Metal before the 🜂 would kindle in an
ordinary Wind-fur­nace, and that with much less charge. In [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=82) this Furnace
you may distill with a luted Retort in a naked 🜂, by leaving two little holes
in the Wall of it to put two small Iron bars in, to set the Retort upon; you
may al­so distill in it, in Sand, both in a Retort and in a Cucurbite, by
putting an Iron Pot into the Furnace with Sand, and laying some Brick with
Clay about the Pot, to inclose that part of the Pot (or luted Retort) that
stands out of the Furnace, and you may give what degrees of 🜂 you will, from
the first and lowest, to the fourth and highest de­gree.

The End of the First Part.

## 2\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=83)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=83)

CHYMICAL SECRETS.

The Second Part.

CONTAINING Many Rare and Excel­lent Medicines, Choice Men­struums, and
Alkahests: The true and only way to Volatilize the fixt Salt of Tartar, and to
Cor­porifie Spirit of Wine, which is Aqua sicca in forma Salis, and is the
true Vegetable Menstruum.

Never before Published.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1682.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=84)

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=84)

## 3\. CHYMICAL SECRETS.  
The Second Part.

### 3.1. A Real and True way to Volatilize the Salt of Tartar, and Corporifie
Spirit of Wine, as it was wrought by a Noble Per­son beyond Sea, and by him
Communicated unto me.

HE took but lbj. of Tartar well Calci­ned, and dissolved it in the Air, free
from the Sun, then filtred, and congealed in a Glass Vessel, then he Calcined
it as the Dutch-man doth (in the next Process) to keep it glowing hot for six
or eight hours, then dissolved it again in the Air, and filtred, [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=85) congealed, and
calcined as before. He re­peated this ten times, then dissolved it in
di­stilled Vinegar (he used Spanish and French Vinegar;) the whole Secret (as
he saith) consisteth in well distilling of the Vinegar, which must be done in
B. M. but it must be so gentle, that you may receive the flegm by it self; and
as soon as you perceive that the drops come Acid, change the Recipient,
putting on another, and then distill the Spi­rit with a stronger fire, so that
you may tell eight or nine between every drop: Conti­nue distilling until it
become like a Syrup, then change the Recipient again, and distill with a
stronger fire until it begin to smell of the fire, and that it be almost dry.
Recti­fie this last and strongest part by it self, and put it to the weaker
part, (keeping the flegm by it self for another use) and recti­fie it together
so often until there remain not the least spot at the bottom of the Glass
after the distillations, which must be to dry­ness every time, and every time
in a clean Retort: This is not a strong Spirit of Vine­gar, nor needs it be,
but this will do the Work. Then take ℥vij. or viij. of your Salt of Tar­tar,
and dissolve it in as much of the said Spirit, or more, as will dissolve it;
let it stand, and it will settle some black feces; then filter it, and
congeal, and calcine it as [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=85) before, but not
with so strong a fire; it must be scarce red-hot, and one hour will suffice;
grind it while it is hot, and dissolve it again in new distilled Vinegar as
before, let the feces settle[?], then filter it, congeal and cal­cine again as
before. Repeat this, till it leave no feces behind, which will be in Seven or
Eight times, if you have wrought well; then when it is very dry, take ℥j. of
it to make a tryal, put it into a clean Glass body, and pour upon it so much
high rectified Spirit of Wine, as will not only moisten it, but that it be
very thin; let it stand thus twenty four hours close stopped in a very gentle
heat, that it may be but Blood-warm; then distill with a gentle fire. If the
Spirit stays, and the flegm come away, then proceed with the whole parcel; but
if not, you must con­tinue the dissolution in distilled Vinegar, Filtration,
Coagulation, and Calcination, as before, until you find (by trying) that the
Spirit stayeth with the Salt, which it will do in a few times: Then proceed
with the rest of the parcel in the same manner as you did with the Ounce;
continue the imbibition and distillation with Spirit of Wine so often, till
the Spirit of Wine come away as strong as it was put on. Then here lyeth the
Se­cret, to Sublime it: Dissolve the said Salt of Tartar impregnated in the
flegm of your [[Page
150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=86) distilled
Vinegar, or in a very weak Spirit of Wine, using no more of the dissolvent
than will dissolve it; shake them well toge­ther, and it will instantly
dissolve all the best and finest part of the Salt of Tartar, and leave the
course part of it, for that will not so easily dissolve, Pour off the
dissolution, and filter it, then put it into a Cucurbite, and distill off the
flegm off the Vinegar, or the weak Spirit of Wine, and then will the dry
Spirit, or Aqua Sicca ascend like the purest Isickles dry that ever you saw;
and this is the true Volatile Salt of Tartar, and Spirit of Wine, in forma
Salis, and is the Vegetable Menstruum, which will dissolve leaf ☉ into an
Oylish Substance in a very gentle heat.

The Tartar which remaineth in the bot­tom of this Sublimation you must put to
that which was left undissolved by the flegm of Vinegar, or weak Spirit of
Wine, and Proceed to fix more Spirit of Wine upon that, being first Calcined,
but not so long, nor with so strong a fir [...] as formerly; and then dissolve
it once in the Ai [...] and it will leave more feces at this time than at any
time before; then filter and congeal, and dissolve it in distilled Vinegar
[...] as before. And now you shall do more in three times than you did all the
times before, for the Tartar is [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=86) altered in its
Nature; then proceed with it as before, imbibing with S. V. And thus you may
fix as much S. V. as you please, and Sublime as many pure and clear Crystals
as you please.

Note, That when your Spirit of Wine is fixed on the Tartar, it will be as
sweet as Sugar; but when it is separated, as above-said, the Tartar will be of
its old Nature, but fit to be impregnated again with much less trouble.

### 3.2. The Dutch-mans Process of Volatilizing Salt of Tartar, and
Corporifying Spirit of Wine, is thus:

HE dissolveth his Tartar Calcined in di­stilled Rain 🜄, and being settled,
fil­ters and congealeth, then Calcineth it for six or eight hours, so that it
be only glowing hot, and no more: Then Powder it, and dissolve it, filter,
congeal, and reverberate, as before; and this he doth sixteen or eighteen
times, until the Tartar settle little or no feces. Then take four or eight
Ounces of it (or what you please) and put it into a Cucurbite, and pour upon
it the best recti­fied Spirit of Wine, so much, that it may be well moistened,
but not to swim over it. Then he digesteth it in B. M. for a day, and [[Page
152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=87) then gently
distills it off, but the Spirit of Wine  [...]scendeth, and will not stay;
when it is dry, he puts the Spirit of Wine back again upon it, and distilleth
as before; and this he doth so often (twelve or fourteen times) and then it
will hold the Spirit of Wine, and the flegm will come away: This he doth with
new Spirit of Wine; and when he findeth that a pretty quantity is congealed
with the Tartar, he grinds it (being very dry) and mixeth it with three parts
of good Bole-Armony, and puts it into a Retort, and distilleth a Spirit from
it by degrees of fire, forcing it strongly at last, and it will be a yellow
Spirit, which he deflegmeth once, and then dissolveth his Calx of ☉ in this
Monstruum, which by digestion extracts all the Tincture of ☉, and leaveth the
Body which, tinging it self of a pure red. Of this he giveth two or three
drops in a little Sack, which doth Miracles (as he saith.)

### 3.3. He maketh his red Calx of ☉ thus:

DIssolve fine ☉ past through Antimony in A.  [...]. then put water into it,
and then cast in ☿, and all will become like a H [...]par; then wash the aaa,
and grind it with three times as much prepared Salt, and di­still it in a
Retort; then edulcorate the Calx, [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=87) and grind ℥j.
of it with three of Cinaber, and then reverberate it by degrees gently: This
he doth twice a day, and repeateth it eleven or twelve times, and it will be a
most subtil red Calx, like Scarlet in colour.

### 3.4. Elixir ex vino & Sole.

TAke the best Odoriferous Rhenish-wine five Gallons, separate its Spirit and
Salt, rectifie the one, and purifie the other; then acuate the Spirit with
another prepared  [...]alt, and at last joyn it to its own pure Cry­stalline
Salt; then is it a true Aqua vitae Philosophorum. This must dissolve a well
prepared Calx of ☉, and by a continued circulation unite with it; then by
Sublima­tion be fixt together, and lastly, by Solution and Coagulation become
incombustible Oyl, which is a great Medicine.

### 3.5. Monsieur Toysonnier wrought thus:

TAke fresh Urine of young Boys, fill one Pot with it, and evaporate it away,
next Morning put on fresh, and evaporate; do thus three or four days, then
evaporate to a Honey, and that you feel a Ponticifie smoak from it, then
cease, and put your Honey into an earthen Vessel, and expose it [[Page
154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=88) to Celifie in
the Air. As soon as it is cold, it will be hard, but the Air will resolve it:
Make thus what quantity of Honey you please: Celifie them four days, then have
another earthen Pot, covered with a rever­sed one that hath a hole in the
bottom, fasten thereon a neck of a Cucurbite of Glass, ten or twelve inches
long, upon which a Retort, with the bottom out for a head, to which fasten a
great ballon. He did put fifteen pound of Honey into his Pot, and with a
gentle fire first distilled off the Spirit and Vo­latile Salt; these be put
upon new Honey, and in Balneo distilled a purer Spirit and Vo­latile Salt;
(the flegm that followed, if put upon new Honey, will become pure Spirit and
Salt) draw the fixed Salt out of all the Caput Mortuums; put ℥xij. of the
Spirit up­on as much pure Spirit of Wine, and it will coagulate it all into a
perfect dry Salt: Min­gle these ℥xxiv. of Volatile Salt with ℥vj. of Salt of
Wine, ℥iij. of Volatile Salt of Urine, and ℥iv. of ☿ Precipitate, and put them
in­to a Body with Head, Limbeck, and Re­ceiver, and Sublime with gentle heat:
Part cometh over in Spirit, and part riseth in Salt. Take ℥xiv. of Salt, and
vi [...]. of Spirit, and ℥ss. of Calx of ☽, and distill with exceed­ing gentle
heat in a Body and Head with a Receiver, a liquid Spirit will come over,
[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=88) and a
white Salt Sublime into the head: Put all back upon the Cake of ☽, and distill
as before. He hath now  [...]eated this Worst eleven times; at the first, the
Spirit and Salt were ten days rising from the ☽, but after­wards seven or
eight: The junctures were all perfectly shut, yet above half of the Vo­latile
Matter was vanished. The Salt of Wine was made thus: (Spanish Wine gave none,
but French did pretty store.) After you have drawn off the Spirit and the
flegm, evaporate the residue (very gently) usque ad pelliculam, then set in a
cold place, and in fifteen days there were many Crystals in it; wash these
with the flegm of the Wine, from the blackness and foulness that is upon them.
The ☿ Precipitate was made thus: Dissolve ℥iv. of ☿ in ℥x. of A. F. made of
two parts of Vitriol, and one of Nitre. Ex­tend the solution, by pouring a
great quan­tity (eight or ten Pints) of fair 🜄 upon it; then pour upon it a
Lixivium made of the fixed Salt of Wine and fair 🜄. He made his Lixivium of
℥iv. of fixed Salt, and but one of the ☿ [...] Precipitate; wherefore he
poured upon the Liquor that he poured off from the Precipitate about half a
pint of the Spirit of Wine, and then the ☿ Precipitated all down. Take both
the Precipitates, and wash them a little from the Spirits of the A. F.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=89)
Hartman.) This Relation is of Sir K. It was done by his Operator Monsieur
Toy­sonnier, in his Operatory in the Piazza in Cove [...]t-Garden.

### 3.6. The Menstruum Coelicum Exuberatum, to dissolve ☉, and all Metals, and
carry them over the Helm. Wrought by Dr. Clodius, and by him Communicated unto
me.

PUT lbj. of perfectly rectified Spirit of Urine to lbiij. of a perfectly
rectified Spirit of Wine, and it will coagulate it all to a drop into a firm
Salt; Sublime and di­still this, and about lbss. will Sublime up in a most
pure active dry Salt, and about two spoonfuls will come over in a fiery
Liquor, and the rest will be a stinking  [...]lat flegm re­maining in the
Cucurbite. Add Spirit of Wine to your two spoonfuls of Liquor, so much as to
make it up lbiij. put this to your lbss. of dry Sublimed Salt, and all will be
a Coagulum, which distill and Sublime as before, and you shall have about two
spoon­fulls and a half of fiery Liquor, and about  [...]ij. more than before
of Sublimed Salt, and in the bottom will remain a stinking flegm as before. He
repeated this twelve times, still with fresh Spirit of Wine, and every time
the quantity of the fiery Spirit in­creaseth [[Page
157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=89) (drawing still
some little addition of dry Salt from the Spirit of Wine) till at length all
the dry Salt come over in liquid fiery Spirit, which he calleth Menstruum
Coelicum; then it will dissolve ☉, and all Me­tals, and carry them over the
Helm with it. This poured upon Salt of Tartar, will pre­sently dissolve it,
and carry it over the helm with it: You may also multiply it as much as you
will with pure Salt or Spirit of Urine.

To add ☿ to it, do thus. Take ☿ well purified (if Spanish) shaking and washing
well with Spirit of Wine or distilled Vine­gar, till it yield no more
blackness, will serve; but if other, Sublime it sometimes to per­fect purity.
Then he put lb [...]. of it into a Retort, joyning a large stone Receiver, and
gave strong sudden 🜂. Repeat this till you have Mercurial 🜄 enough, which
will be quite insipid: Put this 🜄 upon purified run­ning ☿, and digest them
together thirty days, & all will be a viscous Mucilaginous Matter: Distill off
the flegm, and you shall have an Oyl remaining; put upon this Oyl your fiery
Spirit of Urine, and Spirit of Wine (twelve times repeated, as is mentioned)
and the Spi­rit will resolve the Oyl; then distill them over together, and you
have the Menstruum Coelicum  [...]xu [...]eratum. To aate Regulus [[Page
158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=90) of  (antimony)
with ☿, you must pulverize the Regu­lus grosly, as Bay-Salt; then strew it
gently upon the ☿ in a Matrass, and digest three or four days; then grind
together, and it will aaate. Thus you may do with ☽ and Reg. He found
difficulty in doing it with ♀ and Reg. but after digestion, he let it stand a
little while with 🜄 and Salt upon it, and it aaated of it self with the ☿. If
you digest eight days, the blackness you wash away is a Combustible Sulpher,
like Powder of Coal. He maketh Mercurial 🜄 thus: Put store of quick dry Sand
upon ☿ in a Cucurbite, and distill it in very gentle fire, and most will come
over in 🜄: Put this 🜄 upon new ☿, and digest, and it will bring it into an
Oily substance; mingle this with your Coagulum of Spirit of Wine, and Spirit
of Urine (See [...]ullies eight Experiments) and make an Al­kahest of these,
which will be perfect when it is aaated with ☉. Then proceed as Lully
teacheth.

The said Dr. Clodius told me also, that the great Secret of Purifying all
Salts and Vi­triol, &c. consisteth in the purifying the Menstruum (i. e. 🜄)
for if the 🜄 have feces, in which you  [...]dissolve them, it rather
in­creaseth their foulness. He doth thus.

Set Equinox Rain 🜄 (pure Dew were better) to putrifie in Glass Vessels,
slightly [[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=90)
covered (only to keep things from falling in) in a Cellar; in six weeks the
putrefaction will be finished, and all the feces fallen to the bottom; filter
it, set the clear to putrifie again, which will require longer time than
before: If you put some quick dry Sand in i [...], it will help the
putrefaction much the sooner, drawing down the foulness to it. In this
purified 🜄 dissolve your Salt, Vitriol, Salt of Urine, &c. And you must have
a Gallon of this water to ℥j. of Salt; for such dilating of the Salt maketh
the Menstruum lighter than the feces, and therefore they fall down. Mark the
end of Isaac Hollands Pro­cess upon Vitriol, where he directeth dissolv­ing it
in fair 🜄 distilled off; then filter and congeal, and this you may repeat two
or three times: Then take nine parts of this pure Salt, and put to them one
part of pure Spirit of Wine, digest them together for seven or eight days,
then distill off the Li­quor very gently, and about fourteen or fif­teen parts
will come off in insipid flegm, and only one part, or a little more will
remain with the Salt in a dry substance. Repeat this nine times with fresh
Spirit of Wine, till you have employed as much Spirit of Wine as you wrought
upon Salt, which will be increased scarce one part: Put it then to Sub­lime,
and every whit of it will rise in a pure [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=91) Sublimate,
excepting a small parcel of feces that will remain in the bottom: You may
multiply this Sublimate as much as you wil [...] by addition of Spirit of Wine
to it; then distilling away the Liquor, for the 🜹 of the Spirit of Wine will
adhere to the pure Salt in a pure Saline form, and the rest will come away in
an insipid flegm. But in the end, this Salt will be apt to come over in an
Oily Liquor, and sometimes after that, in form of Salt again: But he cannot
yet penetrate into the Causes of these Bodies coming over sometimes liquid,
sometimes dry. Incorpo­rate some of this Salt with pure Spirit of Wine, and it
will dissolve ☉, and all Me­tals.

### 3.7. To prepare a most Excellent Medicine with this Mercurial Water,
proceed thus:

TAke of the afore-said Mercurial 🜄, and of Spirit of Wine distilled three
times upon Honey, and then rectified upon Salt of Tartar, of each equal parts;
distil them together, until they be well united: Then to six parts of this
Menstruum put one part of a Spungy Calx of ☉, digest them toge­ther, until the
☉ is totally dissolved, except a little white Earth, which will remain in the
bottom. Then distill in a Retort in [[Page
161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=91) Sand, and
cohobate so often, until the ☉ come over into the Receiver. Then sepa­rate it,
by distilling in a Cucurbite, and there will remain a red Oyl like a Ruby in
the bottom; whereof one drop in some fit Vehicle, is admirable for Health.
This dis­solution of ☉ hath a most Odoriferous scent, better than Amber and
Musk.

### 3.8. The Lunary 🜄 of Paradise, or the Coelestial Eagle of the Lunar
Sphere, which is Lul­lys true Spiritual Lunary.

DIssolve ☽ in A. F. and precipitate it with Spirit of Salt, dry the Calx, and
mix it with equal parts of Calx of ♃, and thence distil the volatil Crystals
or butter s. a. Ex­pose this butter to the Air to resolve into li­quor, that
by that means it may make a Den­tifique attraction of the Spirit of the World,
which specifieth it self by this Magnet. Put the clean liquor into a
Cucurbite, and di­gest with a Lamp 🜂 for 15 days, at the end of which time
there will distil over an Aethe­rial liquor, which is the Lunary; with which
you may work Miracles in Physick, especially in all diseases of the head and
brain; the dose is the same with the former, mixing it with a fit Vehicle;
Note, that it turneth all liquors into milk, and is sometimes Emetick. For
trans­mutation, [[Page
162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=92) deflegm this 🜄
as before and you shall have the Metalline Gluten; which be­ing digested per
se, will become a white Pow­der of projection; and afterwards a red one: But
it will be better to add a tenth part of leaf ☉ or of the Sulphur of ☉ made by
the Sal Enix: It is multiplyed by new addition of the Lunary or Gluten. Note,
that this liquor is the Sommet of the Lunary: For the Volatil Crystals of ☽
are the simple Lunary; but this Coelestial 🜄 is the Spiritual Lunary, or the
highest point of the Metalline Salts: Note, that you may draw the red and
white Oyl of what remaineth, and proceed as before.

### 3.9. Water of Paradise of Saturn, or Iupiters Coelestial Eagle.

DIssolve ♄ in common A. F. and it will precipitate into a Potential ☿; dry it,
and mix it in great quantity with equal parts of Calx of ♃ or with
(antimony): Draw the Volatil Cry­stals or butter from this, which resolve in
the Air: Put the liquor into a Glass Cucurbite, with its head and recipient,
digest with a gentle lamp 🜂 the space of 15 days; no­thing will come over by
distillation, but on­ly the liquor will Maturate, and become red, and
afterwards within twenty, thirty, or fourty days the Idea of ♄ will rise
invisibly, [[Page
163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=92) and distil into
the Recipient, which is the 🜄 of Paradise.

This 🜄 cureth all Saturnian Maladies, and Melancholy, being mixt with S. V.
You may give it in all Inflammations both inward and outward: The Dose is
equal with the former.

To use it for Metals, put this 🜄 of Para­dise into a small Cucurbite and
deflegm it with a Lamp 🜂 and there will remain the Saturnean Gluten, the
Philosophers Gum, or ☿ of the wise, A Lot, &c. Digest per se, or add a tenth
part of ☉. This Gum is the true Metalline radical Moisture.

[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=93)

### 3.10. About Vitrum Antimonii, and the Tincture of it.

MOnsieur Borel told me, that he had observed this in making the Tincture of
(antimony) (by distilled Vinegar upon the Glass of  (antimony)) that when he
went to dulcifie the Salt that remaineth in the Tincture after the distilled
Vinegar is evaporated away (as Bas. Val. teacheth) he could never perceive
that the 🜄 evaporating carried away the remaining Salt of the Vinegar, but
still when the 🜄 was gone, and left the Powder dry, it was[?] as salt as ever
before, and was of a brown gray colour. But this he observed, that af­ter four
or five times dissolving in 🜄 and evaporating, the Tincture Precipitated down
very red, and the Salt of the distilled Vinegar remained dissolved in the 🜄,
so that he then poured off the 🜄, and dryed the Powder, which then was
exceeding red, and perfectly dulcified: But after thus severing of the Salt
from it, S. V. would not touch upon it, and extract it any further:
Perad­venture a Tartarized S. V. will do it.

He also told me, that in making the Vi­trum Antimonii for this Work, the
Mystery to have it certain and constant, consisteth in this; That after you
have Calcined your  (antimony) [[Page
165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=93) by long and
gentle evaporation and stirring, so that it smoak no more; and when you have
put it in the Crucible to melt into Glass, you must put to it a little piece
of a Coal to burn with the  (antimony), and set the Sul­phur of it on fire,
which will make a little Regulus fall down to the bottom, and the Glass will
be pure clear and red, whereas if no Coal fall or be put in, it will be black
and muddy: And that which maketh this Work of Vitrifying the  (antimony) prove
uncertain, is, that sometimes some Coals fall into the Crucible (as one gives
great heat) without the Artists taking notice, and then the Work proveth well,
but if no wooden Coals fall in, the Glass proveth not as it should.

Monsieur le Fevre told me, that when he makes the Tincture of Vitrum
Antimoniii, be observes, as Monsieur Borel saith, that if the extract of it
made by distilled Vine­gar be perfectly dulcified from all saltness, the S. V.
will not touch upon it; and if it be put upon it in dry Powder, containing the
Salt of the distilled Vinegar with the Tincture of the  (antimony), it will
draw with the Tincture some nocuous Spirits from the Salt; therefore the doth
thus: Evaporate fair 🜄 from it two or three times, the last time leave it
very moist; then put S. V. upon it, and it will presently impregnate it self
with the Tincture.

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=94)

### 3.11. A white Spirit of Sulphur to dissolve ☽ and ☿; given me by Monsieur
Bugneau.

TAke the black Spirit of Sulphur, made per Campanam, put it into a Glass
Re­tort well luted (for fear of breaking) all but a patch at the top as big as
a Crown-piece, that you may thereby see (holding a Candle near it) in what
state the Liquor, therein con­tained, is [...] Distill in Sand, till all the
flegm is come over, and that it begin to drop very sharp, which happens to him
after ℥vj or vij. are come over, of lbj. of Spirit put at first into the
Retort. By this time you shall see a lit­tle 🜹 Sublime up to the discovered
place of the Retort, and a brown Circle of earthy substance swimming upon the
Liquor about the sides of it joyning to the Glass: You must now give the 🜂 so
quick, that the Liquor boyl a little, and presently you shall see it turn all
white, and the brown Corona of Earth become white: Then let the fire die, and
when the Retort is cold, pour out the Spirit, which will look like Rock 🜄,
and will leave some dregs behind; you will have about ℥ix. of this Spirit, put
it upon ℥iv. of ☽ in leaf, and distill it gently off, and after a while you
shall see your ☽ quite dissolved [[Page
167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=94) into clear
Liquor; let it cool, and the ☽ will become a Cake of Crystal, and some Liquor
will swim over it; pour off this Li­quor, and put ℥ij. of fresh ☽ to it (which
now may be in small grenailles) and it will dissolve this as the former, and
become a Crystal by cold: The Liquor that you then pour off will dissolve ℥ij.
more of fresh ☽, doing as before. Now the Liquor that re­maineth after this
third solution of ☽, will dissolve ℥ij. of running ☿ into a Crystalline
substance as the former.

This Spirit of Sulphur thus rectified, be­ing used inwardly (before it is used
with ☽) is much stronger than when it is black, at the first drawing, and is
much gratefuller to the taste, being mingled with 🜄 or other Ve­hicle.

### 3.12. An Universal Medicine, from ☉ and  (antimony), &c.

TAke of the ☿ prepared, as shall be taught hereafter, ℥j. of the Tincture of
☉, afterwards set down, ʒj. mix them well to­gether in a Glass Mortar, then
put them in­to a small Matrass, and digest them with a Lamp 🜂 with one wick
only for ten days; then digest for ten days more with two wicks, then with
three, and lastly, with four wicks, [[Page
168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=95) which makes
fourty days digestion in all, at the end of which you shall have a red Pow­der
as red as a Ruby.

This Powder is an Universal Medicine for the greatest and Chronick Diseases:
It Cures the Gout, Dropsie, Palsie, French-Pox, Plague, Leprosie, the Evil,
Small-pox, and Measles. Its visible Operation is by Stools, by Urine, and by
Sweat: The Dose is from gr. iij. to iv. or v. in Conserve of Borrage or
Vio­lets.

### 3.13. To prepare the ☿ for this Work.

TAke gravelled Ashes, (or instead there­of you may take the Ashes of dryed and
burnt Lees of Wine) and of Quick­lime, of each equal parts, boyl them
toge­gether in 🜄, and make a Lixivium, which filter. Take ℥iij. or iv. of ☿
vitae, put it into a Matrass, and pour upon it of the aforesaid Lixivium, so
much as may cover it the breadth of four fingers; digest with the second
degree of heat, for three or four days, the Lixivium will extract the Tincture
of the ☿ vitae; then decant, and put on fresh Lixivium, and digest. Repeat
this, till you have extracted all the Tincture of your ☿ vitae, and the Powder
be well at­tenuated: Then mix this Powder with equal [[Page
169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=95) weight of
Sublimed 🜹, incorporate them well together with double as much of Oyl of
Tartar, then set it to putrifie in fimo for thirty days, changing the Dung
every sixth or seventh day. Then put your Matter in a Marble Mortar, and grind
it well, adding a little warm 🜄 to it; then add a little more water, but a
little hotter than the first, and grind it well; then let it settle, and
decant the 🜄, and put on fresh warm 🜄, and grind as before, then let it
settle, and decant the water; and put Vinegar upon it instead of 🜄, and grind
it, and you will see in a short time the Powder converted into running ☿.
Note, that if you Sublime Regulus of  (antimony) with four times as much 🜹,
it will Sublime with it in very red flowers; out of which in the same manner
you may extract ☿.

### 3.14. To prepare the Tincture of ☉ for this Work.

TAke fine ☉ in thin Plates, dissolve it in A. R. then pour into the
dissolution some ☿, and a fourth part of A. F. keep it in digestion untill the
☿ is all dissolved; the dissolution of ☉, which was of an Orange-colour
before, will now be white and clear, and the ☉ will Precipitate to the bottom
in a very subtil and spungy Calx; decant the [[Page
170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=96) clear, and
edulcorate the Powder of ☉, till it be freed from all Acrimony, then dry it.

Then take fine Pumice-stone, and make it red-hot in a Crucible, then
extinguish it in Vinegar; reiterate the ignitions and ex­tinctions five or six
times, then reduce it into subtil Powder, which ignifie again for half a
quarter of an hour, then make it as subtil as you can. Then put a bed of this
Pow­der into a Crucible, about a singers breadth, upon that put a Bed of your
Powder of ☉: Continue thus stratifying until all the Pow­der of ☉ be in, then
cover the Crucible with another, and lute them well together, and put it into
a Glass Oven where they pre­pare their Matter, so that the Crucible may be
always red during twenty four hours, and that the Matter in the Crucible may
not melt, Then take out the Matter out of the Cruci­ble, and pulverize it;
then put this Powder in a Matrass, and pour upon it of the fol­lowing
dissolvent, so much as may cover it three fingers breadth, digest it in Ashes
for 34 days, within a few hours you will see the dissolution Tincted of an
Orange colour; after four days digestion decant the Tincture, and pour on more
of the dissolvent, digest as before. Repeat this till you have extracted all
the Tincture of your Powder; then filter all your Extracts, and evaporate with
a gen­tle [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=96) 🜂 to dryness,
and you will have a yel­low Powder of an Orange-colour; put this Powder into a
Matrass, and pour upon it a S. V. prepared as shall be taught hereafter;
digest it, and in two days the S. V. will be Tincted as red as Blood, which
decant, and put on fresh S. V. digest and decant. Re­peat this so often till
you have extracted all the Tincture out of the Powder: Then di­still off the
Tincted S. V. in B. with a gen­tle heat to dryness; and thus is the Tincture
of ☉ prepared for this Work, to be used with the said ☿ of  (antimony), as is
said above.

Note, That if you digest and circulate this Tincture in fimo before you
distill the S. V. from it, and then distill and cohobate two or three times,
and abstracting half the S. V. from it, you will have a kind of an Aurum
potabile, which is a very great Cor­  [...]oborant in the greatest weakness:
The Dose is five or six drops in any convenient Vehicle.

### 3.15. The Dissolvent.

MElt Salt in a Crucible, then take lbj. thereof and pulverize it; mix this
Powder with lbiij. of Honey, boyl them to­gether in an Iron Kettle to the
consistence of a Suppository; then cast this Matter upon a [[Page
172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=97) smooth stone,
and being cold, pulverize it, and put it into a Retort; pour upon it distilled
Vinegar rectified, lbiij. Digest for twenty four hours, then distill in Sand
by graduated 🜂, giving strong 🜂 at last for six hours, that the Retort may
be red; then let it stand to cool the space of twelve hours: Then di­still
this Vinegar in a Cucurbite in Ashes, separating the flegm, rectifie in three
or four times more, and it will be white and clear; before it was yellow.

### 3.16. To prepare the Spirit of Wine, fit for this Tincture of ☉.

TAke Salt of Tartar well purified by se­veral Dissolutions, Filtrations, and
Co­agulations, and then reduced to Powder, ℥iv. which put into a Retort, and
pour up­on it lbij, of rectified Spirit of Wine, let it stand so twenty four
hours, then distill only lbj. of it in Ashes, and you shall have an ex­cellent
Spirit of Wine,  [...]it to draw Tinctures. In the same manner you may extract
the Tincture of Coral, putting the Corals whole with the Pumice-stone, which
by its dry­ness will extract the Tincture of the Corals, leaving them as white
as Starch.

In the same manner you may also extract the Tincture of ☽, which will be blew.

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=97) Sir
Kenelm D.) This Process was given to Monsieur Vrto, Physician of Burges, by
Monsieur Mayo, Sieur de Vancours. This Monsieur Mayo was a great Friend and
Con­fident of Monsieur de la Violette, who gave him this Operation, and they
made it toge­ther. He said, that this was the solidest and best thing that
Monsieur de la Violette had. He gave this to Monsieur Vrto in acknow­ledgment
of a very great good turn he had done him, and after Monsieur Vrto had
re­fused to receive of him a Present of great Va­lue.

### 3.17. A great Corroborant and Sudorifick, wrought by Monsieur Du Closs,
Physician at Paris; given me by him the 16th. of August, 1660.

DIssolve ☉ by means of Salt, Nitre, and Allom, &c. after Zwelfer's manner;
then evaporate away the 🜄, and put S. V. upon the remaining Powder, and it
will go all into a Tincture, or rather all the ☉ will dis­solve in the S. V.
leaving the Salts, most of which will Precipitate in the S. V. Then he
Precipitateth the ☉ with Oyl of Tartar, and washeth and dryeth it, then
reverberateth it, and it is in a deep red Powder; and this he called Cro
[...]us Solis: (But it is not so, al­most all the ☉ remaineth still in the
solution [[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=98)
(which is yellow) and Oyl of Tartar will not Precipitate it, so that it is
rather the Salts that remained in the S. V. and a little mingled with them:)
But take Spirit of Honey (the Vinegry Spirit) two parts, and one part of S. V.
and pour this upon the solution, and all the ☉ will Precipitate like a green
Mud; pour off the Liquor, and put fair 🜄 to the Precipitation, and some ☿,
and so you may have all your ☉, which when it is dry, will be a deep-red
Powder, but if you reverbe­rate it, and aaate it with ☿, and grind it with
Sulphur, and then burn and reverbe­rate it, it will all fly away: And this is
his best way of Calcining and opening ☉.

Upon this Calx of ☉ he putteth his Men­struum, and in twenty four hours it
will Tinct it self as red as blood, which if you digest long, an Oyl will swim
upon it; he evaporateth the Menstruum till it be thick, and digests that with
a Lamp Furnace.

### 3.18. His Menstruum is thus made:

TAke pure S. V. and pure Spirit of Urine, ana, put them together, and distill
off the S. V. with very gentle heat, there will remain a flegmatick Liquor in
the bottom: Cohobate the S. V. upon it till there remain only perfect flegm in
the bottom, and that [[Page
175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=98) all the Spirits
and Volatile Salt of the Urine be in the S. V. This is a great dissolvent and
Alkahest; but it will be stronger if you work it again with new Spirit of
Urine, and so you may make it as strong as you will [...] But this hath not
the Properties of Helmont's pretended Alkahest, to come off from the Body it
hath dissolved, as strong as you put it on, for it leaveth much of the Saline
Spi­rits with the opened Body, if you distill it off: He found some running ☿
in the filters after he had dissolved the ☉ only as far as Zwelfer teacheth;
which solution openeth it exceedingly, and rendereth it apt to
Mer­curialization; but he useth most the follow­ing Calx of ☉: Make an aaa of
☉ and ☿ in due manner, which grind well with Flow­ers of Sulphur, and set it
upon Coals, and so make a Calx of ☉ (ut artis est:) Re­peat this Calcination
two or three times, then take the Calx of ☉, and grind it exceeding well with
twice as much pure decrepitated Salt; put these into a Crucible, which cover
well, and set it to Cement or Reverberate during six hours (or more) in a
Furnace where the heat may be increased by degrees, so that in due time the
Crucible become red. Continue so a pretty time, but have a care the Salt melt
not: When it is cold, take out the Matter, and grind it well, and pour hot
[[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=99) 🜄 upon
it, to dissolve all the Salt, and filter it off, and pour on more 🜄, doing so
till you have severed all the Salt from the ☉ (as also a white Earthy
substance, that will swim up­on the 🜄) then dry the ☉, which grind again with
double its quantity of prepared Salt, (the same Salt will serve again when the
🜄 is distilled from it) and Cement it, and work all as before, taking care
always, that the ☉ settle well to the bottom after you have stirred it in the
🜄. Repeat this six, seven, or eight times (the more the better) till the ☉
come to be all a gray or white Powder: Then Cement it with double its quantity
of pure Salt of Tartar, in the same manner as you did with Salt, and do always
all as before. Repeat this two, three, or four times, dulcifying it every time
very well from the Salt: Then put upon it (being very dry) the Menstruum of S.
V. and Spi­rit of Urine, mentioned before, and it will be Tincted Blood-red in
twenty four hours: Pour off that, and put on more, till you have drawn out all
the Tincture, which di­still in a Cucurbite with very gentle 🜂, till it
become a Gum, of which he putteth ℥j. into a Pint of Sack, and giveth a
spoon­ful for a Dose. It is a mighty Corroborant, as also a Sudorifick, where
Nature requireth it. It will make one sweat twenty four hours.

[[Page 177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=99)The
manner of making his Menstruum, is, to put the two Spirits into a long
Cu­curbite with a narrow mouth, on which he put a Head,  [...]itting it in the
Orifice, but very large in the Body of it, and so distil­leth off his S. V.
and Cohobateth it upon the same Spirit of Urine, till the Volatile Salt be
drawn out of it, or upon new, as you see occasion.

Quaere, Of putting this Menstruum upon a Spungy gray Calx of ☉, made after
Van­dykes way.

### 3.19. The Metalline Aureal 🜄, or the Aethereal Aurum potabile, which is a
very great Medicine for the Gout: It is the true Her­maphroditick Bath.

DIssolve ☽ in A. F. then Precipitate it with Spirit of Salt, then edulcorate
the Powder and dry it, then mix it with its weight of  (antimony) (or Calx of
♃) distill a trans­parent Butter thereof: Take of this Butter one part, mix it
with as much of Calx of ☉ (made by dissolving ☉ in Spirit of Salt) digest them
together, until they be reduced into a Liquor: Distill this Liquor in a
Re­tort, the Spirit of Salt will come over first, and then will follow a red
Butter, which is the great Chalybs, which resolves into a [[Page
178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=100) Liquor in the
Air; put this Liquor into a Cucurbite, joyn a Head and Receiver to it, and
then digest with a Lamp 🜂 for fifteen days, then an Aethereal Liquor will
begin to come over in an invisible form, which will distill into the
Recipient: Deflegm this Liquor until you come to the Eagles Metal­line Gluten;
which is digested (either per se or with ☉) into a true Physical stone: When
it is in an Aethereal Liquor you may take two drops of it in some Cordial
Spi­rit.

### 3.20. The Eagles Gluten, or ☿ of the Wise, or Me­talline Menstruum; with
which and Lions Blood is made the Metalline Stone.

THE Gluten is of divers sorts: The first is altogether Mineral, and is drawn
from ☿ and  (antimony): If you joyn Sulphur of  (antimony) with this Gluten,
you may make a Medici­nal Stone of it. The Second is Metallick, viz.
Saturneal, Lunary, and Aureal. The third is partly Mineral, and partly
Metal­line; as for Example, when one draws  [...] Liquor (which doth not wet)
from ☿ of  [...] (that is to say, from its repercuted Calx) and  (antimony),
which is the Magnet of the Spirit o [...] the World; then draw the Gluten as
you know. The Gluten is Mineral and Metal­line, [[Page
179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=100) and is
sufficient to make the Physical Stone of it, both Mineral and Metalline.

Note, that if you digest per se, what sort of Gluten soever, you may make the
Phy­sical Stone of it. But for to shorten the Work, you may add ☉; for all
Metalline or Mineral Gluten contains in it self its in­ternal Sulphur, which
may be coagulated and fixed into a true Aetherial Panacaea. But it is better
to add this Solary Ferment, as shall be said hereafter. Wonderful things may
be performed (both in Physick, and in Transmutation of Metals) with any sort
of Gluten, either Mineral or Metalline. The 🜄 of Paradise differs not from
the Gluten, except that it containeth some parts more li­quid, and is yet full
of flegm, as shall be shewed.

### 3.21. Water of Paradise, or of the Hermetick Eagle, whereof are made
unheard-of Medicines, and Powders of Projection.

THE 🜄 of Paradise is a ce [...]tain fiery or Aethereal 🜄 drawn from
Coelestial Bo­dies, chiefly from ☉ and ☽, without the mix­ture of any waterish
flegm; so that, what is attracted is the Universal Spirit, the In­forming form
of the Elements, that of the World, Influence of the Stars, Soul of the [[Page
180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=101) World, the
vital Nutriment, latent in the Air. This 🜄 is most potent to drive out all
Diseases, it being altogether Astral, and needeth not be taken by Drams,
Scruples, or Grains, but the twentieth part of a Grain is sufficient for a
Dose; yea, almost the Va­pour only of this Gluten sufficeth, as you shall see:
It is attracted by several things, or (to speak plain) there are several
things which attract it from the Stars; first, by S [...]n­divogi [...]s his
Magnet, or Chalybs; but it requires a longer time to have this Gluten, or this
Philosophical 🜄, which is all, to all universal; for it requireth seven
Months to prepare this Universal Menstruum, after you have the Salt of Nature;
which is a thing indeterminate, and requireth a Metallick Ferment, specifick,
for to specifie and de­terminate it. This most Noble way is clearly and neatly
shewn by the Author: But there are other ways, which are shorter, by which
this Spirit of the World is attracted by several Magnets, whereof shall be
spoken hereafter. Note, that the Physical Stone may be made of all sorts of
waters of Pa­radise; for it is the Philosophical ☿ which is sufficient for
himself and for thee; for it contains in it self a pure Sulphur, which may be
congealed into a Panacea: But for to shorten the Work, the Solar or Lunar
Fer­ment [[Page
181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=101) is added, to
the end that this Gluten, or fiery 🜄 may be sooner congealed and fix­ed: So
that, besides this Generalissima way, or this Universal Stone of the
Philosophers, there are five other Stones; to wit, first, the simple Mineral,
made of ☿ per se, or with ☿ and  (antimony), with the Sulphur of  (antimony).
The Se­cond is the simple Metalline stone, made with ☽ only, with ♃, or with ☉
and Solar Fer­ment. Thirdly, there is a Stone which is Partly Metallick, and
partly Mineral, made of  (antimony), ☿, and ☉, whereof Artesius, Flamel,
Pontanus, Zaichair, and others have writ­ten. Fourthly, There is a Vegetable
Stone. Fifthly, The Animal Stone. We shall treat of all these Stones, under
the name of the 🜄 of Paradise, or the Hermetick Eagle, or Vir­gins Milk.

### 3.22. Water of Paradise of Common ☿, or Hermes his Eagle, of the
Terrestrial and Coele­stial ☿.

SUblime ☿ three or four times with Salt, Nitre, and Vitriol; then dissolve it
in A. F. and digest, then by distillations and cohobations, unite the Salts
Armoniac of the A. F. to which (to have it more Pow­erful) you may put an
eighth part of 🜹: Distill and cohobate so often, till the ☿ comes [[Page
182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=102) to be like
Wax, and that it dissolveth easily in humido. Then dissolve this matter per
deliquium, that it may attract the 🜄 which is contained in the Air: Put this
Liquor in­to a small Cucurbite, joyn its Head and Re­cipient, and digest with
very gentle 🜂 with a Lamp. Nothing will come over during fifteen days, but
afterwards, there will come over an Aethereal Liquor, which is the 🜄 of
Paradise: Two drops of this 🜄 put into ℥iv. of S. V. is an excellent Medicine
against the Pox, for it is the Planet ☿. The Dose is one spoonful. The
Physical Stone is made of this Virginal, or Astral Milk, to wit, distill its
flegm, in a small Cucurbite, with the same Lamp 🜂, and the Gluten or Mineral
Gum will remain in the bottom; of which by digestion is made the Physical or
Medicinal Stone. But note, that if you add ☉, the Operation is sooner
accomplished. Note also, that if you cast one drop of this 🜄 of Paradise upon
a thin Plate of ♀, or of ♂, it will penetrate and whiten it through and
through, before it is fermented with ☉. Note also, that that which remaineth
after the distillation, will serve also. If you would then make a Stone,
different from that which is made with the Virginal Milk only, pro­ceed thus:
After you have distilled the 🜄 of Paradise, distill over with a gentle 🜂 in
[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=102) Ashes
what remaineth, and you shall have a white Oyl; then force over the remaining
part in a Retort, and you shall have a red Oyl; cast away the remaining feces.
Take one part of the red Oyl, and four parts of the white Oyl, and eight parts
of the 🜄 of Paradise, put them into a Matrass, and di­gest them in an Athanor
until all the colours appear one after another, and that the Glu­ten be fixed
into white. If then you aug­ment the 🜂, it will become a red Medicine, of
which you may make Projection thus: Take an hundred parts of ☿, heat it in a
Crucible, and cast upon it one part of this fixt Medicine, and all will be a
Medicine; whereof cast one part upon another hundred parts of ☿, stirring it
with a stick; then melt them together. Cast one part of this Medicine upon an
hundred parts of ☿, and all will be converted into ☽ or ☉, ac­cording to the
Tincture. In this manner, all Metals and Minerals may be reduced in­to
Tinctures by their 🜄 of Paradise, &c. Note, That this Work may be done also
with ☿ dissolved in A. F. and Precipitated with Spirit of Salt; the Calx dryed
and united with Calx of ♃ and  (antimony), and thence the Volatile Crystals,
or [...] Butter extracted, wherewith you may proceed as was said [...] [[Page
184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=103) Or, you may
make also a 🜄 of Paradise, made with ♃ per deliquium.

### 3.23. The Antimonial 🜄 of Paradise, or the Her­metick Coelestial Eagle
with two Heads.

EXtract a Butter from equal parts of  (antimony) and ☿ Sublimate: Dissolve
this Butter in the Air in ♈, ♉, and ♊; put the Liquor into a Glass Cucurbite
with its Head and Re­cipient, lute well all the junctures; excite the Archaeus
which is in him, by a very gen­tle heat in Ashes, by a Lamp 🜂, which will
maturate the Matter in the space of fifteen or twenty days: Then drive up its
Rays in­to the Head, which will be seen corporal in the Recipient in the form
of a clear 🜄. This 🜄 is all fiery, and is the Coelestial Ea­gle with two
Heads. Put it into a Cucur­bite, and deflegm it with the same Lamp 🜂, and
there will remain in the bottom of the Cucurbite the Mineral Gluten, or the
viscous 🜄, which doth not wet ones hands. You may prepare Medicines of this
Coelestial Aethereal 🜄 thus: Put two drops of it into ℥iv. of S. V. it will
turn as white as Milk. This Medicine Cureth the Dropsie, the Epi­lepsie,
Madness, &c. The Dose is from ʒij. to ℥ss. Now, if you would have the Pow­der
of Projection, you must digest the Glu­ten [[Page
185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=103) per se, as was
said; or (which is better) add a tenth part of ☉ in leaf, and digest, or draw
the red and white Oyl, and proceed as in the former Process, and you shall
have a Medicine both for Man, and for Metals.

### 3.24. Water of Paradise of Venus and Mars, or ♀. and ♂ Captivated, whence
cometh Cupid, or the Solar Panacea.

ALthough these Metals cannot take the Mercurial 🜄, nor give Volatile
Cry­stals, as ☽, ♃, and ♄ do, because they are very Mercurial, and the former
almost all Sulphurous, nevertheless you may do it thus: Dissolve ♀ and ♂ (each
by it self) in the Salt Androgine, which hath but little Sulphur, to the end,
that it may dissolve more easily: Then make a Lixivium, which Precipitate with
your Liquor of ♄; dry the Precipitated Calx, and sprinkle it with a good deal
of Spirit of Salt; then mix it with  (antimony), and distill Volatile Crystals
thereof; with which proceed as before. The 🜄 of Para­dise is made of ♀ only,
and is called 🜄, or ♀ his astrum.

It Cures the Pox, Gout, &c. The Gluten of these Metals is digested either per
se, or with a Solar Ferment, as before, into a Pa­nacea, which is a wonderful
Medicine, and [[Page
186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=104) will Cure
Maladies in Men and Me­tals.

### 3.25. The thrice Noble Water of Paradise, or Apol­lo Medens.

DIstill the fiery and Volatile Crystals from ☿ of ☽, with Calx of Iupiter,
which keep. Dissolve ☉ in Spirit of Salt, which joyn with equal parts of your
Crystals; di­gest, and then distill, the Spirit of Salt will come over
immediately first, then will fol­low the red Crystals: Expose this Terrestrial
☉ to the Coelestial, that it may satisfie it self with its Solary Rays, and
then dissolve it self into a Liquor, which will be a Mag­net and an Amaranth
Aethereal and immor­tal. Put this Solary and Lunary Liquor into a Glass
Cucurbite, and distill with a Lamp, 🜂 this Noble, Metalline, Radical
moisture, those invisible Rays of the ☉, or this 🜄 of Paradise, during fourty
or fifty days. This 🜄 is 🜄 of Nature, an Excel­lent Attractive, and its
Power is ineffable. This 🜄 drives out all Maladies, and com­forts Nature, and
is a Royal Medicine; for 'tis the astrum of the ☉, or a ☉ between the
Terrestrial and coelestial ☉. Of this is Apollo furens; for its Rays, or its
🜄 killeth ☿, which they convert into true ☉, as also all [[Page
187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=104) other Metals.
In this Liquor you may dis­solve ☉ if you will, but it will not be ne­cessary;
for when it is freed of its flegm, the Solary Gluten remains, which you may
di­gest per se, until it acquire a purple colour. Thus ☉ is exalted to make a
Tincture. The 🜄 of Paradise is the Aethereal Aurum pota­bile; dissolve two
drops thereof in ℥iv. of S. V. the Dose is ʒij. This is the 🜄 of Na­ture,
which is multiplyed ad infinitum by new addition of the Gluten, &c. Note, That
when this Panacea is fixed, it is the Panacea of Panacea's, which Cureth
Mala­dies, both in Men and Metals.

Note, That this 🜄 of Paradise converts all Metals into ☉, if you digest their
Plates in the same; yea, one drop thereof pene­trates a Plate of ☽, and
transmuteth it into most fine ☉. There is also made another A­pollo Medens,
which is joyned with Spirituous Regulus of  (antimony), to wit, the Flowers
reduced, or fiery Regulus, and conjoyned in the Sul­phurous Sal Enixe, and
both Precipitated into an Aureal Antimonial Panacea. But this Panacea is not
comparable to the other. Apollo furens is the same 🜄 of Paradise, the which
are the invisible Solary Rays, by which the Volatility of ☿ is killed, and is
converted into ☉; and the same it is with the Solary 🜄. Apollo Moriens is the
Eclipse of the ☉ [[Page
188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=105) in the above-
mentioned fiery and Aethereal Menstruums: For in all sorts of Menstruums it
putrifies, groweth black, and maturates in the space of fifteen days: But
after that, it resuscitates before the Judge Apollo resusci­tans.

### 3.26. An unheard-of Arcanum, or new and unheard of Lunary, wherewith is
made the Elixir, or Metalline Stone.

DIssolve what quantity of ☽ you please in the Sal Androgine; in four hours
time half your ☽ will be dissolved into a very red Salt, pour it into a vessel
of Copper, then make a Lixivium, which filter, reduce into a body what
remaineth with ♄, and re-dissolve it in new Sal Androgine as be­fore.
Reiterate this, till all your ☽ go through the filter with the Lixivium, and
you will be sure to have a ☽ altogether Spi­rituous and Volatile, which you
will find to be true to your loss, if you Precipitate it with an Acid Liquor,
and reduce it with ♄; for it will all fly away at the Coppel; the same will
happen if it be attracted by Plates of ♀. These two effects have happened to
me by inadvertence.

Note, That this Spirituous ☽ is a Poten­tial and Spirituous ☉, as you will
find, if [[Page
189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=105) you rejoyn it
with its body at the Coppel: There is nothing to say to that. Note, That the
corporal ☽ which is added, retains all what is of the Nature of ☉, which
ren­ders it afterward in the separating 🜄. There­fore, take all these filtred
Solutions (which are yellow if the Lavers be made with Odor of Metals) and
Precipitate them totally in­to a Lunary Sulphur of a Golden colour, adding a
sufficient quantity of that which Precipitates it: That which Precipitates it
is of our invention, and is of the Saturnian Juice, which swims upon the ☿ of
♄, when its Solution is repercuted by the Salt 🜄. Dry this Lunary Golden
Precipitate gently, and mix it with ana of Calx of ♃, made per se in the 🜄;
or if you will, you may draw the Butter or fiery Crystals with ana of
(antimony); the Crystals are resolved per se in the Air. And with this
unheard-of Magnet are Mira­culously attracted the Influences of the Stars, or
the 🜄 of Nature. This is chiefly done in the belly of ♈ that is to say, in
the Month of April and May. Note here a very great Secret, which is, that
there is no flegm attracted by this Magnet, but onely the pure Nutriment of
Life, or the fiery vi­  [...]al Viand which is hidden in the centre of the
Air; which you will find true, if you put some waterish part into this Liquor;
for [[Page 190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=106) you
shall see that it will not mix with it in any wise, but will swim upon it in
an hete­rogene form, as Milk: You must further sepa­rate this Liquor, which is
the simple Lunary, in which ☉ is easily dissolved: For from this corporal
Lunary you must have a Spiritual and unheard-of Lunary. Put then this Liquor
in a Glass Cucurbite with its Head and Reci­pient, and digest in Ashes with a
very gentle heat by a Lamp the space of one Philoso­phical Month. Nothing will
distill over during the first fifteen days, or more; but it will become a red
Sea, and the Matter will maturate, and after that, you shall see that by this
gentle heat the Metalline Soul will mount invisibly upon the wings of the
Wind, or the Spirit of the World, and will fall into the Recipient in the form
of Tears, which are the Tears of Diana. This Li­quor is much more precious
than pure ☉, and of very great vertue. Continue the dissolution, whilst the
Archaeus of Nature chaseth it, which is done in fifteen days a [...] the
farthest. In this Operation is done, wha [...] Hermes saith, thou shalt
separate, the sub [...] from the Spirit gently, and with great dex­terity.
This distillation is altogether Na­tural, and is perfected by the only
Archaeus of Nature. This Liquor is the Spiritual Lu­nary, which contains in it
self Body, Spirit [[Page
191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=106) and Soul; 'tis
the 🜄 of Paradise, the Lunar Sphere, the Metalline Fountain, and the
Universal Metalline Menstruum. It is a most certain anti-epileptick and
Cephalick: If one or two drops of it are mixt with ℥iv. of S. V. all will
become like Milk. For it is all 🜂; which changes the moist Element of the S.
V. as being contrary to it, or at least not connatural.

### 3.27. To make the Metalline Stone per se of this Spiritual Lunary.

TAke this Liquor, and put it into a small Glass Cucurbite; leave it uncovered,
evaporate it in Ashes with a gentle Lamp 🜂, to the end, that if there be any
moisture from the Air, it may exhale, and there will remain in the bottom of
the Cucurbite the Metalline Gum, the Lunary Gluten, the Azot, &c. which will
liquifie at the least heat, as Butter, and will congeal by cold. Put this Gum
into a Matrass, which Seal Hermetically, and digest per se, it will be­come
black, and after white, and then it is the white Stone; then by increasing the
🜂, it will become of a Citrine colour, and red, without a Solary Ferment: And
the King is made of the Queen, or the immersion of ☽ into a Solary Tincture.
But for to shorten the Work, add unto this Gluten a tenth part [[Page
192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=107) of ☉ in leaf,
or Sulphur of ☉ made Spiri­tual by the Sulphurous Sal Enixe, and di­gest as
was said: The augmentation of this Stone is by addition of new Metalline
Gluten. Note, That this Spiritual Lunary tingeth ☿ into true ☽, if you digest
it therein; also a Plate of ♀ is perforated by putting one drop of this 🜄
upon it. Note also, That when you have distilled the Lunary, that which
remaineth is an eternal Magnet. To that effect, resolve it again in the Air,
and man­age it by a Lamp as before. Then distill an Aethereal Liquor, which is
yet impreg­nated with a Lunary Soul, and distilleth in­to the Recipient, and
then goeth anew into a Gluten: And this is done ad infinitum. Note also, That
that which remains, may be distilled, and you shall have first, a white Lunary
Oyl (which is the Philosophers Oyl of Talc; for the true Oyl of Talc is the
Lunary coagulated per se, and fixed in­to a white Stone, which is fixt and
soft.) Secondly, you shall have the red Oyl by augmenting the 🜂. If you will
make the Stone of these Matters, take of the red Oyl one part, and of the
white Oyl four parts, and eight parts of the Lunary reduced into Gluten: Put
this into a Matrass, and digest until all be fixed into white, and after by
continuing become red. This Medicine [[Page
193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=107) ought not to
be Fermented; for it is the true Metalline Soul, reduced into a Tincture. This
last digestion must be in an Athanor with a Charcoal 🜂.

Hartman.) These Waters of Paradise and Glutens, &c. were given to Sir K.
(about eight or nine Months before he died) by a French Gentleman, a great
Scholar.

### 3.28. Monsieur Barkly's fixation of Common Sul­phur, and the Tincture
thereof, which is an Excellent Medicine in all affects of the Breast and
Lungs.

TAke Flowers of Sulphur, or Sulphur pulverized very subtil; put it into a
Matrass, and pour upon it so much Spirit of Sulphur per Campanam, as may cover
it the breadth of three fingers. Lute the Ma­trass well, and put it in
digestion for fifteen days, or three weeks, or so long until the Flowers of
Sulphur come to be very black: Then distill off all the Spirit of Sulphur to
dryness; break the Matrass, and take out the Sulphur, which pulverize again,
and put it into another Matrass, and pour upon it the Spirit of Sulphur you
distilled off, and distill as before to dryness. Repeat this twice more, which
maketh three cohobations in [[Page
194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=108) all without
the first distillation. Then take your black and fixt Sulphur, and reduce it
to a very subtil Powder, and put it to re­verberate in a Glass Oven the space
of a fortnight or three weeks, it will change its blackness into white, and
after yellow, and at last come to be of a reddish brown colour. The Tincture
of this red fixt Sulphur, is extracted with Spirit of Salt well rectified.

He made thus his Spirit of Salt for this: Take Salt lbj. dissolve it in five
quarts of fair 🜄, and filter it; put it into a Cucurbite, and pour upon it by
little and little lbj. of good Oyl of Vitriol, and joyn the Head and
Recipient; when it is all in, it will begin presently to distill over cold:
Set it in Sand, and with moderate heat drive over as much as will rise, which
rectifie from the flegm: There will remain in the bottom of the Cu­curbite a
wonderful Salt, that is exceeding fusible.

After he had extracted the Tincture,  [...] distilled away all the Spirit of
Salt, till the Tincture was dry: Of this he gave, three grains for a Dose, and
found it a great Dis­phoretick, but it was somewhat rough and sharp in the
Stomach: Whereupon he dul­cified it by several ablutions in fair 🜄; then gave
the same Dose, and it wrought excel­lently well in all Colds of the Breast and
Lungs.

[[Page 195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=108)
Hartman.) This Relation is of Sir K. Digby.

### 3.29. The Countess of Kents Powder, as it was pre­pared by Sir Kenelm
Digby's Order in his Operatory.

TAke ℥iv. of the black ends of the shares of Crabs, the Sun being in the Sign
of Can­cer, Crabs-eyes, fine Pearls and Corals pre­pared, of each ℥j. yellow
Amber ℥ss. Roots of Contrayerva, Virginian Snake-root, an [...] ʒvj. Oriental
Bezoar ʒiij. of the Bones that are found in the hearts of Stags ℈iv. Re­duce
all into a subtil Powder; moisten the Crabs Claws and Crabs-eyes, and the
Pow­ders of Pearls and Corals with a little juice of Lemons, to make them
ferment a little: Then the next day mix all well together, adding ʒj. of
Tincture of Saffron, and pour upon the Mass (when you incorporate it) three or
four spoonfuls of Spirit of Honey, or instead thereof you may take Jelly of
Harts­horn, and Jelly of the Skins of Vipers dryed in the shadow. Then add to
this Composi­tion ℥j. of Trochisque of Vipers; grind it all well together to
make it well incorporate: Then make it up into Balls, and let them dry, and
keep them for Use.

[[Page 196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=109) This
Powder is a most Excellent Remedy in all Epidemical Distempers, all Malignant,
Spotted, and Purple Fevers; to drive out the Small-pox and Measles. It is
Sudorifick, and resists all Corruption, and is admirable in a Surfeit. It
drives the Venom from the heart, and hinders the Vapours to fly up into the
Head and Brain. It drives out by transpi­ration all bad Humours, corroborates
and strengthens Nature. The Dose is from six to twenty, or twenty five grains.
In an ex­tremity of the Plague, one may take from thirty to fourty grains.

Hartman.) Sir K. D. had this Powder always ready by him in his Closet; and I
re­member that many Persons of Quality sent to him for some of it when any of
their Chil­dren had the Small-pox or Measles; and ne­ver any did miscarry of
all those that took it. It is also Excellent against the biting of Mad Dogs,
stinging of Vipers, and other Venemosis Beasts.

[[Page 197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=109)

### 3.30. A very Efficacious Remedy against the Epi­lepsie, or Falling-
Sickness, wherewith Sir Kenelm Digby Cured a Ministers Son, named Mr.
Lichtenstein, at Francfort in Germany, in the Year 1659. to which I was an
Eye-Witness.

TAke of the Skull of a Man that died of a violent Death, of the parings of
nails of Man, ana ʒij. Reduce this to a subtil Powder, and grind it upon a
Marble stone; then take Polypody of the Oak very dry, ʒij. Misletoe of the
Oak, gathered in the Wain of the Moon, ℥ss. Misletoe of the Hasle-tree,
Misltoe of the Tile-tree, of each ʒij. Piony-root ℥ss. Reduce all into a
sub­til Powder: Then take ℥vj. of Sugar, boyl it to the consistence of Rose-
Sugar; then mix all the Powders with it, and stir them well together over the
fire that they may well incorporate together: Then take it from the fire, and
make it up into little Tablets of about a Dram apiece; whereof give one in the
Morning fasting, and two or three hours after Dinner, and another two hours
after Supper: Continue this whilst the Tablets  [...]ast.

[[Page 198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=110)

### 3.31. Another for the same.

SIR Kenelm Digby Relates, that in the Year 1663. the Lady Warwick told him,
that a Daughter of her Husbands elder Brother had the Falling-Sickness in the
greatest Extremity, so that she fell like a log seven or eight times a day
without any motion. They had put her into the hands of the ablest Physitians
in England, who in effect could do her no good. A Gentleman, one of their
Neighbours, undertook to Cure her, and performed the Cure thus: Take true
Misletoe of the Oak, the Leaves, the Berries, and all the tender Branches; dry
it gently in an Oven after the Bread is drawn; then reduce it to a fine
Powder, of which give as much as will lye upon a shilling for one of ripe
years; for middle aged, a six-pence, for a Child, a groat: Give it Morn­ings
and Evenings in Cowslip-water three days before, and three days after the Full
of the Moon. Repeat this Remedy for some Months together. This Cured also my
Lord Herberts Son, and many other Persons of Quality. The best time to gather
the Misle­toe of the Oak, is in the Month of Septem­ber, when it bears
Berries, and in the Waning of the Moon.

[[Page 199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=110)

### 3.32. The Preparation of the Silver Pills against the Dropsie, as they
were prepared by Sir Kenelm Digby's Order in his Opera­tory.

TAke refined ☽ ℥j. dissolve it in ℥iij. of the best Spirit of Nitre in a
Matrass, then evaporate away all the Spirit of Nitre to dryness in a low
Cucurbite, or in some other fit Vessel; then dissolve the matter in a
sufficient quantity of Rose-water, filter the dissolution through gray Paper,
and evapo­rate it again to the consistence of a dry Salt as before. Then take
℥ij. of fine Salt-petre, dissolve it in Rose-water, filter the dissolu­tion,
and evaporate it in a large wide Vessel of Glass, to the consistence of a
Salt. Then mix the ☽ and this Salt together, and put them in a large Glass,
pouring upon them so much Rose-water as will dissolve them in­to a greenish
Liquor: Then evaporate it in Sand to the consistence of a white Salt; then
take it out of the Sand, and being quite cold, put it into a Glass or Marble
Mortar, and put to it ℥ij. of fine Wheat-flower; grind them well together,
then add so much Rose-water as will make it a Mass fit for Pills: Then make it
up into Pills of the bigness of Pease, put them between two Papers, and [[Page
200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=111) let them dry
in the shadow, and they will be of a Purple colour; keep them in a wooden Box.

### 3.33. Directions for the Use of these Silver Pills.

THey are a Specifick against the Dropsie, the Patient is to take one of them
at six or seven of the Clock in the Morning, ta­king some Broath about two
hours after it with eight or ten drops of Spirit of Salt in it. Their
Operation is by Stools, and by Urine; you must continue it until the Cure be
perfected. Note, That if the Patient be weak, he must take the Pill but once
in two days, and in all Broaths and Drink, he ought to take some Dose of
Spirit of Salt, as is said above. If there be need of Sweat­ing, you must use
some dry Stoves, and give him always of the following Salts: Take Salt of
Urine, Salt of Worm-wood, ana ʒij. add half a Scruple of Oyl of Amber, and as
much of Spirit of Urine, with ʒij. of fine Sugar; mix all well together in a
Glass of Stone Mortar, whereof give ℈iv. for a Dose in half a Glass of White-
wine when the Pa­tient is Sweating in the dry Stove, and not in a Bath of
Water: And every third day you must repeat this Remedy, and he will be [[Page
201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=111) Cured within
three days. The evacuation is by abundance of Sweat and Urine.

Hartman.) I cannot omit to relate here a Story, which I have often heard Sir
Ke­nelm Digby tell concerning a Famous Cure of a desperate Dropsie, done by
Dr. Farrar up­on an eminent Lord, who was over-grown with the Dropsie, his
Belly and Stomach swel­led to a Prodigious bigness, and was given over by the
ablest Physicians as incurable. Sir K. D. made the bargain between the Lord
and the Doctor, who was to have five hundred pounds for the Cure: But when the
Lord was Cured, he would give the Doctor no more than three hundred pounds,
saying, that five hundred pounds was too much money, and that all the
Ingredients be used could not stand him in twenty shillings. The Remedies were
thus: Having first well purged the Patien [...] with some fit Purge (as of
Iallap, Manna, Sena) to carry away watry humours, he gave him the following
Broth. A moderate Broth was made of Mutton, Chickens, and Capon, or Hen, but
not Veal; the Broth was not strong of the Meat, nor too weak, but such as the
Patient might drink all the day, for he was to drink no other Liquor; they
made but about a pottle of Broth at a time, for it would not keep: And for
this quantity they took a Gallon of Water, into [[Page
202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=112) which the
Doctor put above a handful of Garlick, and Rosemary, Penyroyal, Thyme, Sweet-
marjoram, Fennel-roots, Parsley-roots, as also Currans, and a sufficient
quantity of Salt. And after some days taking the Broth, they put into every
draught of the Broth (the Patient took) above a spoonful of the crude juice of
Garlick, stamped and pressed out. But if you cannot bear always to drink this
Broth, then use the following De­coction: Take Sarsaparilla ℥xij. China-roots
℥v. Sassafras ℥iij. Cut all these very small, and pour upon them Spring-water,
to three fingers breadth above the Ingredients, and let them infuse over a
soft fire the space of four hours; then throw away this Water, and stamp the
Ingredients in a Stone Mortar with a wooden Pestle: Then pour upon them ten
quarts of Fountain-water, and boyl it in a Vessel close stopped, till four
quarts of it be consumed: Of this Decoction let the Pa­tient drink, without
any other drink but the Garlick Broth.

### 3.34. Another Drink.

TAke all the aforesaid Ingredients, in the same manner prepared and stamped:
Then take a clean Vessel, and fill it with Beer, then put the Ingredients in a
bag, and [[Page
203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=112) hang it in the
Beer; ℥j. of the Ingredients is sufficient for a quart of Beer. Either of
these Drinks is only in case the Patient can­not bear the use of the Garlick
Broth, which alone will dispatch the Cure much the soon­er; and this course of
the Garlick Broth is for all Obstructions, and superfluity of Cold, raw
Humours, clogging the Brain, or any other part, as well as for the Dropsie. To
strengthen and secure the Liver, use the fol­lowing Electuary. Take of Powder
of Turmerick a sufficient quantity, make an Electuary of it with Sugar, and to
every Ounce of it add three drops of Oyl of An­niseed, made by distillation;
and if you put a little Amber-grease to it, it will be the more strengthening.
Take of this Electuary two or three times a day the quantity of a Hasle-nut;
take not above ℥j. in a day.

Besides this, to strengthen the Stomach, use the following Stomacher: Take
Worm-wood, Marjoram, Rosemary, Rue, ana one handful; Cloves, Cinamon, Mace,
ana ℥j. bruise these Spices, and mix them with the Herbs; of these make a
Stomacher, and ap­ply it: And you may likewise anomt your Stomach, and region
of the Liver with Oyl of Nutmegs and Oyl of Roses.

I heard Sir K. D. say, that after twelve or thirteen days, the Patient begun
to Piss in [[Page
204]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=113) great
abundance, and so stinking, noisom, roping matter, that the Nurse which
emptied the Pots, was hardly able to endure the stink and noisomness of it.
And he con­tinued the diet till he was perfectly Cured.

### 3.35. Another Experimented Remedy for the Drop­sie, whereby several
Persons have been Cured, as I have been assured.

TAke the Root of Heath, scrape off the first Bark, which throw away, then peel
off the next rind, and fill a Glass or a Bot­tle with it loosely, then fill it
up with White­wine, and let it stand to infuse over Night, and the next
Morning drink half a pint of Wine; and so continue until you are Cured.

### 3.36. Another Excellent Remedy against the Dropsie.

TAke Spiritual Oyl of Salt, mix with it so much flowers of Sulphur, that it
be­come like Pap, which distill in a Retort in Sand, and you shall have a
Liquor as white as Milk, which is Excellent against the Dropsie.

[[Page 205]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=113)

### 3.37. The Copy of a Letter from Abbot Boucaud from Paris to Sir K. D.
wherein he relates in what manner he Cured himself of the Stone, and of a
Quartan Ague.

SIR,

I Do not tell you that I have been Sick, (and that I am so still) to Excuse my
self for having so long de [...]erred an Answer unto your last two Letters,
&c. It is true nevertheless, for I have laboured under di­vers Distempers; but
among the rest, I have been ill of the Stone, and have had a Quar­tan Ague: I
believe you will not be sorry to hear how I Cured my self of both with­out the
help of any Physician. For the Stone I took twelve grains of the Salt made of
the Stones which were taken out of Men; I dissolved the said Salt in a little
water, and then I put all into a Glass of Whitewine, and drank it off, and
walked about my Chamber near two hours, at the end where­of I had a great need
to make water, and I voided (with violence) a large Glass full of Gravel,
which was so gross, and so rug­ged, that it caused me to void near a Pint of
Blood; the same thing happened to me three times, and every time I voided
Blood, which made me judge that I should have taken less [[Page
206]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=114) of the said
Salt; yet I took it but once, but I felt a great pain and heaviness in my
Reins and Kidneys. The said Stones were Calci­ned in a Potters Oven, and after
they were Calcined, I extracted the Salt out of them with distilled Rain-
water: The feces I Cal­cined again, and extracted the Salt as before, which I
repeated so often, till the said Stones yielded no more Salt. Note, That to
make this Salt for a M [...]n, you must take the stones taken out of Men, and
for a Woman, those that are taken out of Women. And thus was the first Cure
performed.

As for the Quartan Ague, without having been Purged, or let Blood, at the
fourth fit I took a Glass-full of the water of green Wall-nuts, which I had
distilled in their last Season: I took it as soon as I perceived the least
symptom of the Fits approaching; I went to Bed, and caused my self to be well
covered, and slept, and had no Fit at all that time, nor ever after.

The Water I distilled thus: I took green Wall-nuts and beat them in a stone
Mortar, then in a Cucurbite in B. M. I distilled the water from them, which I
cohobated twice upon fresh Wall-nuts. Then having Cal­cined the three Marcs or
Caput Mortuums, I extracted the Salt out of the Ashes; this Salt I put into
the distilled water. I thus, [[Page
207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=114) Sir, I have
given you Account how I went to work.

### 3.38. A Process, how to make a most Excellent Oyl of Sulphur in abundance;
sent also by the said Abbot Boucaud to Sir K.

TAke an Earthen Pan of Stone-ware, in the midst thereof lay a piece of Brick,
upon which set an Earth [...] Poringer full of Sulphur grosly beaten; then put
fair water into your Pan, but not so much as to touch the said Poringer: Then
kindle the Sulphur, and cover it with a Bell, so that the Bell touch the
water, and that the fumes may not come out, but may condense and run down into
the water, which afterwards must be separa­ted in B. with a moderate heat. To
set the Sulphur on fire, you may put into it a square or round piece of Iron
made red-hot in the fire.

Hartman.) In my Opinion, if the Bell touch the Water, and that it hath no hole
at the top, so that the Sulphur have no Air, it will not burn; I judge the
best way to be thus: Let the Poringer stand in the Water, but not so deep, as
that the Water bear it up, and make it float; if it stands half, way in the
Water, it will do, for the weight of the Sul­phur will keep it down, and the
heat of the [[Page
208]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=115) Poringer will
heat the Water, and the Va­pours and steams thereof will mix with the fumes of
the Sulphur, and make them con­dense the better, and so distill down together
into the Water. The Bell should be such a one as is now in use, with a long
neck, and a hole at the top, which should not touch the Water nor the Pan, but
it should be suspended in such manner, that there be some distance between the
bri [...] of the Bell and the sides of the Pan.

### 3.39. A subtil Volatil Water from Sulphur, which will Dissolve ☉.

I AM told by one who hath done it, that when you go to Sublime Flowers of
Sulphur, if you give very gentle and mo­derate fire, and be very attentive,
there will come over first, before any Flowers Sublime, a little very
Volatile, but altogether insipid Water, which he saith, will dissolve ☉: It is
much more Volatile than any S. V. A Glass full of it will presently vanish
away, if you hold the Glass unstopped upon your hand, by the warmth of it.

Hartman.) This Relation is of Sir K.

If you would save this Water, you must have a Glass head upon your last
Subliming-pot, or a Ludel, wherein you Sublime your [[Page
209]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=115) Flowers of
Sulphur, and instead of a Vessel without a bottom, as that for the Flowers of
Antimony, you must have one with a bottom, and without a hole on the side to
put in your Sulphur, and then two Alu­dels besides the said Vessel, and the
Glass-head will be sufficient for subliming the Flowers of Sulphur.

By means of the Glass-head you save also the Vinegar of  (antimony) in
subliming the Flowers, which I have done several times; but I used not above
three Aludels one upon another, besides the Glass-head.

### 3.40. An Excellent Essence of Sulphur for the Breast, and for the Lungs.

TAke Sulphur one part, brown Sugar-candy two parts; pulverize them, and mix
them well together, then put it into a Retort of such a bigness, that two
third parts thereof may remain empty. Then distill in sand, giving very gentle
fire at first; you will have a whitish Liquor, which keep for use.

Hartman.) This was given me by a Phy­s [...]cian at Paris, who told me, that a
Catarrh  [...]alling upon his Lungs, which obstructed his Lungs, causing in
him a great Fever, he Cured himself with this Essence, taking this, thirty
[[Page 210]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=116) or
fourty drops of it in some Broth. He told me also, that it was of great effect
in Asthma, Phthisick, old and inveterated Coughs, &c.

### 3.41. An Excellent Elixir of Sulphur.

TAke Juice of Licorise, Confection of Alkermes, Roots of Elecampane, ana ʒvj.
Alipta moscata ʒiv. Myrrh, Saffron, ana ℥jss. Mastick, Benjamin, Cardamoms the
less, Cinnamon, ana ℥j. Sugar-candy ℥ij. Powder what is to be Powdered, then
mix them together, and add rectified S. V. so much as to make it into a Paste;
then put it into a Circulatory Vessel, and pour upon it so much Spirit of
Sulphur, as may cover it the breadth of four fingers: Digest it fourty days,
then decant the Tincture, and pour upon the remaining Matter fresh S. V. to
ex­tract another Tincture. Then mix these two Tinctures together, and keep
them for Use.

This Tincture is a very great Pectoral, and a Precious Remedy in all affects
of the Breast and Lungs. It is Excellent against Catarrhs, old and inveterate
Coughs, the Phthisick, Asthma's; it cherishes and comforts the Heart, and is
good against fainting and swooning Fits, preserves from Putrefaction; it is
Anodyne, Cephalick, Analeptick, Alexi­pharmack; [[Page
211]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=116) and, as the
Author saith, preserves Health, prolongs Life, and keeps back gray Hairs, by
strengthening Natural heat. It is to be taken in some Pectoral water or
Sy­rup; the Dose is so much as renders the Ve­hicle of a grateful acidity.

### 3.42. Lac Sulphuris.

TAke of Sulphur in Powder on part, and of Quick-lime two parts, mix them, and
put them into an Iron Pot, and pour thereon a good quantity of fair water, let
it boyl until three parts of the water be con­sumed, and that the Liquor be as
red as Blood by the dissolution of the Sulphur; then strain it whilst it is
hot, and let the strained Liquor stand to cool: Then Preci­pitate with
Vinegar, then let it settle, and having poured off the clear, edulcorate the
residue ten or twelve times with warm wa­ter, the last time with Rose-water;
then dry it gently, and keep it for Use.

It is a true Remedy in all affects of the Breast and Lungs; it is given with
great suc­cess to those that are troubled with Catarrhs, Rheum in the Head,
Asthma, Phthisick, Coughs, &c. It promotes expectoration; it hinders the
defluxion to the Joynts, it pre­vents and disperses the windiness of the
Sto­mach [[Page
212]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=117) and Bowels,
and Cureth the Cholick. The Dose is so much as may change the Ve­hicle white;
the best and fittest Vehicle is the Spirit of Lignum Cassiae, or Cinnamon;
taking it twice a day, in the Morning fast­ing, and at Night.

You may make a very good Spirit of Lig­num Cassiae thus, which is a much finer
Spi­rit than that of Cinnamon, and much bet­ter for this use. Take Lignum
Cassiae ℥iv. bruise it well, then pour upon it three quarts of Malaga Sack,
stop the Vessel close, and let it stand to digest for three or four days, then
distill it in a Limbeck, or in a Glass Cucurbite, distilling it off all
together, as long as it cometh with vigour, and you shall have about three
pints and a half of very good Spirit: Thus I make it. But if you will have it
richer of the Wood, put this Liquor upon fresh Cassia, and digest and distill
as before. Repeat this till it be as strong as you desire. You may if you
please separate the runnings so as to have some of such strength as you wish.

[[Page 213]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=117)

### 3.43. A great Diaphoretick of Antimony.

TAke good Antimony Mineral in subtil Powder lbj. mix it with lbss. of ☿
Sub­limate; put this mixture presently into a Retort, leave the Retort for
some time un­stopped before you distill it, for then you shall have more
Butter than if you distill it presently. Then distill a Butter from it
ac­cording to Art, giving strong fire at last, so that the bottom of the
Retort may be red-hot; part of it will come over in Butter, and part will
Sublime in Cinaber, very hard; if you leave this Butter for some time expo­sed
to the Air before you rectifie it, you shall have more Liquor than if you
distill it pre­sently; rectifie this Butter, then melt it a­gain, and pour it
into a clean Retort, and pour upon it by little and little good Spirit of
Nitre, continue pouring on the Spirit of Nitre until the Ebullition ceaseth:
Then di­still it with a gentle fire in Sand, giving strong fire at last, so
that the bottom of the Retort may be red-hot; then let it cool, break the
Retort, and take out your Matter, which will be very spungy, and of a
yellowish co­lour; pulverize and edulcorate it several times with warm water,
then dry it gently; reverberate it for an hour between two Cru­bles [[Page
214]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=118) well luted
together: Then grind it a­gain to a subtil Powder, which put into an Earthen
Poringer, and pour upon it recti­fied S. V. that will burn all away; fire it,
and whilst it burneth, stir it continually with a silver spoon; the S. V.
being burned away, the Powder will remain dry; grind this Powder again, and
mix it with ʒvij. of An­timony Diaphoretick that hath been Calcined three
times with Nitre, grind them well to­gether, and put them into a Retort, and
pour upon them ℥iijss. of good Spirit of Nitre; put the Retort in Sand, and
let it stand thus four and twenty hours; then distill with a gentle fire to
dryness: Break the Retort, and take out the Matter, which grind and
edul­corate with Carduus-water warmed, then spread it upon gray Paper, and let
it dry of it self: Then grind it to an impalpable Pow­der, which put into a
Poringer, and pour upon it S. V. so much as may cover it a fingers breadth;
let it stand thus for five or six hours, then fire the S. V. upon it, and stir
it continually with a silver spoon whilst it burneth, then grind it again, and
put it in­to a Viol, stop it close, and keep it for Use.

The manner of using this Medicine is thus: Take fifteen grains of it for three
Mornings together, mixing with it some [[Page
215]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=118) Conserves or
Sweatmeats, and take it upon the point of a Knife, then drink a Glass­full of
the Sudorifick Decoction after it warm. Then take twenty grains for three
Mornings more; then fifteen grains again for three Mornings more. It is an
Excellent Remedy to Cure the Gout, Dropsie, Palsie, the Ve­nereal Disease, the
Evil, Leprosie; it puri­fieth the whole Mass of Blood, and is good in all
Scorbutick Distempers. Note, That before you use this Medicine, you must
pre­pare the Body before with some fit Purge, according to the Constitution of
the Pa­tient.

Those that are careful to preserve their Health, and to keep it in good state,
may take this Powder in the Spring, at the fal­ling of the Leaf, having first
Purged once or twice; then take the Powder with the Su­dorifick Decoction for
Nine days together, as was said, mixing the Powder with a dram of Confection
of Alkermes. It powerfully resisteth all Corruption, dryeth up all
super­fluous moisture in the Body, and is a true concretive of Blood.

[[Page 216]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=119)

### 3.44. The Sudorifick Decoction.

TAke Lignum Guaiacum ℥iv. Salsaparilla, Sassafras, ana ℥j. infuse them in
three quarts of Fountain-water for twenty four hours; then let it boyl gently
for three hours.

### 3.45. A most Excellent Medicine against all sorts of Agues and Fevers, &c.

TAke of the Starr'd Martial Regulus of Antimony lbj. Mercury Precipitate
lbjss. pulverize and mix them well together, then put them in a Retort, and
distill in Sand as you do Butter of  (antimony); then rectifie this Oyl or
Butter once or twice, casting away the Feces: Then put it into a new Retort,
and pour upon it Spirit of Metheglin; distill and cohobate four or five times
to make the Oyl sweet, then pour S. V. upon it, and abstract it to the
consistence of an Oyl. This is a Precious Remedy for the Cure of many
Dis­eases: It is of great Power and Efficacy to Cure all sorts of Agues,
Quotidians, Tertians, and chiefly Quartans. It Operates by a gen­tle Vomit in
some Persons, and in others it gently Purges without Vomiting, and in some it
gently Operates both ways: It hath vertue [[Page
217]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=119) to eradicate
totally both Root and Seed of the Distemper. The Dose is from six to twelve
drops, in some fit Vehicle.

Note, That having separated the Spirit of Metheglin, if you acuate it with
Spirit of Vitriol, it is a great Diaphoretick, far be­yond all others. Dose is
from half to one whole spoonful in some fit Vehicle.

### 3.46. A Precious Oyl of Antimony.

TAke Antimony Calcined, as for making the Glass of  (antimony), lbij. ℥xij.
Sugar lbj. Mix them well together, and put them in a Retort: Distill in sand,
first, will come a flegm, and afterwards a pure dark-red Oyl, which keep for
Use.

This is an admirable Remedy against the Stone and Gravel, the Dropsie,
Epilepsie, Asthma, Quartan Agues, and all sorts of Fevers, the Plague, and all
Malignant Fe­vers, and Epidemical Distempers, and Le­prosie; and being
outwardly applyed, it cureth, healeth, and dryeth up all inveterate Wounds and
Ulcers. The Dose is four drops in Wine twice a day.

[[Page 218]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=120)

### 3.47. A most Excellent Panacea of the true Sulphur of Antimony.

TAke Lees of Wine, which you may have of the Wine-Coopers when they have
pressed them out, break them into small pieces, let them dry, then burn them
to Ashes: Take of these Ashes, of Quick-lime, and Nitre, ana; make a Lixivium
thereof with warm water, then filter it: Then take Cinaber of Antimony, which
is found in the neck of the Retort when one maketh the Butter of Antimony;
pulverize it, and boyl it in the afore-said Lixivium for the space of four
hours; pour off the Lixivium from the Quick-silver into another Vessel, which
lean on the side, that the red-Sulphur may settle; then edulcorate it with hot
water, and dry it gently; so have you the true Sulphur of Antimony. Take of
this Sulphur, and of Regulus of Antimony, ana ℥j. Oyl of Sulphur per Campanam,
or rectified Oyl of Vitriol ℥iij. Mix all well together, and put it into a
small Retort, di­gest it in Horse-dung, or if you will, in some other gentle
heat for eight or ten days. Then distill it, and cohobate the distilled Liquor
upon the mark three or four times; then increase the fire to the highest
degree, [[Page 219]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=120)
which continue for twelve hours, to force all over, and the Matter will be
fixt; then break the Retort, and take out the Matter, which pulverize, and
edulcorate it with Rose-water; then dry it gently upon a gray Paper, then
reverberate it for four or five hours. Then take ℥j. of this Powder, and of
Salt of red Coral ℥ij. grind them well together to a very subtil Powder.

This is an Universal Medicine to Purifie the whole Mass of Blood, and to root
out such Distempers as proceed from the cor­ruption thereof, and are Curable
by sweat. It Cureth all stubborn, Malign, and Chro­nick Diseases: It Cureth
the Venereal Dis­ease, the most inveterate; the Leprosie, the Evil, the
Scurvy, the Plague, and all Epi­demical Diseases. The Dose is from ten to
thirty grains.

The Order of using this Medicine is thus: First, Purge the Patient once or
twice with fit Purges, then rest three days, then Purge again; then begin with
ten grains of the Powder, which continue for three times, mix the Powder with
some fit Conserve, and give it upon the point of a Knife, in the Morning in
his Bed, drinking a Glass-full of a Sudorifick decoction after it, made hot;
let him keep his Bed for an hour or two, then let him be rubbed with warm
Clothes, and [[Page
220]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=121) the sweat
being quite over, let him rise, and eat of good wholesom Food, forbearing to
eat of Salt Meats, Salt-fish, Sallet, Milk, Butter, or Cheese, or raw Fruit.
Then for three Mornings more give him twenty grains, and then thirty grains
for three Mornings more; then come again to twenty grains for three Mornings
more.

### 3.48. A great Febrifuge.

TAke Mineral Antimony very clean, that hath never been melted, ℥vj. and as
much Salt-petre, pulverize them finely, and mix them well together; then put
them into a strong Crucible, which cover with another Crucible that hath a
little hole in the bottom as big as a Pea: Then put this Crucible into your
Furnace, and let the fire kindle of it self, which increase by degrees, the
Matter will fulminate; when you see that no more smoak cometh out of the
little hole of the Crucible, take it out of the fire, and take out the Matter
that remained in the Crucible, which pulverize very finely. Then take three
Ducats of Gold, and six times as much in weight of the afore-said Powder; melt
the Powder first in a Crucible, then put into it one of the Ducats, stirring
it until it be melted, then put in another Ducat; and so [[Page
221]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=121) continue until
you have put in all your Du­cats one after another: When all is melted and
well incorporated, let it stand in good fusion for half an hour, then take it
out, and let it cool: Then break the Crucible, and take out the Matter, which
pulverize subtily, and mix it with equal weight of ☿ Sublimate, also in fine
Powder; put them into a Retort well luted, put it into a Furnace, and fit a
Recipient to it full of Water, so that the nose of the Retort may enter into
the water; leave the junctures unluted: Give a gentle fire at first, which
augment by degrees; part of the Matter will distill into the Water, but the
greatest part thereof will stick to the neck of the Retort, which you may draw
out with an Iron hook into a bason full of Water: When you see that nothing
more cometh over by the last degree of fire, let it cool; then break the
Retort, and take out all the Matter that is Sublimed about the neck of the
Retort, and put it into the Wa­ter in the Recipient, as also that in the
Ba­son; let the Water stand to settle, then de­cant it, and keep it. It is
Excellent to Cure all sorts of old and inveterate Ulcers, &c. Pour fresh hot
water upon the residue, and having shaken it well together, let it settle;
then decant, and put on more Water. Re­peat these solutions seven or eight
times; [[Page 222]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=122)
then separate the ☿ from it with a Quill, and put the Powder into fresh hot-
water; let it stand thus until the next day, then repeat the Edulcorations as
before, which continue for six days, then edulcorate the last time with cold
Water; then dry the said Powder, and keep it for use. The Dose is one or two
grains for Children; and for Persons of riper Years, from four to six or
seven, ac­cording to their strength and Constitution, putting the Powder over-
night to infuse in two or three Ounces of White-wine; the next Morning strain
the Wine, and let the Patient drink it, and half an hour after he may drink
some warm Broth or Posset: It may also be given in substance. It Operates by a
gentle Vomit, and by Stools. It hath been Experimented, and found very
suc­cessful and effectual in the Cure of all Inter­mittent Fevers, and in the
Gout, as also in the Venereal Disease. Out of the Caput Mortuum you may reduce
the greatest part of the Gold.

This is a Mercurius Vitae of a singular pre­paration; it is not white like the
common, but of a brownish gray colour. It appears by this to have some of the
☿ in it, that when you rub Gold or Copper with the Powder, it will make it
white, which common Mercu­rius vitae will not do.

[[Page 223]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=122)

### 3.49. Another great Febrifuge, which is said to be Riverius his Febrifuge.

TAke ☉, dissolve it in A. R. and Glass of Antimony, dissolved in A. F. ana
℥ss. ☿ washed and purified ℥iij. dissolve it in A. F. Then mix the three
dissolutions together, and put them into a Cucurbite, and distill in Sand, and
cohobate the distilled Liquor eleven times upon the remaining Matter, which
are twelve distillations; then pour upon the remaining Matter rectified S. V.
Cohobate and abstract it six times from the Matter; then take it out and grind
it, and that it may be the better  [...]ixed, Calcine it in a Crucible in a
Circulary fire, until it be al­most glowing-hot. The Dose of this Pow­der is
gr. vj. with gr. xij. of Scammony: Let the Patient take it in the Morning, the
day before the Fit.

### 3.50. Another Febrifuge.

TAke Cinaber of Antimony ℥j. common Salt decrepitated ʒij. pulverize them, and
mix them together; put them into a Glass Cucurbite, and pour upon them Oyl of
Sulphur ℥iij. digest it for two days in a moderate heat in Ashes; then augment
the [[Page 224]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=123)
fire to evaporate away the humidity, then having edulcorated the remaining
Mass, re­duce it into Powder, which mix with ℥iij. of Flowers of Sulphur; put
this into an earthen Poringer, which put upon burning coals; let it kindle,
and stir it continually with an Iron Spatula, until all the Flowers of
Sul­phur be burned away: Then pour upon the remaining Matter so much S. V. as
may co­ver it the breadth of two fingers, then burn away the S. V. then reduce
it to Powder, and keep it for Use.

This Powder is much recommended to Cure all sorts of Agues and Intermitting
Fe­vers, giving it half an hour before the Fit, from ten to fifteen or twenty
grains, in some Syrup or Cordial-water, taking some Broth two hours after it;
but the Patient should be Purged first, and let Blood before the use of this
Powder; and if the first and second dose do not carry away the Fit, it must be
repeated a third time.

### 3.51. Another Febrifuge, which is thought to be Riverius his true
Febrifuge.

TAke of Mercury dulcis twelve times Sublimed ℥jss. Mercurius vitae cor­rected
as followeth, ℥ss. mix them together. The correction of Mercurius vitae is
thus: [[Page 225]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=123)
Take of ☿ vitae, put it into a small Cucur­bite, set it in Sand in a moderate
heat, let it stand until it begin to grow red; then pour upon it rectified
Spirit of Wine, which ab­stract, and pour on fresh S. V. Repeat this three
times, and you shall have a ☿ vitae which will not Operate upwards, but only
downwards. This ☿ vitae is to be used for delicate Persons, but for strong and
robust Persons you may use the Common ☿ vitae.

This Powder finding the Humours dis­posed, will Operate both upwards and
down­wards if you employ the Common ☿ vitae; but if you employ the Corrected,
as was said, it will Operate only downwards. And as this Febrifuge contains in
it a reasonable Dose of ☿ vitae, the ☿ dulcis thus prepared, working for his
part upon the bad Humours, and serving also for a Corrective to the ☿ vitae,
one ought to expect good effects of it.

Riverius gave this Febrifuge to Persons of all Ages and Sexes, in the Morning
the day before the Fit. One may give six grains of it to little Children in
the pap of a roasted Apple, or in some Sweat-meats, and so in­crease the Dose
proportionably, according to the Age and strength of the Patient, to twenty
grains to Adults, and even to twenty [[Page
226]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=124) four to those
that are of a strong Constitu­tion.

Hartman.) These Febrifuges were given me by a Friend, a German; and I thought
it fit to insert them here: But whilst they were Printing, I found them in Mr.
Charras his French Dispensatory, which just at that time came to my hand.

### 3.52. A Certain and Experimented Remedy to Cure the Convulsion Fits in
little Children; as also for the Epilepsie, the Cholick, and for the Spleen,
&c.

TAke Verdigrease, and distill a Spirit thereof, which rectifie once by it
self, and it will leave some feces and Metalline terrestreity behind: Then
take one part of this Spirit, and three parts of fair water, put it upon
Lithargy finely fearsed, as much as it will dissolve: Deflegm it in Balneo,
and then distill it in Sand, and there will come over a pure and powerful
Spirit without Acri­mony; it will taste a little sweetish, as in the making of
Sacharum Saturni.

It is Excellent for the Convulsion of little Children, being given in some fit
Vehicle, a drop or two for Sucking Infants; but to Men you may give ten or
twenty drops.

[[Page 227]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=124)

### 3.53. Sigillum Hermetis, Or, a great and Experi­mented Medicine, which
hath done great Effects in the Cure of all sorts of Agues and Fevers. It was
given to Sir Kenelm Digby by an able Physician, who had done Wonderful Cures
with it.

TAke ☽ ℥vj. dissolve it in the best A. F. you can get, using no more A. F.
than is necessary for the Solution (which will be about ℥jss. i. e. two parts
to one) when you see that it is all perfectly dissolved (without fire) cast
into the Matrass an aaa, made (after the ordinary manner of Goldsmiths) of ʒj.
of pure ☉, and ℥ij. of ☿; you will presently see a pelagus conturbationis
made. Let the Matrass stand still upon a Table, or in some corner, till you
find the Matter at that pass as you desire: you will see many beautiful
colours appear. After fourty days standing, you will see a kind of roughness
appear upon the superficies of the ☿, which will daily grow and sprout out
more. In twenty days more (sixty in all) it will be shot out into little
spears or needles and twigs. When you see that it groweth or shooteth out no
more, pour off all the Liquor, and the Mercurial Matter will soon dry of it
self. Then with some little pieces of Glass break [[Page
228]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=125) off these
Excrescencies or Needles from the Mass, (whereof you may have about ʒj. or
more) and grind them to Powder, which will be very white.

Of this Powder give twenty four grains, or more (according to the Complexion)
in a Cherry, or yolk of an Egg, in the Morn­ing very early, or at Night going
to Bed, or rather after the first sleep at three or four in the Morning, and
in this last case sleep after it. It is seven or eight hours before it useth
to work.

Sometimes the first Dose will not work at all, otherwise than by
strengthening, and then the Author giveth a second Dose two or three days
after, which will work either by Stool or Vomit, or Sweat, as Nature shall
require, and in due proportion.

It Cureth Quartans and other Agues, and worketh admirably in all desperate
Diseases. He useth to take it once a Month himself. When there is no peccant
Humour in the Body, it worketh not by evacuation, but strengtheneth. The ☿
incloseth and shut­teth up the Metals, like a Rose of Iericho, from whence he
calleth it Sigillum Hermetis. The part of the Needles next the Mass worketh
rougher than the ends. Out of the Mass you may draw most of the Gold and
Silver, with loss of about an eighth part of [[Page
229]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=125) the first, and
less proportion of the last. He thinks this to be a Philosophical ☿, and to be
useful in the great Work.

### 3.54. A Mercurial Liquor with Jupiter.

TAke lbj. of Iupiter, melt it in a Cru­cible, then pour into it lbj. of ☿
re­vived from Cinaber, and made hot, make an aaa of it, which wash with warm
water, wherein you have dissolved a little Salt; wash it so often, till you
have washed away all the blackness of it, and the aaa will be as white as
snow: Then dry it, and grind it in a Marble or Stone Mortar with lbij. of
Cor­rosive Sublimate; then spread it upon a large dish of Glass, which set
shelving in a Cel­lar, putting something under it to receive the Liquor that
will run from it, you will find at last the Salts resolved into a Liquor, in
which will be also the ☿, which will be re­vived; separate the Liquor from the
☿, and keep the ☿ for another use: Put the Liquor into a Cucurbite, and
evaporate the super­fluous moisture of it in B. M. with a gentle heat: Then
digest it for fifteen days more in the same B. with a very gentle heat; then
pour this Liquor into a Retort, which put in Sand, and fit a Recipient to it;
then distill by graduated fire, giving strong fire at last [[Page
230]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=126) of the fourth
degree; you shall have a Li­quor like an Oyl.

This Liquor is much esteemed to Cure the Cancer, Wolf, Fistulaes, and all
sorts of old, inveterate, Malign, and gnawing Ulcers, being applyed outwardly.

### 3.55. Monsieur C. his Lunary Emetick and Fe­brifuge, &c.

DIssolve ☽ in A. F. then Precipitate it with Spirit of Salt, then dry the
Calx.

Take of this Calx, and of  (antimony), ana, distill it as a Butter of
(antimony), you shall have a Butter white and transparent, which will dissolve
☉. If you will make an Emetick of this Butter, Precipitate one part of it with
fair water, then edulcorate with Blood-warm water, and you will have an
Emetick Re­medy, which will Purge.

It Cures all sorts of Agues and Fevers, and  [...] a Catholicum for ill
Humours. The Dose is from one grain to three, in some fit thing in the Morning
fasting. It must be given with great Caution.

[[Page 231]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=126)

### 3.56. To make a most Excellent Sudorifick of the aforesaid Butter, that
will Cure the Leprosie, and the Venereal Disease, proceed thus:

TAke the other part of this Butter, and put it into a Retort, and pour upon it
Spirit of Nitre; distill and cohobate three or four times; then edulcorate it
with fair water, and dry it; then burn Spirit of Wine upon it, and you shall
have a Sudorifick, which will do admirable effects, taking from eight grains
to sixteen, in the Morning in Bed; drink some fit decoction after it: And
after the Sweating, the Patient must be rub­bed with warm Clothes all over his
whole Body, observing a reasonable Diet, and using some fit Purge before.

### 3.57. An Oyl of ☉, wherewith Monsieur Belieur, a Famous Chirurgeon at
Paris, Cured Can­cers, all old Ulcers, Cankers, and Venereal Sores, &c.

TAke Spirit of Salt two parts, Spirit of Nitre one part; in this dissolve as
much ☉ as it will dissolve: Distill off very gently the Liquor in B. M. until
the ☉ remain in a Crystalline Gum or Salt; then let it re­solve to Liquor in
the Air by it self: Then [[Page
232]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=127) distill again,
and resolve. Repeat this till it congeal no more in the Cucurbite, but re­main
a deep-red Liquor, like an Oyl. The manner of using this Oyl is thus: Dip a
Straw or a Feather in it, and touch all round about the borders of the Sore
with it.

With this he Cured a very Malignant Ulcer in a Leg (that had been there above
three Years) in the space of ten days; and also a Cancer in a Womans Cheek in
fifteen days space, that other Chirurgeons (with­out hope of Cure) had given
over. With this he also Cured a Woman (that had seven­teen Cankers in her
private parts, that had been so some Years, and without hope of Cure) in
fifteen days.

### 3.58. Doctor Havervelt his Remedy, wherewith he Cured the Evil or
Scrofulaes, Cancers, and Old Ulcers.

TAke Dantzick Vitriol, Calcine it till it be yellow, then grind it with Salt
or Salt-petre, the ordinary proportion: With this Sublime ☿, which Sublime
once again by it self; then take only the Crystalline part of it, whereof take
℥j. grind it to a subtil Powder in a Glass Mortar, with a Glass Pestle; put
this Powder into a large Glass-bottle, and pour upon it a quart of [[Page
233]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=127) Fountain-
water, stop the Bottle close, and let it stand thus for some days, shaking it
often: Then being well settled and stood without shaking at least twenty four
hours, pour off the clear, and filter it. Then take one spoonful of this
Liquor, which put into a Vial, and pour into it two spoonfuls of fair
Fountain-water: Shake the Vial well, then pour it out into a Glass, and let
the Patient drink it in the Morning fasting; let him keep himself very warm,
and stir and walk as much as he can; but let him neither eat nor drink till
two hours after the Medi­cine hath Operated. It will Operate by Stools, and by
a gentle Vomit. The next Morning, if the Patient find himself strong enough,
let him take the said Medicine again, if not, he may rest a day or two
be­tween.

With this Remedy the Author above-mentioned Cured all sorts of Scrofula's,
whe­ther open or shut; the Cancer or Wolf, whe­ther in the Breast, or any
other part of the Body; as also all sorts of Pustula's and Old Ulcers and
Wounds.

The said Doctor Communicated this Re­medy to Sir K. D.

[[Page 234]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=128)

### 3.59. Another for the same.

SIR Kenelm relates, that Dr. Farrar as­sured him, he had perfectly Cured a
most contumacious, foul, inveterate Evil (several times touched by the King,
and wrought upon by the best Chirurgeons, and given over as desperate) by the
following means:

Take Garden-Snails, that have white or gray Houses upon them, beat them in a
Mortar with a little Parsley, into the con­sistence of a Plaister, which apply
to the Sore or Sores, and change it every twenty four hours.

This is also good to take away the raging pain of the Gout.

### 3.60. A most Excellent Physical Salt, as it was prepared in Sir Kenelm's
Laboratory.

TAke Nitre, Sulphur, ana lbj. Camphire ℥ij. mingle them well together, and
cast them by little and little into an earthen Cu­curbite rod-hote, which shut
close imme­diately with a just stopper of Brick that closeth it firmly; the
Cucurbite must have two arms, unto which are fastened two Bal­lons of Glass
(as you see by the Figure in

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=128)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=129) [[Page
235]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=129) the next page)
each Ballon containing a­bout two quarts of Spirit of Urine (to the quantity
of Ingredients here named) which attracts unto it the Spirits, which will
ascend and pass by the two Arms on each side: When all is cold, take out the
fixt Matter that remaineth in the Cucurbite, and grind it small, and dissolve
it in simple Spirit of Urine, and being filtred and congealed, dis­solve it in
the Acid Spirit of Urine that was in the Ballons, and hath the Spirit of
Sul­phur, Nitre, and Camphire in it: Distill and cohobate this (in a Glass
Cucurbite) till the Salt have retained in it all the Spirits that were in the
Urine. This Salt will be very grateful, and not taste or smell at all of the
Camphire, nor is Saturnine, or Anti-vene­real in its effect. It is very
efficacious in all Fevers, either simple or Malignant any ways, or Spotted: In
the Small-Pox or Measles, in all the Progress of them, from before their
coming out, till the end; and preserveth the Heart from hot and putrid Vapours
and Fumes, and purifieth the Blood.

[[Page 236]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=130)

### 3.61. The best way to make the Spirit of Urine is thus:

LET the Urine stand eight or ten days, in which time it will putrifie and
fer­ment; then distill very gently, and that which cometh first is the Spirit.
When it beginneth to come weak and insipid (which you will know by tasting a
drop) then cease, for all that is good is come over. Thus you shall have near
half your quantity of Urine in good Spirit.

### 3.62. Sir Kenelm Digby's Excellent Remedy for Tetters, Herps, and Ring-
worms, Scabby Itches, &c. as it was prepared by his Di­rections for his own
use for a Tetter.

DIssolve ℥ij. of running ☿ in ℥iv. of the best A. F. pour upon the Solution a
quart of fair water, in which is dissolved two handfuls of Salt, and then
filtred; this will Precipitate the ☿ to the bottom in a white Calx. When it is
well settled, pour off the clear water, which keep for Use. Pour the remaining
milky thick substance upon lbj. of Hogs-grease melted in an earthen Pot; the
grease must be very hot when you pour in the dissolved ☿; but take the Pot
from [[Page 237]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=130)
the fire when you pour the ☿ to it, and stir it well all the while you are
pouring it in; and when it is all in, set the Pot upon the fire again to boil
the grease, till all the moi­sture of the Mercurial Substance and Solu­tion is
evaporated away, but be sure you stir it all the while, as also after you take
it from the fire (which you must do as soon as the moisture is gone) till the
grease is cold and hardened.

The way of using this Oyntment and Wa­ter, to Cure all sorts of Tetters,
Herps, or any Scabby Itches, or Inflamed red Faces or Noses, is thus:

First, if the Evil be very great, Purge and let Blood strongly; then begin
with the Wa­ter, rub the Tetters, and all about it with Linnen dipped in the
Water made as hot as you can endure it; and when you have rub­bed and bathed
it well, lay upon it Com­presses wetted in the water. Do thus twice a day for
two or three days, or more, till you see it hath drawn out the Salt Humour
abun­dantly, and that the part is much inflamed, and very sore, and hath
little holes or Ulcers eaten in it. Presently after the first wash­ing it will
grow very sore and Inflamed; therefore you must not afterwards rub it so hard
as at first, but very gently. Some Sores will require that you use the Water
five [[Page 238]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=131) or
six days, others more, tender ones two or three days. When you judge that the
Water hath drawn out sufficiently the vio­lent Matter, then anoint with the
grease as hot as you can endure it, and lay on it a Plaister of the same
Oyntment, binding it on. This Oyntment will presently asswage the pain, and
take away the Inflammation. Dress it with it twice or thrice a day. Much
Matter will run from the Sore, as from an Ulcer; and by little and little it
will heal up. And that which is wonderful is, that whereas one would think
that such deep holes as the Water will have eaten, should have scars, there
will not appear the least mark of them, but a fine new tender Natural skin
will come over it all.

### 3.63. A great Medicine, wherewith Wonderful Cures have been performed to
my know­ledge.

TAke Bezoar Mineral well prepared, and Antimony Diaphoretick also well
pre­pared, ana ℥j. grind them together to a sub­til Powder, and put them into
a small Re­tort, and pour upon them ℥iv. of good Spi­rit of Nitre; distill in
Sand with a moderate fire to dryness, then cohobate and distill twice, which
are three distillations in all with [[Page
239]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=131) the Spirit of
Nitre upon the Matter. Then pour fresh Spirit of Nitre upon it, and di­still
and cohobate as before. Repeat this a third time with fresh Spirit of Nitre,
the same quantity as before, which are nine di­stillations (in all) with ℥xij.
of Spirit of Nitre: Then break the Retort, and take out the Matter, which
grind to Powder, and edulcorate it well with warm Carduus-water; then dry it
gently, and put it into a Poringer, and burn rectified S. V. upon it, stirring
it all the while the S. V. burn­eth, with a Silver spoon, untill the S. V. be
burned all away, and the Powder remain dry. Then pour fresh S. V. upon it, and
fire it as before: Repeat this a third time, then grind the Powder, and keep
it in a Vial close stopped.

This Powder Cureth the Venereal Disease the most inveterate, with all its
Symptoms and attendencies without exception, and re­storeth lost strength and
vigour, as Experi­ence testifieth. It Cureth all Rheumatisms, the Leprosie,
all interior and exterior Ulcers; it purifieth the whole Mass of Blood, and
wonderfully fortifieth Nature, &c.

The way of using this Powder to Cure the above-mentioned Diseases is thus:

First, Purge with some fit gentle Purga­tive Potion; then, if the Disease
requireth, [[Page
240]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=132) you may let
Blood the next day, then two days after that repeat the Purge, and two days
after you may begin with the Powder; taking gr. viij. of it for five Mornings
to­gether, the Powder being mixt with a little Conserve of Roses, let the
Patient take it upon the point of a Knife in the Morning in his Bed, and drink
after it immediately a Glass-full of the following Decoction as hot as he can
drink it; let him keep his Bed, and he will be in a gentle breathing Sweat for
an hour; which being past, let him be rubbed with warm Clothes, his Legs,
Thighs, Arms, Shoulders, and the Back; then let him keep his Bed for an hour
longer, to see if he will sweat any more: The sweat being quite over, he may
rise, and go about his business, as at other times. After those five days the
Dose of the Powder must be increased, ta­king twelve grains of it for other
five Morn­ings; and then you must come again to eight grains for five Mornings
more. When you begin with the twelve grains after the first five Doses, you
must drink a little more of the Sudorisick Decoction than before, and taking
the Powder then in a little Con­fection of Alkermes. You may also increase the
Dose of the Powder by degrees (as Sir K. D. observes) taking (for example) gr.
x. the sixth day, and gr. xij. the other three [[Page
241]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=132) days
following; then gr. x. the tenth day, and so come again to gr. viij. the
eleventh day. One may take gr. xx. of it at one time without inconveniency.
The first Purge the Author giveth, is a Decoction of Succory and Tamarinds,
with infusion of two Drams of Sena, and being strained, dissolveth in it ℥j.
of Syrup of Peach-flowers. The Second is the same, adding only of Confection
of Hamech, or of Confection of Citron; or you may increase a little the Dose
of Sena, and of the Syrup, if one is not willing to take any thing where there
is Scammony in. The Sudorifick Decoction the Author maketh use of with this
Powder, is thus:

Take Sarsaparilla ℥ij. China-root ℥j. Sas­safras ℥ss. Santal Citrine ʒij. and
a little Licorise if you will, and a little Cinnamon for to aromatise it; let
all be infused with three quarts of water for twelve hours in warm Sand; then
let it boyl gently until a third part is consumed, then strain it.

Note, That if you put a little Salt of Tartar into the water when you put the
In­gredients in, it will extract the Vertue and Tincture out of them much the
better; as also in making any Purgative Decoction, if you infuse them over-
night with a little Salt of Tartar put in the water, and then boyling [[Page
242]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=133) it only two or
three walms the next Morn­ing, it will be much more effectual.

### 3.64. Lapis ignis, for the renovation of Mankind, by the three Principles
of Nature, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.

TAke  (antimony) Mineral, pulverize it, and Cal­cine it in a close
Reverberatory, with sufficient, but moderate heat, so that it melt not, in
twenty four hours it will be Calcined, and will be a gray Powder. Take of this
(antimony) Calcined, and of raw  (antimony) Mineral, ana lbj. melt them
together in a Crucible; when they are well melted and incorporated, pour it
out into a Copper or Brass Kettle, and it will be Glass of  (antimony), which
needeth not to be clear. If you did not add the  (antimony) Mineral, the
Calcined  (antimony) would not melt. Pulverize this Glass, and grind it upon a
Marble stone till it be an impalpable Powder, which put into a Vial, and pour
upon it distilled Vine­gar alcalised with its fixt Salt, digest in Sand; when
you see the distilled Vinegar coloured of a Golden colour, decant the clear,
and put fresh distilled Vinegar upon the Glass, and digest as before. Repeat
this till you have extracted all the Tincture out of the Glass: Then filter
the Tincted distilled Vi­negar, and put it into a Recort; distill with [[Page
243]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=133) a gentle fire
in Sand until you see there re­main a Liquor like a deep-red Oyl in the bottom
of the Retort, and that you see some drops appear in the neck of the Retort,
which is a sign that all the distilled Vinegar is come over. Pour upon this
Oyl Tartarised S. V. digest and circulate for three or four days, or more:
Then draw off the S. V. gently in B. and as soon as you see any red drops
appear, change the Recipient, putting on another; then distill over all the
remaining red Oyl to dryness. This Oyl will be very red, and very precious,
and is the true Oyl and Sulphur of Antimony, which is a wonderful Medi­cine
against the Plague, and all Diseases.

### 3.65. To make the Salt of Antimony.

CAlcine  (antimony) in a Glass Oven, or in a Re­verberatory, until it be
perfectly white, without any addition; then sprinkle it with Dew, and dry it
in the Sun; sprinkle and dry it seven or eight times, then grind it to Powder:
Take of this Powder three parts, and one of Powder of Charcoal; mix them
together, and put them into a Crucible, which set in a Wind-furnace, and give
fire by degrees, at last strong sire to make all melt well; then take out the
Crucible, and knock it against the ground to make the Regulus [[Page
244]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=134) fall to the
bottom; break the Crucible being cold, and separate the Salt, which you will
find between the Regulus and the Scories. So soon as you perceive that the
Matter is melted, you must be quick in making the Regulus, and take the
Crucible out as soon as you can, for fear the Salt should evapo­rate in the
fire.

### 3.66. To make the ☿ of  (antimony) for this Work.

CAlcine  (antimony) in a close Reverberatory until it be gray, then Sublime it
in an Earthen Vessel; grind again what is Sub­limed, and Sublime it as before.
Repeat this Operation three times, or until you see the  (antimony) Sublimed
hard and ponderous, where­in is inclosed all the ☿ of  (antimony).

### 3.67. Composition of the said Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.

TAke of the said Salt ℥j. dissolve it in as much of the Oyl as will dissolve
it, and as much as the said Salt will imbibe, so that it be like an Oyntment
or Paste; digest in fimo equino for ten days: Then take it out, and add ℥jss.
of the said ☿ of  (antimony); and being well mixt and incorporated together,
put it to digest as before, until it be converted into [[Page
245]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=134) a red Powder.
The way of taking this red Powder is thus:

Take gr. iv. of this Powder in a little Ca­nary Sack in the Morning fasting in
your Bed, it will cause a gentle breathing sweat for three days together,
during which time you must keep your Bed; your Chamber must be very warm and
close, you may eat and drink moderately of good wholsome Food. The three days
being past, you may rise, and walk about your Chamber, taking good nourishing
Food, abstaining from all Labours in Body and Mind; and thus you will renew
Hair and Skin, and will be strong and vigorous.

It will not be needful to use this Remedy but once in fourty Years; but you
may use of the said Oyl, taking three drops of it in a little Sack in the
Morning fasting, for the Preservation of your Health. This Oyl may be given in
all Distempers with great success.

This is from Abbot Boucaud.

### 3.68. The Marchioness de Beck, her Aurum po­tabile, which she much
esteemeth.

TAke Calx of ☉, and Regulus of  (antimony), ana ℥j. Iupiter ʒij. melt them
together, then grind them to a subtil Powder with ℥iv. of Sugar-candy,
Oriental Bezoar, and Sal [[Page
246]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=135) armoniack, ana
ʒj. Mix all well together, and put them into a large Retort, and distill in
Sand with a graduate fire for six hours; let the bottom of the Retort be red-
hot at last for half an hour. You shall have an Aureal Liquor, whereof two or
three drops taken in a little Canary, or other conve­nient Liquor, is a great
Cordial and Resto­rative.

Hartman.) The said Marchioness told me at Paris (where she shewed me this
Aurum potabile, and gave me the Receipt of it) that when at any time she found
her self in­disposed, she presently took two or three drops of it, and
immediately she felt her self streng­thened and chearful, &c.

The Baron de Roche shewed me also the Receipt of it at Paris, who also made
great esteem of it, telling me, that he esteemed it to be one of the best
Aurum potabile's that could be made, and that it was a Sovereign Cordial and
Restorative.

You may reduce two third parts of the ☉ out of the Caput Mortuum, its Tincture
only, and the subtilest part of it cometh over by the distillation.

[[Page 247]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=135)

### 3.69. Cornachinus his Medicinal Powder, as it was Prepared by Sir K.
Digby's Order in his Laboratory.

TAke Regulus of  (antimony), and of pure Salt-petre, ana ℥iv. mingle them well
toge­ther in subtil Powder, and cast them into a red-hot Crucible, and make
them burn by casting in a fiery Coal, which repeat as often as it consumeth;
for without that the Salt-petre will not burn, there being no more Sulphur in
the  (antimony) to set it on fire. Keep it thus in fusion in a reverberating
heat for at least an hour, stirring the Matter often with an Iron Rod; then
let it cool. This must not be edulcorated as common  (antimony) Dia­phoretick,
but the fixed Salt of Salt-petre must remain with it, and must by no means be
separated from the  (antimony), for in that Sir K. says, consisteth the Vertue
against Fevers. Of this we gave with the Scammony and Cream of Tartar, ana gr.
x. diminishing and increasing the Dose according to Age and strength.

Hartman.) Sir K. recommended this to me as a very good Purge, telling me, that
I might make use of it whensoever I had oc­casion.

[[Page 248]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=136) The
best way to make the Regulus of  (antimony), is, to put first into the
Crucible the Salt-petre and Tartar, and when they are well melted, put in the
(antimony), and proceed in the rest in the usual manner: Thus you shall shall
have six or seven pound, or more, of every pound of Antimony. Likewise to make
a Martial Regulus, put the  (antimony) first in­to the Crucible; and when it
is in perfect fusion, then put in the Mars.

### 3.70. A Laxative and Emetick Cream of Tartar.

TAke Glass of  (antimony), and Cream of Tartar, ana ℥jss. grind them to a
subtil Pow­der, then mix them together; put this into a Matrass, and pour upon
it ℥ij. of Rose­mary-water; digest it for some days, sha­king it sometimes;
then filter it, and evapo­rate to dryness, and you shall have a Salt, which
grind to Powder, and keep it in a Glass close stopped. It is a safe and gentle
Vomit, and Operates also by Stools. The Dose is from gr. j. to v. or vj. in a
little Sack.

[[Page 249]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=136)

### 3.71. Another most Excellent Laxative and Eme­tick Cream of Tartar.

TAke ℥iv. of Cream of Tartar, grind it to a subtil Powder, which put into a
Matrass, and pour upon it so much Spirit of Sal armoniac as may cover it the
breadth of two fingers; stop it close, and set it in a Cellar for twenty four
hours, then pour it into an Earthen Pot glazed, and put into it ℥j. of Glass
of  (antimony) in subtil Powder; set this Pot in a Furnace in Sand (or upon a
gentle Coal-fire) and pour into it a sufficient quan­tity of fair water; let
it cool six or eight hours, still pouring in more water as it con­sumeth: At
last, evaporate until it come to have a thin light skin on the top; then set
it in a Cellar, and it will shoot into Crystals, which take out, and keep them
for Use.

This is a most Excellent Medicine, and one of the best Emeticks that can be
pre­pared. The Dose is from gr. j. to vj. for Children; and for Aged Persons,
from gr. x. to xv. in a little Sack.

The best and easiest way to make a most subtil and penetrant Spirit of Sal
armoniac, (as it was made in Sir Kenelm's Laboratory, and as I make it now) is
thus:

[[Page 250]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=137) Take
Quick-lime grosly beaten, put a bed of it about two fingers thick into the
bottom of a Cucurbite; then dissolve lbj. of Sal armoniac in as much water as
will dissolve it: Pour of this dissolution upon the Quick-lime (having first
placed the Cu­curbite in the Furnace in Sand) so much as may dissolve it well,
and swim half a fin­gers breadth over it. Then be as quick as you can in
fitting on the Head and Reci­pient (for it will immediately begin to di­still
without fire) lute all the junctures well, and distill with a gentle fire,
keeping the subtil Spirit by it self, which cometh first. If any flegm should
come over with the se­cond Spirit, rectifie it in Balneo.

This Spirit is not only good for benumbed heads to smell to, but also to take
inwardly, for it is a most Excellent Remedy: It opens all Ob­structions, it is
Sudorifick and Diuretick. 'Tis very good in Fevers, especially the Pu­trid, in
Palsies, Epilepsies, Hysterical Fits, and the Plague, resisting all
Corruption, in Lethargy, and stupification of the Spirits. The Dose is from
eight to thirty drops. It also asswages the pain of the Gout, being mixt with
S. V. or Brandy, and Linnen Clothes dipt in it, and laid upon the parts
afflicted.

Hartman.) In distilling of this Spirit this way, I have observed several
inconveniences; [[Page
251]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=137) the first is,
that if you use a Glass Cucurbite, it will be apt to crack by the sudden heat
of the Quick-lime, caused by pouring on the dis­solution of the 🜹 (and an
earthen Cucurbite will imbibe it.) Secondly, by the same Rea­son you lose a
great part of the subtilest Spi­rit, which will ascend before you have poured
in the quantity of the dissolution above-men­tioned, and before you can fit on
the Head and Recipient. To prevent all these incon­veniences, I make use of a
Tin Cucurbite, with a Spout in the upper part (See it in the third Figure) and
having placed it in the Fur­nace in Sand, I put in the Quick-lime, and then I
fit a Glass Head and Recipient, and having well luted all the junctures with
wet Bladders, or Paste and Paper, I pour in the dissolution of 🜹 by a funnel
through the Spout; then I close the Spout, and distill; with a gen­tle fire.
When the distillation is over, take out the Caput Mortuum, and make the
Cu­curbite clean, and wipe it dry, that it may not rust or canker, and it will
serve for many other Operations, and will save you the buying of many Glass
Cucurbites, which by reason of their thick and knobbed bottoms are so apt to
break.

[[Page 252]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=138)

### 3.72. The Volatile Salt of Tartar, as I have often made it, which is an
Excellent Re­medy.

TAke Lees of Wine, (which you may have from the Wine-Coopers when they have
pressed them out for making of Vine­gar) break them in small pieces, and let
them dry; then being very hard and dry, bruise them grosly, and fill an
Earthen Re­tort with it, or a Glass one coated; distill in naked fire, fitting
any Recipient to it to receive only a sour flegm, which will come over first;
as soon as you see any white fumes come over, (among which cometh the
Vo­latile Salt) change the Recipient, putting on another pretty large; lute
the junctures well with Paste and Paper, then increase the fire by degrees,
until you see the Recipient filled with white fumes; continue the fire in that
degree, untill those white Vapours diminish, and that the Recipient beginneth
to grow cold: Then augment the fire to the highest degree, to force all over
at last; when nothing more cometh over, cease. The distillation will be
performed in three or four hours; you will have a whitish Liquor, which
contained in it the Volatile Salt, and part thereof will stick to the sides of
the Recipient, [[Page
253]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=138) and a reddish
foetide Oyl will swim upon the Liquor. Pour out all the Liquor that is in the
Recipient, then pour a little warm water in the Recipient, and shake it to get
out all the Volatile Salt: Separate the Oyl from the Liquor by a Glass funnel;
then filter the Li­quor, to free it from all Oyliness: Put this Liquor into a
Matrass with a long Neck, to which fit a Head and a small Recipient; di­still
in Sand with a very gentle heat, and the Volatil Salt will ascend into the
Head as white as snow; when you see that a pretty quantity is Sublimed, take
off the Head, and stop the mouth of the Matrass, if you have not ano­ther Head
to put on; be as quick as you can to gather the Volatile Salt that is in the
head, and put it into a Vial, which stop very close with a Glass stopper, for
it is very apt to re­solve into Liquor when it taketh Air: Then put the Head
on again, and continue the Sub­limation until there Sublime no more Salt;
gather this last Salt, and put it to the rest: Then put on the Head again, and
augment the fire a little, and you shall have a fiery Liquor, which is the
Volatile Spirit of Tar­tar, and is also the Volatile Salt, mixt with some
flegm, which makes it come over in a liquid form.

This Salt is much esteemed and recom­mended to purifie the Blood by Sweat and
[[Page 254]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=139) by
Urine. It is the best of all common Re­medies against Hysterical Fits and
Vapours, smelling to it, and taking it inwardly. It is Excellent against the
Palsie, Apoplexy, Epilepsie, &c. against Quartan and Tertian Agues. It opens
all Obstructions, and pro­vokes the Terms. The Volatile Spirit hath the same
Vertue as the Salt; it is good for all Obstructions, particularly of the
Spleen, and keeps the Body open; it is far beyond the common Spirit of Tartar
in Vertue. The Dose is from eight to twenty or thirty drops in some fit
Vehicle.

### 3.73. A Physical Salt.

TAke Nitre and Oyl of Sulphur, ana lbj. flegm of Vitriol lbss. pulverize the
Nitre and put it into a Retort, and pour upon it the Oyl of Sulphur and flegm
of Vitriol; distill in Sand, and you shall have a very good Spirit of Nitre,
and a pure white Salt will remain in the bottom of the Retort. This Salt is
much esteemed in Fevers, and to quench thirst, being taken in Juleps,
Ptrisans, or Possets. The Dose is thirty or fourty grains.

[[Page 255]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=139)

### 3.74. A Precious Tincture of the Flowers of Antimony.

TAke the dark-red Flowers of  (antimony), digest and circulate them with
rectified Spi­rit of Vitriol; when they are sufficiently united, abstract the
Spirit of Vitriol toan Oyl, upon which pour S. V. digest and extract a
Tincture s. a. which abstract again to the con­sistence of an Oyl. This
Tincture fortifieth and cherisheth the Heart & Vital Spirits, strength­eneth
the Stomach, is good against Agues and Fevers, Hysterical Fits, Hypochondriac
Me­lancholy: It Cures the Iaundies, opens Ob­structions, provokes the Terms.
It is good against the Gout, Scurvy, and Dropsie, Itch and Scabs: It purifieth
the Blood, and strengthens Nature. Dose from gr. j. to iij. or iv. given in a
fit Vehicle.

### 3.75. An Excellent and true Tincture of Coral.

TAke good red Coral ℥iv. grind it to subtil Powder, which mingle with ℥iv. of
Sal armoniac that hath been three times Sublimed from decrepitated Salt. Put
this mixture into a small Cucurbite, which set in a Sand Furnace; fit a Head
and Reci­pient to it, and having well luted the junctures, [[Page
256]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=140) give a gentle
fire at first, which augment by degrees. There will come over first, a small
quantity of a Urinous Volatile Spirit; after that, you shall see the Flowers
ascend and stick to the Head, and upper part of the Cucurbite. These Flowers
will be tinged with divers colours, as red, green, blew, very pleasant to
behold, they contain in them the true Tincture of Coral; for the body of the
Coral which remaineth in the bottom, will be as white as snow; continue a
mode­rate fire until no more Flowers ascend: The Operation will be performed
in a few hours. Then gather diligently all these Flowers, and put them in a
Matrass, and pour upon them rectified S. V. to the heighth of four fin­gers;
digest some days in B. the S. V. will extract a pure red Tincture out of the
Flow­ers, which will remain white in the bottom; filter this Tincture, and
abstract from it three fourth parts of the S. V. and a deep­red Tincture will
remain in the bottom, which is the true Tincture of Coral.

This Tincture is a Sovereign Remedy to strengthen the Stomach and Bowels. It
pu­rifieth the Blood by Sweat and Urine. It opens Obstructions, is Excellent
in all sorts of Fluxes, &c. Dose from six to twenty four drops, in some
convenient Vehicle.

[[Page 257]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=140) The way
to Sublime the Flowers of Sal armoniac for this work, is thus:

Take common Salt decrepitated and Sal armoniac, ana lbj. pulverize and min­gle
them together, and put them in a Cu­curbite, and Sublime in Sand with a gentle
fire at first, which augment by degrees; the Flowers will ascend into the Head
like Meal: Continue the fire for five or six hours; then let all cool, and
gather the Flowers, which mix with new Salt, and Sublime as before: Repeat
this three times.

### 3.76. An Excellent Extract of Mars, for Diarrhaea's and Fluxes.

TAke filings of Steel (which you may buy at the Needle-makers) ℥iv. put them
in well-glazed Pipkin, and pour thereon a quart of good deep-red Wine, (that
which is used to colour White-wine) let it boyl until about three parts of the
Wine be consumed, stir­ring often with an Iron Spatula. Then strain it whilst
it is hot.

It is a great and certain Remedy for Dy­senteries, Diarrhae'as, old Hepatical
Fluxes, and such like Diseases; you may give an Ounce of it in Broth fasting,
for some Mornings together. This I have sufficiently experienced with happy
success.

[[Page 258]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=141)

### 3.77. Sir Kenelm Digby's Remedy for the same, as it was prepared by his
Order, and much used.

TAke Rye-flower, and make a Paste there­of with Juice of Elder-berries; then
bake hard Biskets thereof, which pulverize, and make a Paste again with the
Juice of Elder-berries as before: Repeat this three times. Then reduce it to
Powder. The Dose is one Dram.

### 3.78. Sir Kenelm Digby, his Excellent Plaister of Lead.

TAke of the best Oyl Olive lbij. ℥iv. white-lead, red Minium, ana lbj. grind
them to Powder, and put them with the Oyl into a large glazed Pot or Pipkin,
with ℥xij. of Venice Soap shred small, which put upon a gentle Coal-fire, and
stir it well with an Iron Spatula for an hour; then increase the fire a
little, which continue until the Liquor be of the colour of an Oyl: Then drop
some of it upon a board, and if it sticks, or that it cleave to your fingers,
'tis a sign that it is boyled enough; then roll it up, and keep it for Use.

[[Page 259]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=141) This
Plaister being applyed to the Sto­mach, is good for the weakness and
indige­stion thereof, and causeth a good Appetite.

Being applyed to the Belly, it Cureth the Colick; and being applyed to the
Back, it strengthens the Reins, Cureth the Bloody-flux, the Gonorrhaea, and
tempers the ex­cessive heat of the Liver.

It Cureth all Contusions and Bruises, Swel­lings and Inflammations. It
maturates and draws all sorts of Apostumes, Wolfs, and Pustles, and Cures
them, without Lancing or Incision. Being applyed to the Head, it strengthens
the Eye-sight: To the Funda­ment, it Cureth all accidents that may hap­pen
there, as Piles, &c. And being applyed to the Belly of a Woman, it provokes
the Terms, and disposeth her for Conception.

### 3.79. Dr. Stephen's Plaister for the Gout.

TAke Virgins-wax lbij. Hogs-grease ℥ss. Mutton-Suet ℥ij. Oyl of Colts-foot,
Plantain and Rose-water, ana ʒij. Lavender-water ʒij. Dragon-water, and Water
of Bor­age, ana ℥ss. two Nutmegs, two Cloves, and a little Mace, beat into
Powder; mix them all well together, and let it boyl with a mo­derate fire unto
the consistence of an Oynt­ment; wherewith anoint the part grieved as [[Page
260]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=142) hot as you can
endure it, and dip Linnen Clothes in it, and apply them.

### 3.80. A very good Oyntment for the Gout; and the running Gout, Aches,
Numbness, and pain in the Ioynts, &c.

TAke the tender Branches of Dwarf-Elder, in the Month of March, when they
sprout out of the ground from the root, and are not above a finger long, three
hand­fuls; stamp them in a stone Mortar, then mix them with lbj. of Hogs-
grease; put this into a Pipkin, and let it stew upon a gentle fire for two or
three hours.

This was Communicated unto me by a worthy Gentleman, whom uch esteemed it,
because he found great benefit by it in the Gout: It taketh away the raging
pain there­of, giveth ease, and strengthens the parts afflicted.

In the running Gout, Numbness, and raging pain in the Joynts, I have had much
Experience of the Vertue of this Oyntment, after many Remedies used in vain;
the parts grieved must be anointed with it as hot as can be endured, and
chafed in before a fire.

[[Page 261]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=142)

### 3.81. A Certain and Infallible Remedy to prevent and Cure the Fits of the
Gout.

I Knew a Gentleman in Germany, who al­ways Cured and prevented his Fits of the
Gout (whensoever he perceived the least symptom of its approaching) by the
fol­lowing Remedy:

He caused a good quantity of the Herb Mullein (Verbascum in Latin) to be
gathered every Summer when it was in its Flower, which is in Iune, it beareth
many yellow Flowers upon a long straight stalk with large leaves at the
bottom, which are hoary. Then he took a good quantity of this Herb, and cut it
small, the Stalk, Flowers, and Leaves, and caused it to be boyled in a pail-
full of Forge-water out of a Smith's trough, where­in he quenches and cooleth
his Irons; when this was boyled sufficiently, then there was put into it a
large piece of Chalk in Powder. In this Water he bathed his Feet, Leggs, and
Knees, as hot as he could endure it, in a Tub, continuing until the Water grew
cold. Then a hole was digged in the ground in his Garden, wherein this Water
was put with the Ingredients, and then covered with Earth.

This always prevented his Fit, so that he [[Page
262]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=143) never had any
pain, lameness, or swelling at all, to which I was an Eye-witness. And I heard
him say, that if he did not use this Re­medy, he would have very shrewd and
rack­ing Fits, and keep his Bed by it for a Month or six weeks, and that twice
a Year, chiefly in the Spring, and at the Falling of the Leaf.

### 3.82. Mr. Locher, an Apothecary of London, his Excellent Oyl for Deafness,
which he gave to Sir K. D.

TAke Oyl of bitter Almonds, Oyl of Spikenard, ana ʒvj. Juice of Onions, Juice
of Rue, ana ʒij. black Hellebore ℈ss. Colloquintida ʒss. Oyl of Exetor ʒij.
Boyl this till the Juice be consumed; then strain it, and add two drops of Oyl
of Anni [...]d, Oyl of Origanum one drop. Pour a drop or two of this Oyl into
the Ear, and lye upon your Bed with that Ear upwards that you intend to drop
into, lye still for a quarter of an hour after; then drop into the other, if
it require. It is to be continued a Month, or two or three, as you find
benefit. When you have dropt into the Ear, you must stop it with a little
black-wool, dipped in the Oyl. Many Persons have found much benefit by the use
of this Oyl, to my knowledge.

[[Page 263]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=143)

### 3.83. Another Experimented Remedy for the same.

TAke a good large Eel, flea it, and cut it into round pieces of the length of
a finger, stick them full with Rosemary and Sage; then take an Earthen Pan,
put two or three sticks of Wood in Cross-wise, lay your pieces of Eel upon
them, so that they may not touch the bottom of the Pan; bake it in an Oven as
you do Meat: Then take the Fat of the Eel that is in the Pan, and strain it
through a fine Linnen Cloth, mea­sure how much there is of it, and put to it
as much S. V. Then take Juice of Onions, and Juice of the white ends of Leeks,
ana ℥j. of your first mixture ℥ij. put them together into a Vial, stop it
close, and shake it well for an hour. It is in all things to be used as the
former, except that instead of one or two drops, you must drop in three or
four.

Hartman.) This was Communicated to me by a Gentleman at Paris, who had done
Wonderful Cures with it, and among the rest, he had Cured the Governour of
Calais his Secretary with it, who had been deaf twenty Years [...] his
deafness being caused by a Sick­ness.

[[Page 264]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=144)

### 3.84. A most Precious Balsam of great Vertue.

TAke Turpentine lbij. Lignum Aloes ℥ss. Mastick, Cloves, Galingal, Cinnamon,
Zedoar, Nutmegs, Cubebs, Olibanum, ana ℥j. Roots of Master-wort, of Angelica,
ana ℥ss. Figs cut small six in number, Gum Tra­gacanth ℥ij. Bruise all the
Ingredients, and mix them well together, then put them into a Glass Retort,
and having warmed the Tur­pentine to make it run, pour it upon the
In­gredients, and distill in Sand: Separate the Balsam from a little flegm
that will come over with it.

1\. This Balsam is a very great preserver of the Health of Mankind, taking
every Morn­ing three or four drops of it in a little Beer or Wine; it
strengthens the Stomach, and causeth a good Digestion, and a good Ap­petite.

2\. It strengthens the Brain and Memory.

3\. It is good against Deafness, pouring two or three drops every day into the
Ear, and stopping the Ear with a little black-wool, moistened with a little of
this Balsam.

4\. It helpeth Rheumatick Eyes, takes a­way the heat and pain thereof, and
strengthens the Sight, anointing the Eye-lids there­with.

[[Page 265]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=144) 5\. It
Cureth all sorts of Scabs, Itches, and Scall'd Heads, be they never so bad.

6\. It Cures Fistulaes, the Cancer, Wolf, and all other gnawing Diseases; and
Cures all sorts of Wounds, whether old or new.

7\. It Cures the Gonorrhaea, the Whites in Women, and strengthens the Reins.

8\. It is good against the Biting of a Mad Dog, Vipers, and other Venemous
Beasts, being both inwardly and outwardly applyed; and is a great Preservative
against the Plague.

9\. It is very good against the Cramp, Numbness, aking, and pain in the
Joynts, contraction and weakness of the Nerves com­ing from a cold Cause, as
Experience testi­fieth.

10\. It sweetens an unsavoury or stinking Breath, and suffers no Worms to
breed in the Stomach and Bowels.

11\. It is said, that if a dead Corps be Embalmed with it, it will never rot
nor consume, nor any Linnen about it that is imbibed with this Balsam: And
that for a tryal, one should take a piece of Flesh, and warm it well against
the fire, then rub it over with this Balsam, and let it be well imbibed with
it, rubbing it with it three or four times. Then lay it away, and it will
remain sound and fresh, so that it may be eaten a twelve Month after.

[[Page 266]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=145)

### 3.85. Laudanum Germanicum: Being a singular Preparation of Matthew's, or
Dr. Starky's Pills:

I Thought I could not better finish this Book, than with the Receipt of these
most Excellent Pills, with the true way of Preparing them, which far exceeds
the com­mon: The Receipt is thus:

Take Opium lbj. dissolve it in distilled Vinegar, then filter and evaporate to
the consistence of a Mass for Pills: Then take black Hellebore lbj. reduce it
to a subtil Powder, which put into a Matrass, and pour upon it so much
distilled Vinegar as will co­ver it the breadth of four fingers; digest for
two days, then evaporate with a gentle heat to the consistence of Pills. Then
take of the Corrector lbj. Oyl of Amber that hath been rectified with fair
water, ℥ij. Licorise dryed and reduced to subtil Powder, lbj. Saffron dryed
and pulverized, lbss. Put all into a large Mortar (well warmed by put­ting
Coals kindled into it) incorporate them well together by strongly beating and
mix­ing them, adding by little and little (as you incorporate them) of the Oyl
of Tur­pentine that hath stood upon the Corrector, and is of a red colour,
℥iij. Tincture of An­timony [[Page
267]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=145) ℥iv. Oyl of
Anniseed, of Juniper-berries, of Sassafras, Oyl of Vitriol, Spirit of Harts-
horn, ana ℥ij. Gum Arabick dis­solved in distilled Vinegar, ℥ss. and if you
see that the Composition is too stiff, add a little more of the said Oyl of
Turpentine, and of the Tincture of Antimony: Then put it up in a Gally-pot,
and tye it up close with a Bladder and Leather.

The Composition of these Pills is of a very sine consistence, and not so
crumbly as the common, but commodious to handle, and make up in Pills like
unto warm Wax. The Dose is two small Pills about the bigness of an ordinary
Pease, or one Pill about the big­ness of a gray Pease swelled, taking them at
Night.

These Pills are approved of, and are pre­scribed, and used by the best
Physicians, in Consumptions, and in other Cases.

I thought to have reserved the Prepara­tion of them to my self, and not to
have Published it; but thinking that it is unchri­stian to keep any thing from
the Publick good, my Conscience would not permit me.

The Preparation of the Corrector differs not from that of Starky's; but
because this Book may come to the Hands of some Per­sons which do not know it,
I thought good to insert it here.

[[Page 268]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=146) Take
pure Salt-petre, and White-wine, or Rhenish-wine Tartar, ana equal parts,
pulverize them, and searse them, and mix them well together: Then take a large
Cru­cible, and set it in your Furnace, and being red-hot, cast in some of your
mixture by little and little with an Iron Ladle, and when the fulmination is
over, cast in more, which continue till you have put in all your mix­ture;
then let it flow in the Crucible, giving strong heat.

Then pour it out, and when the Crucible is cold, scrape off all the Salt that
sticketh to the sides of it. Dissolve this Salt in boyling-water. Make
likewise a Lixivium of Quick-lime and Water, which being settled, pour it off:
Take of this Lixivium the same quan­tity with that of the Salt of Tartar; mix
and filter them, then evaporate to a Salt, which will be pure, clear and white
like Crystal; grind it to Powder, and put it into a strong large Vessel, and
pour upon it immediately so much Oyl of Turpentine as may cover it the breadth
of four or five fingers; stir it well together, then cover it loosely, only to
keep things from falling in, and that the Air may come to it; let it stand
thus, stirring it three or four times a day with a wooden Spa­tula, and as you
see the Salt imbibeth the Oyl, add still more Oyl, until the Salt hath [[Page
269]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=146) taken in and
absorbed three times its weight of Oyl, or that it will take in no more, and
is like a Soap, and the Oyl that swimmeth upon it is of a red Colour.

### 3.86. The Tincture of Antimony is made thus, ac­cording to Basil
Valentine.

TAke equal parts of Salt of Tartar and  (antimony), melt them together in a
Crucible, keep them in fusion for half an hour, then pour it out, and whilst
it is hot reduce it to Powder, which put into a Matrass, and pour upon it of
the best rectified Spirit of Wine so much as may cover it the breadth of three
fingers, set the Matrass in warm Sand, that the S. V. may boyl a little, and
you shall have a very red Tincture, which decant, and keep for Use.

This Tincture is recommended to open all Obstructions, of all the Principal
parts, as Liver, Spleen, Lungs, Womb, Reins, and Bladder; it provokes the
Terms, Cureth the Yellow Jaundise, Green-Sickness, Scurvy, Dropsie, Asthma,
Pleuri [...]ie, Melancholy, Ulcers inward and outward, Scabs, Itch, Pox,
Small-Pox and Measles. Dose gr. iv. to xij.

[[Page 270]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=147)

## 4\. Postscript.

### 4.1. The Preparation of Sir Ken [...]lm Digby's Sym­pathetical Powder, as
we prepared it every Year in his Laboratory, and as I prepare it now, is only
thus:

TAke what quantity you please of good English Vitriol, dissolve it in warm
wa­ter, but use no more water than will dissolve it, leaving some of the
impurest part at the bottom undissolved: Then filter the disso­lution, and
evaporate it until you see a thin skin upon it, then put it in a cool place,
and let it stand without stirring it for two or three days, covering it
[...]oosely only, to keep things from fallingin. It will shoot into fair,
green, and large Crystals, which take out, and spread them abroad in a large
flat earthen Dish, and expose them to the heat of the Sun in the Dog days,
turning them often, and the Sun will Calcine them white; when you see them all
white without, beat them grosly, and ex­pos [...] them again to the Sun,
securing them [[Page
271]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=147) from Rain;
when they are well Calcined, powder them finely, and expose this Pow­der again
to the Sun, turning and stirring it often. Continue this until it be reduced
to a white Powder, which put up in a Glass, and tye it up close, and keep it
in a dry place.

As for the Vertues of this Powder, I will only say, that I have seen great
Experience of it in my time, in stanching of desperate bleeding at the Nose.
2. In stanching the Blood of a Wound. 3. In Curing with it any green Wound
(where there is no fra­cture of Bones) without any Plaister or Oyntment, in a
few days.

A Girl about twelve Years of Age bleed­ing desperately at the Nose for two or
three days together, her Mother having used all the means she could devise (in
vain) came to me, telling me, that she had heard I had a Powder that would
stanch Bleeding, she desired me to let her have a little of it, for she feared
her Daughter would bleed to Death: I gave her some of the Powder, and bid her
put a little of it in three or four spoonfuls of fair water, and to bath her
No­strils with it with a clean Linnen rag, putting it up into the Nostrils,
which she did, and her bleeding stopped immediately; the next day she did
bleed a little again, and then using [[Page
272]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=148) it again, it
did stanch it, and she never bled again afterwards.

I spoke with a Famous Chirurgeon, named Mr. Smith, in the City of Augusta in
Ger­many, who told me, that he had a great re­spect for Sir K. D. Books, and
that he made his Sympathetical Powder every Year, and did all his Chiefest
Cures with it in green wounds, with much greater ease to the Patient than if
he had used Oyntments or Plaisters.

If the Reader desires to know more of the Effects of this Powder, and the
Reason of it, I refer him to the Reading of Sir K. Digby's Treatise of Curing
of Wounds by way of Sympathy, where he will find entire satis­faction and full
information of the Reasons of its effects.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=95992&page=148)

[Home](/)

Digby, Kenelm, Sir, 1603-1665.. Date: 1682  

