## (unknown project)

# Poems and translations, written upon several occasions, and to several
persons by a late scholar of Eaton.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=1)

LICENSED,

Rob. Midgley.

Octob. 25. 1688.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=1)

POEMS AND TRANSLATIONS, WRITTEN Upon ſeveral Occaſions, AND To ſeveral
Perſons. By a late Scholar of Eaton.

Et nos ergo manum ferulae ſubduximus, & nunc

Expectes eadem à ſummo minimoque Poeta:

Scripſimus, & ſtulta est clementia, cum tot ubique

Vatibus occurras, periturae parcere chartae.

Juv.

Non illud ipſum quod optimum eſt deſperandum, & in praeſtantibus rebus, magna
ſunt ea, quae ſunt optimis proxima; prima enim ſequentem, honeſtum eſt, in
ſe­cundis, tertiiſque conſiſtere. Tull.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Church-Yard.
1689.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=2)

TO The Right Honourable THE Counteſs of CLARENDON, THESE Rude and Ʋnpoliſh'd
Poems Are Humbly Preſented, DEDICATED, and DEVOTED By the Author, Her
Ladyſhip's Moſt Dutiful and Obedient Servant.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=3)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=3)

## TO THE Worthy Mr RODERICK, Upper-Maſter OF EATON-SCHOOL.

SIR,

THeſe Trifles at Your Feet I'd humbly lay,

And gladly theſe for my vaſt Debts repay;

I'd beg the great Protection of Your Name,

To have that Altar ſanctifie my Flame:

My little All, lent Stock I would reſign,

With reaſon, proud to ſerve at ſuch a Shrine;

But that they're Trifles all, and all thoſe Trifles mine.

Admit them moderate: the Seed that's ſown,

At firſt was Yours, much more the Crop's Your own.

You gave the Talent, that improv'd I bring;

By You my Chirping Muſe was taught to ſing.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=4) You warm'd my
Soul with new Promethean Fire,

Your Wings my flagging Thoughts learnt to aſpire.

You all the Wheels of my ſlow Fancy move,

My doubtful Wit at Your true Touch-ſtone prove.

My Pegaſus was in Your Paſture bred,

Not on coarſe Birch, but Buds of Ivy fed.

Hail the profeſs'd Palaemon of our Iſle!

Aetonian Helicon for every ſtile!

Now give me leave theſe my Firſt-fruits to bring,

Pledge of the Summer, and the Pride of Spring.

So Primroſes are upon Altars laid;

And Pepper-corns for Rent by Beggars paid.

Your Dutiful Scholar, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=4)

## THE TABLE.

  * A Tranſlation out of Syneſius. To Mr. Hen­ry Colman of Queens-Colledge in Cam­bridge Pag. 1
  * Anacreontiques. Ode I. Love. To Mrs. S. Hill 4
  * Ode II. The Letter-Carrier. To Madam Be­bington▪ 7
  * Ode III. Gold. To Madam Richardſon 11
  * Ode IV. Grey Hairs. To Mr. Anth. Whiſtler 14
  * Ode V. Drink. To Mr. Will. Harding 15
  * Anacreon's Bleſſing. To Mr. O—n 17
  * A Greek Epigram to Hemiera. To Madam A— R— 23
  * The Snow-Ball. A Tranſlation. To Madam D. Boſcowen ibid.
  * To Idera wearing a Mask. A Song. To Madam [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=5) M—R—24
  * Bion Idyl. 2. To Mr. Dryden 27
  * A Paraphraſe on the twenty third Idyl. of Theo­critus, to Idera 28
  * Chorus 1. of Seneca's Agamemnon. To my Lord Townſhend 35
  * Parting with his dear Brother, Mr. Aſh Wynd­ham▪ 39
  * To Mr. G. L. an Ode 42
  * The Spring. To Mr. Ben. Wrightſon 49
  * Learning. To Mr. Francis Fuller of St. John's in Cambridge 51
  * To Mr. R. Smith of King's Colledge in Cam­bridge 52
  * To Idera in Mourning, going into Mourning himſelf ſoon after 54
  * A Paradox in praiſe of Ambition. To his dear Friend Mr. Edw. Taylour, of Merton Col­ledge in Oxford 56
  * To Idera. Age in a Looking-glaſs 64
  * Solitude. To his dear Brother, Mr. Aſh Wynd­ham 65
  * To a young Lady that conſtantly ſlept at Church 76
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=5) To Idera, putting a Copy of Verſes in at her Win­dow at midnight. 78
  * To Idera, Speechleſs 80
  * Incurable. To Idera 82
  * To the Ingenious Mr. Barker. Saul's Witch of Endor 84
  * To Mrs. B. Wright, on her Incomparable Poetry 91
  * A Fragment of Catullus. Advice to Hemiera. To Madam A—R—94
  * The Paradox to Idera 95
  * To Idera, dreaming ſhe was angry 96
  * Ovid's Amorum, Lib. 3. Eleg. 9. on the death of Tibullus. To Mr. William Lloyd 98
  * To Idera, having by ſome miſchance ſo hurt her ſelf as to halt 104
  * To Mr. O—n. A Diſſwaſive from that effemi­nate Paſſion of Love 108
  * To Idera, writing her Name in Snow, which mel­ting to water, froze, and ſoon after thaw'd 109
  * A Propitiatory Sacrifice, to the Ghost of J—M—by way of Paſtoral, in a Dialogue between Thyrſis and Corydon. To his dear Brother [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=6) Mr. Aſh Wyndham 110
  * Oldham's Ghost. A Dream. To Mr. Ro. Townſhend 117
  * On the Death of the late Duke of Ormond. To Mr. Will. Butler 121
  * To Mr. R. Nichols. On the Little Man that was ſhew'd for a Sight all over England 124
  * Solomon's Song. cap. 1. ver. 2. To Mrs. Mary Nichols 125
  * To Idera. The Apology for Silence 127
  * The Dumb Diſcovery. To Idera 129
  * In praiſe of Wine mixt with Water. To Mr. Francis Nichols 130
  * Parting with Mr. Tho. Bebington 131
  * A Greek Epigram. To Idera 134
  * On John Pig, who was very famous for his great Noſe. To Mr. R. Nichols 136
  * Part of the fourteenth Satyr of Juvenal, against Covetouſneſs. To Mr. William Percival ibid.
  * An Epigram. To Mr. Hen. Northcote of Exon-Colledge, Oxon. The Happy Miſer 152
  * An Epigram, in praiſe of John Pig's Diminutive [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=6) Noſe. To Mr. Frederick Colman 153
  * Concerning John Pig's Mountainous Noſe, and Quick-ſilver Feet. To Mr. T. Wooley ibid.
  * To a young Lady, reading the ſeventh Verſe of the first Chapter of Proverbs. To Idera. 154
  * To his Valentine Hemiera▪ Madam A. R. 155
  * To Idera, who would not be ſeen to ſteal a Look from Duſeraſtes, by turning her back 157
  * To Hemiera 158
  * To P. P. being to run a Race after Dinner 161
  * Mediocrity. To Mr. Humph. Lind ibid.
  * Diogenes in his Kingdom. To Mr. Denham 162
  * Noll's Epitaph. To Mr. Andrew Snapes ibid.
  * A Short Life and a Sweet. To Mr. Edward Taylor 163
  * To Mr. Henry Palmer, going to Sea ibid.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=7) To Mr. Butler. A Greek Epigram 164
  * To Mr. Will. Percival. That Poetry is Witch­craft ibid.
  * Antipater's Epitaph on Homer. To Mr. John Penneck 165
  * To Mr. N. Smith. On a Covetous old Miſer, a Religious Gripe ibid.
  * To Mr. King, against the Aſtrologers 166
  * To Mr. Hen. Fane ibid.
  * An Epigram out of Plato. To Madam Amara 168

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=8)

## ERRATA.

PAge 4. line 10. for now read when. p. 11. l. 12. for Paſſengers r. Paſſenger.
p. 18. l. 27. for they r. would. p. 22. l. 3. for and splits r. exhauſts. p.
27. l. 13. for Artiſt r. Bowman. p. 40. l. 2. for Titles r. name and number.
p. 45. l. 14. for bare r. bear. p. 53. l. 20. for can mount r. pretend. p. 54.
l. 9\. for his r. her. p. 81. l. 1. for her r. you. p. 88. l. 10. for the r.
her. p. 124. l. 2. for drop r. pour. p. 140. l. 1. for he r. ſhe. p. 156. l.
26. for R. r. ſhe.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE Worthy Mr RODERICK, Upper-Maſter OF EATON-SCHOOL.
  * THE TABLE.
  * ERRATA.
  * 1\. POEMS.
    * 1.1. A Tranſlation out of Syneſius. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, &c.
    * 1.2. Anacreontiques.
      * 1.2.1. ODE I. Love.
      * 1.2.2. ODE II. The Letter-Carrier.
      * 1.2.3. ODE III. Gold.
      * 1.2.4. ODE IV. Grey Hairs.
      * 1.2.5. ODE V. Drink.
      * 1.2.6. Anacreon's Bleſſing.
    * 1.3. Bion Idyl. 4. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, &c. To Mrs. M———— Dr————r.
    * 1.4. A Greek EPIGRAM to Hemiera. To Madam A— R—.
    * 1.5. The SNOW-BALL. A Tranſlation. To Madam D— B—
    * 1.6. To Idera wearing a MASK. A SONG To Madam M— R—.
    * 1.7. Bion Idyl. 2. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, &c. To Mr. Dryden.
    * 1.8. A PARAPHRASE On the twenty third Idyl. of Theocritus, From the beginning to 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, &c. To Idera.
    * 1.9. Chorus 1. Of Seneca's Agamemnon. To my Lord Townſhend.
    * 1.10. Parting with His Dear Brother, Mr. Aſh Wyndham.
    * 1.11. To Mr. G. L. an ODE.
    * 1.12. The SPRING. To Mr. Ben. Wrightſon.
    * 1.13. Learning.
    * 1.14. To Mr. R. Smith of King's Colledge in Cambridge.
    * 1.15. To Idera in Mourning, Going into Mourning Himſelf ſoon after.
    * 1.16. A Paradox in Praiſe of Ambition. To his dear Friend Mr. Edw. Taylour, of Merton Colledge in Oxford.
    * 1.17. To Idera. Age in a Looking-glaſs.
    * 1.18. SOLITƲDE. To his dear Brother, Mr. Aſh Wyndham.
    * 1.19. To a young Lady that conſtantly ſlept at Church.
    * 1.20. To Idera, Putting a Copy of Verſes in at her Window at Midnight.
    * 1.21. To Idera, Speechleſs.
    * 1.22. INCƲRABLE. To Idera.
    * 1.23. To the Ingenious Mr. Barker. Saul's Witch of Endor.
    * 1.24. To Mrs. B. Wright, On her Incomparable Poetry.
    * 1.25. A Fragment of Catullus. Advice to Hemiera. To Madam A— R—.
    * 1.26. The PARADOX, To Idera.
    * 1.27. To Idera, Dreaming ſhe was Angry.
    * 1.28. Ovid's Amorum Lib. 3. Eleg. 9. On the death of Tibullus. To Mr. William Lloyd.
    * 1.29. To Idera, Having by ſome Miſchance ſo hurt her ſelf as to halt.
    * 1.30. To Mr. Omnibon. A Diſſwaſive from that Effeminate Paſſion of Love.
    * 1.31. To Idera, Writing her Name in Snow, which melting to Water, froze, and ſoon after thaw'd.
    * 1.32. A Propitiatory Sacrifice, To the Ghoſt of J— M— by way of Paſtoral, in a Dialogue between Thyrſis and Corydon. To his dear Brother Mr. Aſh Wyndham.
    * 1.33. Oldham's GHOST. A Dream. To Mr. Ro. Townſhend.
    * 1.34. On The Death of the late Duke of Ormond. To Mr. William Butler.
    * 1.35. To Mr. R. Nichols. On the Little Man that was ſhow'd for a Sight all over England. In imitation of a Greek Epigram out of Lucilius.
    * 1.36. To Mrs. Mary Nichols.
    * 1.37. To Idera, The Apology for Silence.
    * 1.38. The Dumb Diſcovery. To Idera.
    * 1.39. In praiſe of Wine mixt with Water. A Greek EPIGRAM, Out of Meleager. To Mr. Francis Nichols.
    * 1.40. Parting with Mr. Tho. Bebington.
    * 1.41. A Greek EPIGRAM. To Idera.
    * 1.42. On John Pig, who was very famous for his great NOSE. To Mr. R. Nichols.
    * 1.43. Part of the 14th Satyr of Juvenal, Against Covetouſneſs: With a long Preface taken out of the ſame Satyr. To Mr. Will. Percival.
    * 1.44. An EPIGRAM. To Mr. H. Northcote of Exeter-Colledge, Oxon. The Happy Miſer.
    * 1.45. An EPIGRAM. In praiſe of John Pig's Diminutive Noſe, in imitation of the Emperour Trajan's. To Mr. Frederick Colman.
    * 1.46. Another out of Ammianus. To Mr. T. Woolley. Concerning John Pig's Mountainous Noſe and Quick-ſilver Feet.
    * 1.47. To a young Lady reading the ſeventh Verſe of the firſt Chapter of Proverbs. To Idera.
    * 1.48. To his Valentine Hemiera, Madam A. R.
    * 1.49. To Idera. Who would not be ſeen to ſteal a Look from Duſeraſtes, by turning her back.
    * 1.50. To Hemiera.
    * 1.51. To P. P. being to run a Race after Dinner.
    * 1.52. An Epigram out of Alphaeus Mitylenaeus. To Mr. Humphry Lind. Mediocrity.
    * 1.53. Another. To Mr. Denham. Diogenes in his Kingdom.
    * 1.54. An EPITAPH on old Oliver. To Mr. Andrew Snapes.
    * 1.55. A Greek EPIGRAM. A ſhort Life and a ſweet. To his dear Friend Mr. Edw. Taylour.
    * 1.56. To Mr. Henry Palmer, going to Sea.
    * 1.57. To Mr. Butler. A Greek EPIGRAM.
    * 1.58. To his dear Friend Mr. Will. Percival. That Poetry is Witchcraft.
    * 1.59. Antipater's Epitaph upon Homer. To Mr. John Penneck.
    * 1.60. To Mr. Nat. Smith. On a covetous old Miſer, a religious Gripe.
    * 1.61. To Mr. King. A Greek Epigram againſt the Aſtrologers.
    * 1.62. To Mr. Hen. Fane.
    * 1.63. An EPIGRAM out of Plato. To Madam Amara.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=8)

## 1\. POEMS.

### 1.1. A Tranſlation out of Syneſius.  
[...], &c.

WIT, alas, what idle Charms!

Herculean Strength, or Milo's Arms!

Beauty, what ground for Pride is there?

Or Gold, as trifling as the Fair!

What Halcyons build within a Crown?

What ſolid Pleaſure's in Renown?

If in an equal Ballance laid,

And by a hand impartial weigh'd,

With ſerious and Divine affairs,

With holy and Religious cares,

Compar'd with the Almighty's Love,

Lighter than Vanity they'll prove.

One eaſily outſtrips in courſe,

The beſt that ever back'd a Horſe;

Can ride Bucephalus full ſpeed,

Or one of Neptune's generous Breed:

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=9) Can make
his fiery Courſer fly,

Like winged Lightning, through the Sky.

Another has prodigious ſtore,

Mountains and Seas of Golden Ore;

The Miſer's heart could wiſh no more.

Whom Midas envying, would prevent,

And of his ſecond wiſh repent.

One is a Cretan at his Bow,

Can ſhoot a very Hair in two;

Excels the Maſter of this Art,

Makes Teucer lay it deep to heart;

And what was formerly his Pride,

His Bow, as uſeleſs, throw aſide.

Another has a comely Face;

(And when there's Beauty in the caſe,

What Spell can lay this Spirit? what Charms

Of humane power reſiſt theſe Arms?)

H'as ſuch a Beauty ſo divine,

Nireus his Title would reſign,

And emulous Narciſſus pine.

Another prides in Noble Bloud;

Another in a numerous Brood

Of lovely Girls and hopeful Boys,

Their Countries Props, and Parents Joys;

Of Danaus and Aegyptus Stock,

A great and a well-order'd Flock.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=9) This is my
Wiſh, (let them have theirs,

Which are the leaſt of all my cares,)

Let me live private and obſcure,

From Noiſe, and Pride, and Scorn ſecure;

From the drie Complements of Court,

Gliſtning Glo-worms! Fortunes ſport!

From mean Ambition, lying Fame,

Baſe Actions, and a tainted Name.

No fine-ſpun Cobwebs of the Great,

No gay Contrivances of State:

No gilded Greatneſs, empty ſhows,

(Miſ-guiding Meteors!) make me loſe

That happy Path that I would choſe.

Let me with Aglaus be found,

Pleas'd in my little ſpot of ground;

Or bleſt with the poor Gardner's fate,

Envied by Alexander's ſtate.

Abdolonymus, only known

To ſome poor Pot-herbs of his own;

Gardner, degraded to a Throne!

What if the World ſhould never hear

Of ſuch a one as Go—l there?

On Earth let me a Cypher be,

So I make one, my God, with thee.

Here let me, as a ſtranger, live,

At beſt a nameleſs Expletive;

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=10) So to my
ſelf I am but known,

And unto thee, my God, alone.

### 1.2. Anacreontiques.

#### 1.2.1. ODE I. Love.

AS lately on my ſleepy Bed

I laid my ſick and drowſie head,

And Night it ſelf with me lay dead▪

The Heavens nodded, Nature ſnor'd,

When Winking Morpheus gave the word

Silence; and at the Court of Night

'Twas time to hang out every Light:

Now wearied Limbs took their repoſe,

When troubled Minds began to doſe;

When twinkling Stars could hardly keep

Themſelves from dropping faſt aſleep;

Some dimm'd and ſhot, but others fell:

Cloſe was the ſilence, deep as Hell.

Half the Creation joyntly ſlept,

Clouds Sympathetick Showers wept.

The Moon, like all the reſt, was gone

To Bed to her Endymion.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=10) Cupid
knock'd at Anacreon's Gate;

What buſineſs have you here ſo late,

Said I? and ask'd the ſtranger's name,

His Meſſage, and from whence he came▪

Poor little Beggar-boy, ſaid he,

That is benighted; pity me:

For Heaven's ſake, Sir, let me in,

For I am almoſt wet to th' skin:

I've been a ſhooting all this day;

'Tis dark, and I have loſt my way:

The Stars themſelves, the very Moon,

Share my Misfortune; I'm undone!

Let me but in a Stable lie,

'Twill be a deed of Charity.

I heard the flattering Raſcal ſpeak,

And could not but for pity's ſake,

In ſuch a caſe, open the Gate,

Which ſtraight my Youngſter enter'd at,

With Bag and Quiver at his back:

And having drunk a Glaſs of Sack

To warm within, my little Squire,

I ask'd him to come near the Fire;

And brought him out a ſumptuous hoard

Of Victuals on a plenteous Board,

The beſt my Houſe could then afford;

And play'd the Courtier, to excuſe

The barren deſerts of my Muſe▪

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=11) So poor a
Meal as he muſt make,

And wiſh'd it better for his ſake.

I rub'd his little hands in mine,

And wrung his hair ſo ſoft, ſo fine,

Like his own Mother's Locks. And now

He look'd ſo charmingly, I vow

I ſcarcely could forbear to hug

The little fiery wanton Pug.

And thus no little time was ſpent

In Ceremony and Complement.

Now when he found himſelf grow warm,

Has the Rain done my Bow no harm,

(Said he)? and made no more to do,

But took his pretty little Bow,

And ſtrung it up, and pierc'd my heart:

So does the Gad-bee's tickling ſmart

Fret and delight th' infected part.

Up and away then, Whip and Spur,

Crying, God b'ye, your Servant, Sir;

I wiſh you well, my Hoſt, adieu;

I'm very much oblig'd to you:

I ſee my Bow is well enough;

But Friend, your Heart's not Arrow-proof.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=11)

#### 1.2.2. ODE II. The Letter-Carrier.

TEll me, amiable Dove,

Thou great Embaſſadour of Love,

A Spokes man fit for amorous Jove;

Tell me, tell me, why ſuch haſt?

Whither is't you flie ſo faſt?

Where didſt thou thy breath perfume?

From what Spicy Country come?

From whence, with thy Mercurial Wing,

Doſt thou theſe Heavenly Odours bring?

Swimming through th' ambitious Air,

Proud to kiſs thy Wings ſo fair,

Leaving a ſcent of ſweetneſs there.

Tell me who it is, will be

So honour'd with thy companie?

The Dove replied, What would I give,

Poor Dove, for a Preſervative

From Coxcombs ſo inquiſitive?

Pray what are my concerns to you?

But ſince 'tis your deſire to know,

And Medlers will not be ſaid no:

(Save me, ye Gods; for what offence

Muſt I be kill'd by Impertinence?)

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=12) I am (and
then ſhe curb'd her Head,

Her Tail, Fan-like, by Feathers ſpread,

And walk'd in ſtate, and clapp'd her Wings,

And did a hundred pretty things,

To ſhew her pride) Anacreon's Dove,

And manage the affairs of Love

With his Bathyllus, that dear Boy,

(Oh, happy ſtate that I enjoy!)

Lovely Bathyllus, he that can,

By one ſweet look, ev'n conquer Man;

Can by the Magick of his Eyes,

Over all things tyrannize;

Victorious Beauty of all Greece,

The whole Creation's Maſter-piece;

The Pride of Nature, and the Fire

That raiſes Venus's Deſire,

Whom thô ſhe envy, ſhe muſt ſtill admire;

Could make a Stoick change his mind,

Fixt as the Sun, turn like the Wind,

And in Love's School more Pleaſures find,

Than in his former Hermite's Cell,

Principles dark and deep as Hell.

To Venus once I did belong,

She ſold me for a trifling Song.

O happy I, that us'd to run

From place to place, from Sun to Sun,

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=12) Managing
the Intrigues of Love,

With Mars, and half the Gods above,

With her Seraglio of Gallants,

That by turns ſupply'd her wants;

Am Servant to Anacreon,

Who lov'd by all, yet loves but one.

And as you ſee me now, I bear

His Letters to his lovely Fair;

This the perfume that ſcents the Air.

He promiſes to ſet me free;

Excuſe me for ſuch libertie:

No other freedom would I crave,

Than name and nature of a Slave;

Nor other ſlavery can I dread,

Than being, as he tells me, freed.

For to what purpoſe ſhould I flie,

And ramble in the ſpacious Skie,

By Famine, Net, or Arrow die?

Sit ſtarving on a Mountains top,

Or coo on barren Trees, and hop,

In fear of death, from bough to bough,

I know not where, I know not how;

Either die for want of Meat,

Elſe Haws, and Chaff, and Vetches eat:

Nor ſafety in that wretched fare,

'Ware Birdlime, Turtle! and the Snare.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=13) Where
Puddle-water is the beſt,

A hollow Tree the ſofteſt Neſt;

To hear Owls Muſick, nor that long;

She'll make one dance unto her Song.

Is this the freedom I have loſt?

Is this the freedom others boaſt?

I by my Maſter now can ſtand,

Peck Crums out of Anacreon's hand;

And have my little Ganymede

To give me Wine, whene're I need.

I in a merry mood, can ſup

Wine out of Anacreon's Cup;

His own pure, choice, delicious Wine,

So ſmooth, ſo ſparkling, and ſo fine!

Which he keeps purpoſely to treat

Bathyllus with, when they two meet.

When I get drunk, I clap my wings,

And dance, whilſt my Anacreon ſings.

And when I am a ſleepy grown,

Upon his Harp I lay me down:

Muſick and I can there agree

In one united Harmonie;

Both make our Maſter Melodie.

Peace and Concord is, in brief,

The perfect ſum of my whole Life,

Free from danger, noiſe, or ſtrife.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=13) Farewel.
But now too late I muſt repent,

That like your ſelf I'm grown impertinent:

For when I'm gone, you'll ſay you took me wrong,

To be a Dove with a Crows pratling Tongue.

#### 1.2.3. ODE III. Gold.

COuld the Miſers heaps of Gold

Flatter Death to quit her hold;

Or would Hell be ſo content,

To take money for her Rent;

Could a man at any rate,

Bribe inexorable Fate;

Could he get Charon in the mind

To leave his Paſſengers behind,

When he has once his Earneſt paid;

Could this Spirit be ever laid

By all the Magick and the Spells

Of Conjuring Miſers in their Cells;

Would Mercury but load himſelf,

Inſtead of men, with loads of Pelf;

Cumber up Hell with Bags of Coin;

Could he prevail with Proſerpine:

'Twould be a notable Deſign.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=14) Could all
his Wealth and all his Power

Purchaſe Reſpit for an hour,

O how I'd ſcrape and drudge for Ore!

O how I'd ranſack Natures Store!

And when I'd done, ſtill crave for more.

I'd drein Pactolus for his Sands,

And wiſh for Midas Golden Hands:

I'd waſh in Tagus to be rich,

Glad to have that Golden Itch.

The World ſhould ſerve me for a Mine,

To furniſh me with Soveraign Coin,

And I would ſerve at Pluto's Shrine.

Almighty Gold ſhould be my Word,

Almighty Gold ſhould be my Lord:

Almighty Gold ſhould all controul;

I'd bear his Image in my Soul.

By him inſpir'd, I'd ſeek and find

Wealth, the Saviour of Mankind.

For Gold is God, and ſomething more;

His Deity would I adore.

Of my God I'd make a ſhrine,

And out of that a God-head coin.

I'd dig to Hell, but that I'd get

Enough to pay the common Debt

Of Nature, a Securitie

From all Arreſts, and thus ſet free,

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=14) That Hell
and I might be at peace,

And Death might grant a longer Leaſe.

But if it be too hard a Task;

Nay, if it be a ſin to ask

The price of a few fleeting days,

To add a furlong to ones Race;

To change one ſpan of life to two,

A ſingle Thread into a Clue;

To hire the Fates to ſheath the Knife,

With Gold to purchaſe longer life:

Why ſhould I by day-time weep,

Or in the night-time break my ſleep?

Why ſhould I beat my Breaſt, complain,

Sigh, and whine, and all in vain?

Melt into Tears, and tear my Hair,

Like one in frenzy or deſpair?

For if the Fates will ſo ordain,

That I muſt die like other men;

Nor have I reaſon to believe,

From Fate I ſhou'd my ſelf reprieve:

If I muſt die, and hence be hurl'd

From this into another World;

What uſe or pleaſure can I have

Of Gold or Silver in the Grave?

They neither revel, buy nor ſell,

Nor drink, nor dance, nor love in Hell.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=15) Therefore
I hope you will excuſe

Theſe Recreations that I uſe

Rarely, but Natural to my Muſe.

Beſides, I am not like to meet

A Miſtriſs in a Winding-Sheet;

Or court a Pretty Maid to Bed

To Grave to me, when I am dead.

#### 1.2.4. ODE IV. Grey Hairs.

WHither flieſt thou, O my Dear,

And leav'ſt a melting Lover here,

Dying, ſinking in Deſpair?

Is my Reverend Hoary Grey,

Such a Bug-bear in your way?

What makes you look ſo ghaſt, and ſtare

As if you're frightned at my Hair?

Becauſe your ſelf's ſo wondrous fair?

Becauſe your Cheeks, ſo lovely red,

Can make Aurora hide her head,

And bluſhing run agen to bed?

Make baffled Venus loſe her Trade,

The emulous Roſes blaſt and fade?

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=15) Scarlet
and Crimſon loſe their die,

Beauty it ſelf aſham'd to vie?

Do not ſcornfully deſpiſe

Me, the Victim of your eyes;

But accept my bleeding Heart,

Weak in Nature, ſtrong in Art.

Then all objections juſtly mute

Will prove, our different colours ſuit.

For you muſt own, to do me right,

I'm ne'er the worſe for being white.

Such a luſtre Lillies caſt;

Wanton Roſes, Lillies chaſt.

But when they both together meet,

The Rivals breathe a fragrant ſweet,

And make a Garland look compleat.

#### 1.2.5. ODE V. Drink.

WHen Wine has fum'd into my head,

My buſie Senſes all lie dead,

And melancholy Megrims ſink

Into the Ocean of my Drink:

This Whirl-pool ſwallows them all up;

And at the bottom of my Cup

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=16) I meet
with all the Gods can give,

To make a Mortal happy live.

I never covet to be great,

Nor envy Croeſus his Eſtate.

Like Bacchanal, I dance and ſing,

And ſcorn the Title of a King:

I make a Foot-ball of a Crown,

Kick glorious Diadems up and down.

I verſifie Extempore,

And all my Speech is Poetrie.

So that with reaſon I may think

I'm made of Poetry, Love, and Drink.

Let other men fall out, and fight

For true or for pretended Right,

To Arms, to Arms; I never care:

A Bottle's all the Arms I bear.

Serve only under Cupid's Banner,

Till made a Lord of Venus Mannour.

But now I think on't, I am told,

That now my youthful Bloud grows cold:

Be wiſe, Anacreon, as thou'rt old.

That Fate has ey'd me ſeveral years,

Reſolv'd to pay off all Arrears:

One foot is in the Grave, and Death

Would fain ſuck out my fragrant breath:

But I'll prevent him, and will lie

Dead drunk o'th' ſpot before I die;

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=16) And by
this pretty Countermine

Baffle the Cannibal's Deſign.

#### 1.2.6. Anacreon's Bleſſing.

WHen Sleep had clos'd my weary Eyes,

Sleep, that Door of Myſteries;

On wing'd Chimaera's ſtraight convey'd,

Where Centinels of Viſions play'd

Before the Gates of Night and Shade;

Arriv'd at ſpacious Fairy Land,

With Sibyl's Bough, and Morpheus Wand,

My Fancy on an Object wrought,

An Object worthy of a thought;

That which by day-time did engage

My mind in a Poetick Rage,

When all my Senſes ſeal'd up, lay

Free from the buſineſs of the day;

My roving Brains again purſu'd,

(Thô the Conception was but rude)

And once again with Joy renew'd.

Methought Anacreon appear'd,

An old man with a Reverend Beard,

Old, yet had a graceful look;

With a Bottle and a Book;

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=17) His
breath ſmelt ſtrong of fragrant Wine,

(Ah curſed be the fatal Vine!)

His Lips with Kiſſes worn, and drie,

His ruffled Cheeks of Scarlet die,

His Spaniel Cupid running by.

When by degrees he nearer drew,

My Face, my Gate, and Habit knew.

When falling proſtrate on the ground,

As a Son in Duty bound,

Ten thouſand times to ſpeak I ſtrove,

Ten thouſand times ſtruck dumb by Love.

Tranſports of Wonder and Surprize

Raviſht my Soul, and burſt out of my Eyes:

But he preventing my Petition,

With a prophetical ſuſpicion,

Stroaking my Lethargick head,

In token of his Bleſſing, ſaid,

"Thy Vow is heard, and it is done,

"The Father's Merits for the Son,

"Make thee, thô an unworthy Heir,

"Fall to Praiſe, inſtead of Prayer.

"Go lay claim unto my Strains,

"My Muſe inſpire thy fruitful Brains,

"As a Reward for all thy pains.

"However, aim thou not too high;

"Some at their loweſt higher flie,

"Than they that ſoar above the Skie;

"[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=17) Than
they that ſoaring, never fell;

"Know your own ſphere, ſtrive to excel

"In that to which your Genius leads.

"I never ſung Heroick deeds,

"Nay, ſhould attempt it, all in vain,

"To write in Homer's lofty ſtrain:

"Yet in my own peculiar way

"Am every whit as fam'd as they.

"But one Rule more before we go:

"Let not your Fancy ebb and flow

"As your Brain on Spirits feeds,

"'T helps one Defect, and twenty breeds.

"Wine will nothing ſolid ſettle;

"Hones by ſharpning, wear the Mettle.

"Thô the bewitching Cups of Liquor

"Made elevated thoughts the quicker,

"Yet the Grapeſtone ſtop'd my breath,

"The Grape my life, the Grape my death.

This ſaid, Anacreon ſmil'd and ſneez'd,

A happy Omen he was pleas'd:

Then pull'd a Garland from his head,

(The Garland was of Myrtle made,

The Garland ſmelt of Love and Wine,

Anacreontique, ſweet, and fine)

With Violets, Palms, and Roſes wrought,

And for a Song of Flora bought.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=18) This he
about my Temples twin'd,

And rapt in a ſtrong blaſt of wind,

Left me and ſordid Earth behind.

I for a Legacy did call,

He let his Book and Spaniel fall.

When out of ſight the Coach was gone,

I put Anacreon's Garland on.

How glad I was to be undone!

The Philtre did effectual prove,

And nothing can theſe Charms remove;

But I am plung'd in the Abyſs of endleſs Love.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=18)

### 1.3. Bion Idyl. 4.  
[...], &c.  
To Mrs. M———— Dr————r.

'TIS the effect of Love, not ſervile Fear,

The Muſes fit their Songs to Cupid's Ear:

Proud at his feet to lay their Scepters down,

And pay Allegiance to their Soveraign's Crown.

'Tis only Love inſpires Apollo's Lute,

Without that Harmony the Muſick's Mute.

The Harp of Eloquence, Venus fairly won

At Pythian Games, a Preſent for her Son.

Orpheus may tune up his Melodious Strings,

Yet none ſo ſweetly as the Siren ſings.

For that Apoſtate (an eternal ſhame

Confound the Rebel, and his hateful Name!)

Whoſe Actions all run counter to his Oath,

His debauch'd Judgment counter to them both;

Dull ſcribling Traytor, who would fain infuſe

Treaſon into the heart of every Muſe;

The wholſome ſtreams of our Parnaſſus mud

Wirh naſty Dregs of Wine, and Lakes of Bloud;

With cold admittance thinks to baffle Love,

Blaſphemouſly the God a Baſtard prove;

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=19) Shall
flagging flie, and in thoſe flights ſtill fall:

Parnaſſus Doves for him produce a Gall.

In vain he calls, and ſwells, and ſplits his Lungs,

Cupid has gagg'd their mouth, or ty'd their tongues;

But he that with His Inſpiration ſings,

Scorns the mean thredbare ſtile of warlike Kings,

Iambick Rage, great words, or mighty things:

But in a ſoft, a ſmooth, a gentle ſtrain,

Shall eaſe (and without pangs) his teeming Brain;

Shall as a Prieſt at Cupid's Altar wait,

And daily numerous Offerings conſecrate.

His Reaſon never in Eclipſe decay,

Nor he want fire to animate his Clay.

Eteſian Gales of Wit, Invention blow,

And Paſſion with Perfection joyntly flow.

Nature intent, whilſt this her Maſter ſings,

And Immortality mount him on her Wings.

His Plaudits ſhall be eccho'd through the World,

Himſelf to the Elyſian Manſions hurl'd.

By good Experience part my ſelf can prove,

I never write ſo well, as when I write of Love.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=19)

### 1.4. A Greek EPIGRAM to Hemiera. To Madam A— R—.

WHen Pallas arm'd, met Venus in the Field,

Will you, ſaid ſhe, the Prize of Beauty yield?

Venus reply'd, If naked with my Charms

I can prevail, what need have I of Arms?

### 1.5. The SNOW-BALL. A Tranſlation. To Madam D— B—

I Dera Snow-balls made, and at me threw;

What can a perſecuted Lover do?

What Labyrinths are theſe in which I rove?

Inextricable are the Schools of Love.

Ev'n Snow, O Irony! to Fire ſhe turns,

And every Vein, with cold ſtruck thorough, burns.

Ah what ſo cold! yet that ſhe could inſpire,

With heat enough to kindle my deſire,

Thrown only by her hands it ſet my heart on fire.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=20) What
Antidote can ſuch a Plague remove?

What place can ſave me from the Charms of Love?

If ev'n the Elements unconſtant prove;

If they (like all the World) begin to cheat,

If Contrarieties can ſo friendly meet,

And cold ſo naturally bring forth heat;

If Snow it ſelf a hidden Fire contains,

She only, only ſhe can eaſe my pains;

She captiv'd firſt my heart, ſhe muſt unlooſe my Chains.

But ah! my flames cannot be quenched ſo,

By virtue of cold Ice, or frozen Snow.

### 1.6. To Idera wearing a MASK. A SONG To Madam M— R—.

1.

WHY ſhould hoodwink'd Nature die?

And blinded Beauty fade?

Grace, Innocence, and Virtue lie

Smother'd in Maſquerade?

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=20)

2.

Let Cupid's Monarchy diſplay

His Flags of White and Red,

Nor give the World juſt cauſe to ſay,

Sick of a Maidenhead.

3.

Why ſhould the Mountebanks lay claim

To th' Colours of your Skin?

'T may raiſe a ſcandal on your Name,

Thô I ſhould think it ſin.

4.

Thô my Implicit Faith be ſtrong

Inviſibles to believe,

Thô I ſhould think I did you wrong,

To ſay you can deceive.

5.

Diſpel thoſe happy Clouds that kiſs

Your Riſing Sun unſeen,

That ſtrive to raviſh all the Bliſs,

And interpoſe a Screen.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=21)

6.

Who would not at your Rays take fire?

T' Arabian Deſerts flie,

And in a Spicy Nest expire,

And in a Fever die?

7.

Pity a bleeding, wounded Hart,

Abandon'd by the Herd;

I'd die, but for my better part,

Life is to be preferr'd.

8.

Let Venus boaſt her Maſter-piece,

Let all the World admire;

Let me alone the Prize poſſeſs,

Troy, Greece,—may be on fire.

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=21)

### 1.7. Bion Idyl. 2.  
[...], &c.  
To Mr. Dryden.

A Little Stripling once a ſhooting went,

And hot he was, and on his Game intent:

He ſpy'd the little blinking Buzzard, Love,

Sculking in a thick ſhady Myrtle Grove;

With joy and wonder ſtruck, firſt ſtones he flung,

And then his Bow, ſure of his Buzzard, ſtrung:

Cloſe by the Tree, a Fated Arrow drew,

But Love too quick, ſtill to another flew,

And all the Archer's Policy would not do.

Then to a good old Man he did himſelf apply,

Told him the News, and ſhew'd Love perching up on high.

The Gaffer Plough-man ſmiling, ſhook his head,

Pleas'd with the fancy, to the Artiſt ſaid,

Leave ſhooting, Youngster, and believe my words,

Theſe are but feather'd Monſters, Beaſts of Birds.

Were you at man's eſtate, he'd act your part;

Love's a damn'd Marks-man at a ſeaſon'd heart.

Thô he flies now, then would he follow you,

And as a greedy Vultur cloſe purſue.

You are too young, he's for a noble Prey;

Yet leſt he take a liking to you, get you hence away.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=22)

### 1.8. A PARAPHRASE On the twenty third Idyl. of Theocritus, From the
beginning to  [...], &c.  
To Idera.

I.

AN amorous little Swain

Was ſet to keep

His Father's goodly Flock of Sheep,

In the Arcadian Plain:

By chance a beauteous She came by,

Whom when his watchful Eyes did ſpy,

His Guardian Eyes

That there ſtood Centinel, with wonder and ſurpize,

Marking the beauty of her Angel's face,

Set off with a ſweet Carriage, and a heavenly Grace,

Bleſt with a pleaſant Mein, and ſprightly Air,

And all the dear Enchantments of the Fair;

Well ſatisfy'd, they let her paſs:

Who thus admitted, did impart

The ſecret to his wounded Heart.

Charm'd with the lovely Maid, that Fate had thither brought,

Whoſe Beauty did ſurpaſs deſire or thought;

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=22) In making
whom,

Nature for once did thus preſume

To go beyond her Rule, and place

On a ſweet Virgin's Body, a Cherub's Face;

Or rather to adorn

With more than heavenly Beauty, a Terreſtrial form.

II.

But ah! her Mind

Not like to her Seraphick Face, proud, ſcornful, and unkind;

Deſpiſing thoſe whom Paſſion,

Whom reſiſtleſs Paſſion mov'd,

To humble Adoration,

Thoſe who diſdain'd her moſt, ſhe above all things lov'd.

She knew not, nor deſir'd to know

The fatal power of Cupid's Bow,

How oft, and how infallibly he throws

An amorous golden Dart,

To pierce the refractory Heart

That dare his injur'd Deity expoſe;

Cruel in deed and word:

Ne're the leaſt hopes of comfort would diſcover,

To a deſpairing, burning, dying Lover.

But in her Veins, Fury for Paſſion boils,

No roſie Lips, no pleaſant Smiles,

No bluſhing Cheeks, no languiſhing Eyes,

That might ſeem to ſympathize;

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=23) But as a
chaſed Boar that fills

With roaring all the neighbouring Hills,

With Vengeance caſts his Eyes around,

And foaming, tears the groaning ground;

Till diſtant Vales the Eccho trembling take;

The Foreſt all and every Creature ſhake:

So ſhe, glances her Eyes upon the Swain,

With deſperate Diſdain,

Adding more fewel to his never dying Pain.

III.

With ſcorn her Countenance turn'd pale,

And all her other Charms began to fail;

Diſdain had baniſh'd every Grace,

Thoſe blazing Comets of her Face,

Pride and Contempt took place.

Yet the Shepherd finds no Arms

For theſe fainting, ſickly Charms.

Her divine Sweetneſs he muſt ſtill admire,

Struck blind from Heaven with Cupid's fire,

The flaſhes of an impotent deſire.

Alas! how vain does ſpeechleſs Reaſon prove!

When enter'd in that Tyrant's Schools,

We learn his Epidemick Rules;

And fetter'd in the Chains of Love,

Turn Faſhionable Fools:

We cannot call our ſelves our own,

But our affections pay obeyſance to another's Crown.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=23)

IV.

No longer able to contain,

Thô all in vain,

Thô all his words were Offerings to the Wind,

Deaf as ſhe was unkind!

Tears like the Torrent of a ſwelling Floud,

Tears from the Heart exhal'd, and drops of Bloud,

Their ſinking banks did overflow,

And drown the famiſh'd Vales below.

Trembling with dread and awful fear,

At laſt he ventur'd to draw near

The Object of his Love, the Cauſe of his Deſpair.

Firſt he preſumes to kiſs

The ſacred ground whereon he with Devotion trod,

As in the preſence of an angry God,

And then he ſtrove to ſpeak;

But conſcious Jealouſie oft gave a check,

And made his half-out-liſping words draw back.

Stam'ring at laſt he forc'd out ſuch a Speech as this.

V.

"Inexorable, cruel, ſtony Saint!

"Blind to my Tears, and deaf to my Complaint!

"Sure of ſome Lioneſs, or Tyger born,

"Unworthy of my Love, as I unworthy of your Scorn!

"A grateful Preſent to your Shrine I bring,

"The Welcome, and the only welcome thing,

"[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=24) That to
my comfort, muſt remain,

"To eaſe me of my Pain,

"To eaſe me of my Love, and you of your Diſdain;

"And Lo! proud haughty Nymph, and Lo!

"How willingly I go,

"How willingly I go, and take delight

"In your Commands, thô baniſh'd from your ſight.

"I go where every Love-ſick mind

"An univerſal Remedy may find;

"The place is call'd Oblivion's Land,

"And Lethe's lazy Lake i'th' midſt does ſtand;

"Which were it poſſible that I could dry,

"In flames unquenchable I ſtill ſhould fry;

"Nor could I yet forget thy Name,

"So oft have I repeated o're the ſame.

"But find alas! no Water that can quench my Flame.

VI.

"Adieu, fair Virgin! and eternally adieu!

"Yet thou proud Anaxarete! learn what doom

"Undoubtedly ſhall on thy Beauty come,

"And from my dying mouth believe it true.

"The pleaſant Day is quickly done,

"Flowers in the Morning freſh, cut down by Noon;

"The bluſhing Roſes fade, and wither ſoon;

"White Snow that melts before the ſcorching Sun,

"So youthful Beauty's full of Charms, all in a mo­ment gone

"[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=24) The time
will come, when you your ſelf will prove

"How great a Deity is Love,

"Beauty, or Wit, will ev'n that ſcornful Soul alarm,

"A wanton Ovid, or a fair Adonis Charm;

"You'll offer Hecatombs of Prayers,

"Bedew your Sacrifice with flouds of tears,

"Day and night ſigh would, but you dare not woo,

"For all's in vain that you can do,

"No greater pity will you find than I from you.

"Then will your tortur'd Conſcience bring me into mind,

"Not to encourage you, but ſerve you in your kind;

"My reſtleſs Ghost ſhall come,

"Not with ſoft Sighs, but Io's loud at your deſerved doom.

VII.

"And yet grant me but this, ev'n this at leaſt,

"I'll ask no more, but grant me this Requeſt,

"Pull out the fatal Dagger from my Breaſt,

"And come and ſigh and mourn a while;

"I ask not (what I long'd for once) a Smile:

"But pull the Dagger from the Wound,

"And cloſe, and cloſe embrace me round:

"Thy Veil over my lifeleſs Body ſpread,

"Give me one kiſs, one kiſs when I am dead.

"I ask no more, coy Daphne! grant but this,

"A meeting, parting Kiſs,

"[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=25) Seal my
cold Lips with thine,

"When thou haſt ſuckt up all my dying breath,

"And mournful Cypreſs round my Temples twine,

"When to th' Elyſian Manſions I am fled.

"Nor needſt thou fear, thus ſummon'd after death,

"My raviſht Sould ſhould come again;

"No, all thy Courtſhip is in vain,

"All cannot draw me from the Joys of the Elyſian Plain.

VIII.

Then build me up a ſtately Tomb,

For a cloſe Retiring Room;

In it place a Downy Bed,

Where Love may lay his ſworn Confederate's head;

And leave me, after thou haſt three times ſaid,

My Duſeraſtes, He! Soul of my Soul, is dead.

Ah, cruel Death! that couldſt us two divide,

Had Jove but pleas'd that I for thee had di'd!

Write this upon my Monument, to prove

Your own Unworthy Scorn, my Conſtant Love:

Here lies a Lover, Kill'd by deep Deſpair;

Stay Reader, ſtay,

And only be ſo kind to ſay,

Alas! he lov'd, alas! he lov'd a Cruel Fair.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=25)

### 1.9. Chorus 1. Of Seneca's Agamemnon.  
To my Lord Townſhend.

I.

FOrtune! thou ſlippery Stage of Kings,

Upon whoſe Smiles or Frowns

Depends the Settlement or Fall of Crowns!

What various Chances treacherous Fortune brings,

Mounting on deceitful Wings!

To Monarchs Scepters gives, and ſets them up on high

Upon the tottering Spires of Dignity;

Then leaves them all alone,

Hung in the Air, upon a Windy Throne,

Volatil Fortune muſt be gone:

So let them fall or riſe,

Away the baſe perfidious Juggler flies.

How canſt thou put a Cheat on us, ſo bare,

Give us but Tinſel Goods for Solid Ware?

Wouldſt have them rich and gay appear,

Thô truly little worth, and truly very dear.

II.

'Tis not a Conqueror's Sword or Crown,

A Prince's Smile, or Tyrant's Frown,

Can make Cares at diſtance keep,

Or buy one ſhort-liv'd moment's ſleep.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=26) Greatneſs
is nothing but a pleaſant Fable,

Nor can it make a Soul invulnerable.

The Court is no ſecurity from pains,

Princes have wore their Chains.

One Miſery on another's neck does ride;

'Tis a troubled Sea, when Fortune is our Guide;

And 'tis a rare unuſual ſight,

In Fate's black Webs to ſee one thread of white.

The raging Waves tear up the Sand,

And foaming beat againſt the Land;

Yet not ſo faſt the Tyde can flow,

Yet not ſo faſt the Wind can blow,

As giddy Fortune raſhly throw

Out of her careleſs hand, the doubtful Die,

When in the twinkling of an Eye,

Kings Beggars, Beggars Kings, turn'd at her Lottery.

Kings would be fear'd, but even Kings we ſee,

Fear, leſt they that fear them, ſhould uſe Treachery.

III.

'Tis not the Night can give the Balm of Rest

To thoſe whoſe Spirits are oppreſt

With Care, that Night-Mare on their breaſt.

Sleep is no Antidote t' expel

Fear, that Firebrand of Hell.

What City will not impious Arms deſtroy?

Slight was the Cauſe, great was the Fall of Troy.

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=26) Bloud-
thirſty War ſwallows whole Kingdoms down,

Nor makes two mouthfuls of a Crown.

See the vaſt Pyramids that once ev'n reach'd the Skie,

Like Mole-hills in the duſt, or Atoms lie.

Chaſtity is at Court a hateful name,

And ſilenc'd Juſtice put to ſhame:

They laugh at Wedlock's Sacred Tye,

Stifle gaſping Innocence,

Perjure their Reaſon, and debauch their Sence,

And impudently give ev'n Truth it ſelf the Lye.

IV.

But War in Hoſtile manner ſtands

With Spear advanc'd, and bloudy hands:

And there Jove's Executioners all wait

To overturn thoſe Pinacles of State.

Furies in the Triumphant Chariot ride,

With Whips to check the Conſul's pride.

Death in a thouſand dreadful ſhapes appears,

And gnaws on Conſcience prepoſſeſt with fears.

Crowns from weight, and care from Kings,

Are both inſeparable things.

V.

Yet ſuppoſe Fate offers no Violence,

Publick Peace, private Innocence,

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=27) Still
things that are ſo high and great,

Cannot ſupport their feeble height,

But tottering down, ſink under their own weight.

If Sails be fill'd, thô by a proſperous wind,

Thoſe Gales may prove unkind.

A Whirlwind overturns the Tower that ſhrouds

Its lofty top amongſt the Clouds.

The little Shrubs in humble ſhades that ſpread,

See the vaſt Oak, whoſe proud aſpiring head

Defied the Thunderer, in the Forreſt lie

Sapleſs, wither'd, crackt, and drie.

Flaſhes of Lightning only Mountains ſtrike;

In this alone are Fortune's Scales alike:

Whatever's above weight muſt over fall,

Without exception, All.

Great Bodies, too luxurious grown

With ſomething more than properly their own,

Predominant Diſeaſes feed

Corruption in the Bloud, and Humours breed.

The fatteſt Cattel are for ſlaughter choſe,

To dangers Greatneſs muſt expoſe.

Whatever tottering Fortune does exalt,

Has only Crutches lent to learn to halt.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=27)

VI.

Low moderate things muſt needs bear longeſt date,

That man is truly, and is only Great,

That lives contented with a mean Eſtate.

Thrice happy is that man whoſe Means do lie

Above, or elſe below curſt Fortune's Eye;

Nor like a Coward to the ſhore does creep,

Nor raſhly thruſts himſelf into the deep,

### 1.10. Parting with His Dear Brother, Mr. Aſh Wyndham.

I.

MAke room, ye Pygmie Sons of Fame,

That with Antiquity would ſwell your name,

Proud before others, to have trod

The Paths of Virtue, and the Ways of God.

Thô laſt, I'll mend my pace,

Not they that ſet out firſt, muſt win the Race.

'Tis done! and now, methinks,

The ſtately Monument of Niſus ſinks,

And all thoſe Hero's duſt to nothing ſhrinks.

'Tis done! I mount upon the Wings of Love,

And through the Sky, by the Twin-Stars I move;

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=28) From
whence thoſe little Atoms I review,

That once with Titles fill'd the World,

Thouſands into a crowded Pitcher hurl'd,

Wet with the Tears of Moiſture and of Dew.

2.

'Tis done! and all the Field's my own,

But ſtill what ſhall I do to be for ever known?

How ſhall I keep up this my flight,

And prove 'tis not Preſumption, but my Right?

'Tis done! and the unqueſtionable Heir,

Dear Corydon, will to my Title ſwear,

Ev'n He, whoſe name had ſpread from Pole to Pole,

Great and diffuſive as his Soul:

Had Fame, with all her hundred Tongues, but breath

To ſound him loud enough, till after death,

Whoſe Name was made to comprehend

All the Virtues of a Friend:

Too great for words, whoſe Soul needs no tranſlation, Nature's one only work
of Supererogation.

3.

Oh! I could almoſt with that Fate would try

How unconcern'd for thee I durſt to die;

How at the fatal Altar I could ſmile,

Griev'd only at thy abſence for a while.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=28) Proud as
a Harbinger, to go before

To chuſe ſome melancholy Grove,

Where I together with my thoughts might rove,

And thy auſpicious Name implore.

Yet if not ſentenc'd to depart,

How gladly could I watch the Guardian of my heart!

Nor yet by day, nor yet by night,

Let thee ſteal one ſhort moment from my ſight.

How with thy abſence can I be content,

When every minute without thee, is miſ-ſpent?

But ah! the Fruit's forbidden for a time,

And who the Tree dares climb?

Now were not Jealouſie a ſin,

I could once more, once, and eternally begin

Thy Faith, thy Promiſe to ſecure,

Not in a thouſand Oaths ſecure.

4.

Pardon (Dear Corydon!) too zealous Love,

That fain would all things prove;

Afraid on ſlender grounds to truſt,

Or can a Friend be over juſt?

For thô my faultring fears betray

Suſpicious doubts, yet I muſt ſtill believe

'T's impoſſible for Corydon to deceive;

Whoſe heart's Truth's Hieroglyphick well expreſt,

Preſiding in the Temple of your Breaſt.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=29) Where on
that Altar I muſt humbly lay

This Offering, with my conſecrated Vow,

My Sibyl's Golden Bough.

I ſwear by your own ſelf, and truth by you,

That to the ſelf-ſame Oath I will be true:

Nor need I tell you, for you needs muſt know,

I love you above all things here below.

By Heaven once more, and the Almighty Powers,

Intirely and eternally I'm Yours,

C. O.

### 1.11. To Mr. G. L. an ODE.

1.

DEar George, the better part

Of my united, now divided heart,

Accept of theſe rude Lines this Paper bears,

Conceiv'd in Sorrow, and brought forth in Tears;

Sad as th' Occaſion, haſty as thy Flight:

Nor wonder, if with ſo much pains

They wrought their paſſage through my brains:

No wonder, if ſo hardly I the Dirge endite,

Which ev'n my Pen clog'd with grief, cannot write:

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=29) No
wonder, if my Verſes lag behind,

Since my Muſe with Tears is blind,

I to this Priſon here confin'd;

For ſure no better is that place to me,

Whilſt thou are abſent, whereſoe're it be.

2.

Seven days are paſt, ſince I beheld thy face,

In which Divinity it ſelf is writ,

And Angel all in every line of it;

Picture of Beauty, and the Stamp of Grace.

Seven! to what immenſe number does that word amount!

Seven days! 7000 years in Love's account.

Every Minute is a Day,

Every Hour a tedious Year,

In which the Sun does once appear,

And in a moment vaniſhes away,

And leaves the miſerable cloudy Hemiſphere.

Seven days! before I could my ſilence break,

Thy Name in Accents interrupted ſpeak.

For ſeven long days upon the Rack,

And overwhelmed with the dreadful ſtorm,

Grief haunted me like th'evil Spirit of Saul;

Then in my wavering mind I thought,

What if I ſhould my ſelf to David's Harp apply?

And might not numbers be a Remedy?

I tried and found it nonſence all;

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=30) I tried
again, and at the ſecond draught,

Like old Deucalion's Stones, all came to better form.

3.

To ſay, my Life is bound in thine,

In deed were a Tautologie;

For that as neceſſarily muſt be,

As that thou haſt a Soul divine.

But to expreſs the Grief and Conſternation,

When Soul and Body part;

For ſuch it is does ſeize my heart,

That, that only is above my paſſion.

Each day, my Sun, ſince you withdrew your light,

Has been an everlaſting Night;

And yet ſtill baniſh'd, Thyrſis, from thy ſight!

4.

I feel the Pangs and Tortures of a dying Soul;

Nay, I my ſelf am dead, thô but in part,

Whilſt you are my Vicegerent in my heart,

And muſt command the whole.

'Tis this alone that does ſupport

My ſinking Spirits from the Grave,

That thô the Scorpion ſtings, her bloud can ſave.

Greatneſs and Fortune do your abſence court;

Thô Fate does her malicious Nature ſhow,

To make ſuch bitter ſtreams from a ſweet Fountain flow.

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=30)

5.

Methinks I Pylades and Oreſtes ſee,

And muſt admire their conſtancie;

But when again I do recount

To what vaſt ſum my Debts amount,

How infinitely I am oblig'd to thee,

Their Friendſhip in the Balance laid,

And equally and fairly weigh'd

Againſt my ſpotleſs Love,

Lighter than Vanity does prove,

Tilts up, (like Vapours that the Air invade)

Whilſt mine is ſolid and does downward to its centre move:

No more to be compar'd, than Atoms to the Sun,

Or little drops unto the boundleſs Ocean.

6.

Pylades proffer'd his own Life, ('tis true)

And bare that puniſhment was juſtly due

To| ſuch a Friend; but hadſt† thou died

Inſtead of him, thou hadſt been ſtil'd the Matricide,

* His horrid Crime transferr'd to you:

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=31) That
Murther ſoon have put an end

To that proverbial name of Friend.

But as thy matchleſs Innocence

‖ Could only be a capital Offence,

Thy Vertues I would ranſom by my death,

And bleſs the Author with my dying breath.

7.

This I with leſs reluctancy could bear,

Than ſuch damnation to deſpair,

Than abſence from that glorious Sun,

Who lends all Creatures light, and yet himſelf wants none.

'Tis from his Rays I ſteal Promethean fire,

Kindle my fatal† Spices, and expire:

Whoſe Worth and Vertues when I think upon,

Toſt by two different motions of my mind,

But both to the ſame end inclin'd,

I cannot be with-held, I muſt be gone:

My Soul is on the wing;

But being ſtopt by croſs Neceſſity,

She makes a Poſt of every Wind,

Sends word ſhe fears you grow unkind;

Commits to every blaſt a ſigh,

Then melts away into a piece of Poetry.

So when the Nightingale has gor'd her breaſt,

She tunes her Pipes, and quavers out her beſt:

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=31) And thô
in the extremity of pain,

Has not forgot her uſual ſtrain,

But ſets her ſelf to ſing.

### 1.12. The SPRING. To Mr. Ben. Wrightſon.

Ver adeò frondi nemorum, ver utile ſylvis:

Vere tument terrae, & genitalia ſemina poſcunt.

Vir. geor. 2.

HAil fragrant Spring! the charming pride of May,

Let Heaven ſmile upon this ſolemn day,

The Sun new dreſt, ſhine with a brighter ray.

The Feveriſh Summer, Aguiſh Winter flie,

Conſumptive Autumn with her Palſie die,

Or baniſh'd hence at the dread Queen's command,

Go take poſſeſſion in another Land.

For Flora comes with Royal Garlands crown'd,

The Flowers kiſs her feet upon the ground;

The Muſes, Graces, and good Genius dance,

And with juſt Meaſures and ſweet Tunes advance.

Birds winged Sirens, Choriſters of the Sky,

In Conſort ſing, and in Proceſſion fly;

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=32) Each
keeps his proper Time, and Note, and Place,

Whilſt falling murmuring Rivers ſing the Baſe.

The Eaſtern winds Arabian Odours breath,

The Weſtern upwards blow thoſe Sweets they ſuck'd beneath.

The Fields array'd in their new Robes of State,

Upon their bounteous Benefactor wait.

Birds fan their wings, & ſpread their ſpeckled plumes,

And Violets make a Preſent of Perfumes.

The Air on Primroſes and Lillies feeds,

Melts Spices, and prolifick moiſture breeds.

The Woodbinds and the Honyſuckles ſtrive

Which with Ambroſia firſt can ſtock a Hive.

Nature does entertain the Queen with Feaſts,

And Plays and Masks acted by wanton Beaſts:

The Elephant plays Gambols with his Trunk;

The Graſhopper with dew of Nectar drunk,

To his own Muſick leads a Country-Dance:

Mettleſom Horſes, through their Paſture prance;

The active Roes and Kids at Leap-Frog play;

The whole Creation keeps a Holy day.

Now tempting Venus, naked in her Hair,

With her Gallants walks out to take the Air.

Love in his Mother's Locks hides all his Darts,

And takes his rounds to ſingle out his Hearts:

And here and there, ſtill as he paſſes by,

At random lets an amorous Arrow fly.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=32) Day and
night Vulcan his vaſt Bellows blows,

Day and night the Cyclopian Anvil glows

With harden'd Metal work'd on th' Forge of Fate,

For Shafts, ſome gilt with Love, ſome tipp'd with Hate.

His Stock for all the following year, new ground,

Poiſon'd to carry Death in every Wound.

Proud Peacocks with their Tails expanded ſtrut,

And jealous Rams for recreation butt.

The Warlike Steed waves up and down his Main,

The Warlike Steed, the Champion of the Plain.

The Bull fights bloudy Duels for his Mate,

And to keep up the Grandeur of his State.

No Fleecy Tempeſts gather in the Sky,

Nor raging Dog-ſtars torrid heat now fry.

But Sol with his new Chariot ſhines more bright,

His Horſes breath leſs flame, and clearer light.

The Silver Streams double refined flow,

And Fiſhes frisk, to ſee the pompous Show.

Home the kind Oak the Vine his Wife receives,

And hides her nakedneſs with his own Leaves.

Turtles together billing ſit, and coo,

And with alternate glances ſilent woo.

Nightingales charm the liſtning Woods, to wreſt

Their tender Sprigs, to make a downy Neſt.

Flora's conducted to her Vernal Throne,

And now a Trumpet for Retreat is blown.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=33) Once more
her Court, the painted Gardens ſmile,

And ſweat out moiſture from their fruitful Soil.

The ſickly Plants revive, look freſh and fair,

The Seaſon temperate, clear the Morning Air:

The Evening drops down various ſweets in ſhowers;

Proſerpine plunders Sicily for Flowers.

The little eager Virgin never ſtands,

But fills her Lap, her Boſom, and her Hands:

The Bloſſoms, preſt by an untimely death,

Spin out their Odour with their dying breath:

(As Bees, kill'd by the wanton Boys in play,

Their Honey from their ſwelling Bags convey.)

Blind Pluto comes, innocent his deſign!

Led by the ſcent, and lights on Proſerpine:

Then greedy to ſecure thoſe fragrant Sweets,

He takes her too, and rifles all he meets.

Now more than her Elyſian Joys invite,

Now Fate unlocks the Iron Gate of Night,

The Priſoner viſits Ceres and the Light.

Almighty Jupiter deſcends to lie

With Mother Earth, and paſſing through the Skie,

The ſcorching heat of Signs malignant damps,

And with freſh Oyl ſupplies the heavenly Lamps.

Now Mother Earth's full time is almoſt come,

Parent of all things, bears a pregnant Womb.

Nature is hatching Plenty on her Neſt,

Nature by youthful Saturn firſt compreſt.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=33) This is
the Life and Spirit of the Year,

With a brisk Air thus Janus does appear.

This the ſlick skin, the ſhrivel'd Snake does wear,

when her old caſe is ragged, looſe, and bare.

Harmonious Muſick, and Seraphick Love,

Is all thoſe happy Souls enjoy above.

Now Earth is like the Manſions of the Bleſt;

Muſick in every Grove, and Love in every Breaſt.

Here in this natural Landskip we may ſee

Heſperian Paradiſe in Epitomie:

For what was Paradiſe, but eternal Spring?

Let Birds of Paradiſe its Praiſes ſing.

Hail, Sacred Spring! Hail to thy lovely Green!

Let the World ſhout, Amen; and cry, God bleſs the Queen.

Non alios primâ creſcentis origine Mundi

Illuxiſſe Dies, aliumve habuiſſe tenorem

Crediderim. Ver illud erat: ver magnus agebat

Orbis, &c.

Vir. Geor. 2.

### 1.13. Learning.

WHen diſmal Chaos did the World confound,

And all lay in a common Deluge drown'd,

Horror, Deſpair, and Death reign'd all around.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=34) Parnaſſus
was the laſt that diſappear'd,

Or firſt his reverend top aſpiring rear'd.

The Olive-Tree then lifted up her head,

And ſmil'd to ſee no Rival Beauty bred.

Thus Learning is the next to our Salvation;

Laſt of the old, or firſt o'th' new Creation.

### 1.14. To Mr. R. Smith of King's Colledge in Cambridge.

Ingentes animos anguſto in Corpore verſant.

Vir. Geor. 4.

I Hear, my Friend, ſome dare profane your name,

Derogate from your Merit and your Fame,

Preſume your Body, for a capacious Mind

Too little, as if Dwarfs were Fools by kind.

Minerva ſure was no ſuch bouncing Dame,

The puny Product of Jove's little Brain.

Apollo too was but a Dapper Twin,

By Nature and by Birth the next akin:

Apollo all the Wit from Dian ſtole,

Shar'd half his Father's Rape, but all his Soul.

The other rough, unhewen, long Lubbers made,

For Nonſence, Service, Slavery, and Trade.

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=34) The
Sacred Laurel is it ſelf but low,

And with its humble and ſubmiſſive bough,

Does court the mighty Brain, the little Brow.

What thô your Body be diminutive,

Heav'n to your Soul can no addition give.

Inſects that have moſt Legs, do ſloweſt crawl;

The Dove of all Birds, only wants a Gall.

What greater Bruits go by the name of men,

Than a Therſites, or a Saracen?

What thô dumb Animals we can deſpiſe,

The wiſest man yet thought the Ant was wiſe.

A Nut-ſhell held the worth of Homer's Brain,

And a ſmall Bottle could the Winds contain.

From narrow Streights vaſt rapid Billows flow,

And Zephyrus fruitful Gales do gently blow.

Full as much Prudence to the Bee is given,

As any wing'd Inhabitant of Heaven.

And the leaſt Body juſtly may aſpire

To one ſmall ſpark of the Celeſtial Fire,

The Great can do no more, the Great can mount no higher.

The barren Tree can in the Deſarts ſpread,

And threaten Heaven with its luxurious head:

Whilſt others low, and laden with their Fruit,

With bended Branches touch their very root.

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=35) Let Fools
and Coxcombs prate what they think fit,

And burſt with Envy, they muſt ſtill ſubmit

To Pygmie Members, and Gigantick Wit.

### 1.15. To Idera in Mourning, Going into Mourning Himſelf ſoon after.

1.

PRovident Fate conſider'd well,

When at one double ſtroke two fell,

For both to toll one Paſſing-bell.

2.

Not that his ſtock of Shafts was low,

Nor did they one another know

For Fellow-Travellers below.

3.

But when ſhe ſaw one bleeding heart,

In different Liveries forc'd to part,

She drew a reconciling Dart.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=35)

4.

When therefore there a Blank was put,

Here Fate a Thread, grown rotten, cut,

And Eyes that could not open, ſhut.

5.

Of hoary Grief now both partake,

Or elſe a ſolemn Mourning make,

Idera! for one another's ſake.

6.

For thus by Heaven it was decreed,

Our Myrtle, for our Mourning Weed,

Incorporate ſhould together breed.

7.

Our Streams from the ſame Fountain flow;

From the ſame Stalk our Troubles grow;

The Riſe, the Root we only know.

8.

So when one Flower's torn, and preſt,

And ſmother'd in a ſteaming Breaſt,

That Wound will murther all the reſt.

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=36)

9.

So if one Baſe be ſtruck alone,

The next that bears a heavy tone,

Will fetch a Sympathetick Groan.

10.

Learn from your everlaſting Dye,

Not with your Black to change your Conſtancy,

'T were better you ſhould mourn alone, than I.

### 1.16. A Paradox in Praiſe of Ambition.  
To his dear Friend Mr. Edw. Taylour, of Merton Colledge in Oxford.

—Deus immortalis haberi

Dum cupit Empedocles, ardentem fervidus Aetnam

Inſiluit.

Horat. de Arte Poeticâ.

1.

SOul of the World! Spark of Promethean Fire!

Sick of this lower Orb, my Breaſt inſpire!

Mount me upon thy Wings!

To blow thy Thundring Trumpet Fame,

To be the Herald of thy Name,

And tune thy ſpeaking Strings!

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=36) Let me
for ever at thy Altars wait,

Know what it is to be divinely Great.

2.

Thou art the whole Creation's Myſtick Sun,

And thou art all its Beauties drawn in one!

For when thy Glory's ſet,

Thick Clouds muſt intercept the Light,

Black Darkneſs, and eternal Night

Their old Dominion get,

When thou art baniſh'd from thy Royal Throne,

Confuſion muſt her Firſt-born Chaos own.

3.

Thou doſt our groveling Souls from Earth tranſport,

From ſordid Earth, with Jove to keep our Court:

Thou doſt of God partake

A Particle of heavenly Air,

The Badge of Honour that we wear

For our Diſtinction ſake:

Elſe Bruits might claim preeminence over Man,

Nay Bruits would ſuffer by th' Compariſon.

4.

Thy Engine mounts our noble thoughts on high,

Deucalion's Stones have learnt the art to flie:

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=37) Thou doſt
our Metal prove,

Thou haſt the everlaſting Springs

On which all great and mighty things

In their right order move;

Thy Spirit does life unto our Souls diſpence,

Thy Center's every-where, but no-where thy Circum­ference.

5.

Nor can our leaden Faculties aſpire

To one great Action, till thy Veſtal Fire

On our blind Reaſons ſhine;

From Sleep our dull Affections raiſe,

Free Paſſions from a miſty maze,

Our droſſie part refine.

Whatever's wonderful, from thee muſt come,

Muſt be conceiv'd in thy Omniſcient Womb.

6.

What is it that I hear Caeſar thy Heir,

Caeſar, Soul of thy Soul, devoutly ſwear,

This Light ſhall either ſee

Caeſar degraded to a Tomb,

Or Caeſar Pontifex of Rome,

A Slave, or Monarch He.

Here Soveraign Prince, or there a Soveraign Shade,

Where amongſt Nothings, no Diſtinction's made.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=37)

7.

It was a thought worthy of thy own Spirit,

Nor was Rome over anſwerable for his Merit.

She could not put him by,

For over-rul'd by Power Divine,

They all their Hearts and Voices joyn,

And Caeſar, Caeſar cry.

It was the breathing of a Soul inſpir'd,

With a true Principle of Honour fir'd.

8.

Thus Calchas baffled in Prophetick ſtrife,

Redeem'd his Honour by his loſs of life.

And thus in Robes of State,

When ranſack'd Rome was all on fire,

The Senate only did deſire,

Like Gods, to meet their Fate.

Thus Hannibal could Death it ſelf command,

Reſolv'd to fall by none but his own hand.

9.

Stoicks in vain a Rigorous Life defend,

And to renounce all Paſſions would pretend:

Whilſt they ſubmit to thine,

Thee Soveraign over Nature own,

As a juſt Tribute to thy Throne,

Bodies and Souls reſign.

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=38) See Cato,
for his Honour bleeding lie,

Brutus, the Beſt of men, for Glory die.

10.

Of Alexander, what ſhould I rehearſe?

Who took a Journy through the Univerſe,

Did all things there ſubdue;

Kingdoms againſt Kingdoms hurl'd,

At one ſtroak conquer'd all the World,

And ſhock'd ev'n Nature too:

At laſt with Tears cram'd into a ſmall Tomb,

Complaining in theſe narrow ſtreights for want of room.

11.

And now methinks ten thouſand Heroes throng,

To hear and bear a part in this my Song;

Where in the Front I ſpy

Hercules by his Pillars ſtand;

Scaevola with his wither'd hand;

Codrus and Decius vy:

With Palms the Royal Champions all in white

In a Proceſſion go, a Glorious Sight!

12.

What thô th' Rebellious Giants groaning lie,

Stretcht out under a vaſt Eternity?

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=38) What thô
that hateful name

Catiline greedy to be Great,

Make nothing to devour a State?

Their's was a Baſtard Flame.

For pure Ambition nothing will ſuggeſt,

Nothing but what will ſtand ev'n Virtue's Teſt:

13.

Nor a diſhonourable Scaffold climb,

To build to Heaven, to compaſs her deſign;

Nor when in queſt of Fame,

To quench her never-dying Thirſt,

Take draughts of Poiſon till ſhe burſt,

And ſo procure a Name.

From a baſe Thought or Action ſhe will fly,

Too near akin to Virtue to comply.

14.

When Heav'n firſt made our active Souls of Fire,

Heaven deſign'd thoſe flames ſhould all aſpire.

Can we be ſo unjuſt,

Our divine Natures to debaſe?

Crawl with the Serpent on our Face,

And lick our Native Duſt?

Our Souls as heavy as our Corps of Clay,

Not unlike Worms, were we not worſe than they.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=39)

15.

But above all our Tribe with thee poſſeſt,

Indulge thy brooding motions in their breaſt.

In thy wing'd Chariot riſe,

The glorious works of God ſurvey,

The Regions of eternal Day,

And Flowery Paradiſe:

Sometimes above take an immortal flight,

Or paſs through Tempe's Valleys of Delight.

16.

Thou with the influence of thy fruitful Beams

Reflect'ſt a warmth on Helicon's cold ſtreams:

By thee, the heavenly Quire

All their harmonious Anthems ſing,

Apollo without thee's no King,

Thou breatheſt on his Lyre.

By thee the Palm preſt down, ſtill higher ſhoots,

Till Heaven her Branches kiſs, and Hell her roots.

17.

Full of thy Power I can no more contain,

But the exceſs of Pleaſure turns to pain;

Alas what ſhall I do?

Still but a younger Son of Fame,

Nor that—a Cypher of a Name,

A Dwarfiſh Poet too?

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=39) How ſhall
I Nature underhand engage,

Not thus to meaſure out my Portion by my Age?

18.

What Manure is't will ripen Barren Brains?

How ſhall I ſpin out Senſe in Waller's ſtrains?

Oh! that I could but draw

All thoſe beauteous Charms that lie

Under the Veil of Poetrie,

And could ſtrain Nature's Law,

To comprehend all Wiſdom, and all Wit,

Nor, by thy light, upon the Rocks of Error ſplit!

19.

What ſhall I do to be for ever known,

And make Perfection's Quinteſſence my own!

But all my thought's in vain,

I only can my ſelf apply

To Caeſar's fatal Remedy,

I flag in every ſtrain,

And like the Nightingale muſt e'en expire,

Vanquiſh'd, and dumb on the Victorious Lyre.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=40)

### 1.17. To Idera. Age in a Looking-glaſs.

O quam continuis, & quantis longa ſenectus

Plena malis! deformem, & tetrum ante omnia vultum,

Diſſimilemque ſui, deformem pro cute pellem,

Pendenteſque genas, & tales adſpice jugas,

Quales umbriferos ubi pandit Tabraca ſaltus,

In vetulâ ſcalpit jàm mater ſimia buccâ, &c.

Juv. Sat. 10.

DO not, haughty Nymph, diſdain

The Incenſe of an Humble Swain!

What thô you're Great? what thô you're Fair?

Age and Death will not ſpare.

A furrow'd Cheek, a wrinkled Chin,

An old tough Hide, a Saffron Skin,

Sore, Rheumy Eyes, the Senſes gone,

Fal'n Jaws, nothing but skin and bone,

The Picture of a Skeleton,

May be thought ſomething like a Face,

To one that loves the former Grace;

Apollo ſcorns a cold Embrace.

The like Marpeſſa chuſe a Joy,

Not tranſient, nor apt to cloy:

A conſtant Love, that's like to laſt,

Thô Clouds and Storms ſhould overcast.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=40) Apollo
takes you for a time,

And only courts to taſte your Prime:

A God too goodly to engage

His Faith to Females for an Age:

Muſt through all Cupid's Labyrinths range,

His Love as often as his Viſage change;

But Idas, thô a Mortal, yet may prove

Immortal in his Love:

None can like Idas conſtant be,

And none like Idas can reſemble Me.

### 1.18. SOLITƲDE. To his dear Brother, Mr. Aſh Wyndham.

Sic ego ſecretis poſſum bene vivere ſylvis,

Qua nulla humano ſit via trita pede.

Tu mihi curarum requies, tu nocte vel atrâ

Lumen, & in ſolis tu mihi Turba locis.

1.

O Corydon! how I hug my ſelf to think!

When in this troubled Sea the World,

All thruſt into the Main,

Till by a Hurricane,

Through the Abyſs with Vengeance hurl'd,

With horrible Adieus they parting ſink.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=41)

2.

Whilſt I upon the ſilent ſhore, ſecure,

Fear neither ſtormy Wind nor Tide,

With elevated Soul,

Can move from Pole to Pole,

And through the aery Regions glide,

Need only pity what they muſt endure.

3.

The World will take no notice of my Name;

Well then I'll let th' Impoſtor ſee

I have my Paſſions broke,

Brought Pride to wear a Yoke,

I'm as Indifferent as ſhe;

No—I will never ſtop her Trump of Fame.

4.

That curſed word the World bliſters my Tongue,

It breaths out all the Plagues of Hell;

'Tis Nonſence intricate,

Unintelligible ſtate,

That puzzles all my Brains to ſpell,

If I gueſs right, Man's Dust the World is Dung.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=41)

5.

I never could any Contexture find,

Confuſion only is her courſe,

Her Joys but pleaſant Fictions,

A Maſs of Contradictions,

All Guilt, all Trouble and Remorſe;

This is the World, or ſhe or I am blind.

6.

She never yet was in true Colours drawn;

All, Diſappointments, Pains, and Fears,

One Scene of Miſery,

Conſtant Inconſtancy,

Tempeſtuous World, a Vale of Tears,

For our chief Happineſs Chance the only Pawn.

7.

Paſſions, and Diſcontents, and Jealouſies,

Publick War, and Domeſtick Strife,

Perjury and Deceit,

This Gall confounds the Sweet,

And poiſons all the Joys of Life;

And our vains Hopes muſt end in penitential Sighs.

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=42)

8.

Oh! I am ſick, and my head giddy turns,

The thoughts of noiſe I cannot bear,

Impertinence ſtrikes me through,

Buſineſs that kills me too,

Death is leſs terrible than Care;

To get from this Fools Paradiſe my heart burns.

9.

Who would not then with us, dear Friend, retire?

Accept the happineſs to ſhroud

Under a ſhady Screen,

To walk along unſeen,

Wrapt like Aeneas in a Cloud,

And ſee the World, as he did Troy, on fire.

10.

'Tis more than time, my Soul, that we were gone,

Delay, my Corydon, does us wrong;

The World will grow more bold,

Still loth to quit her hold,

For her Temptations they are ſtrong.

Come then and put blind Pluto's Helmet on.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=42)

11.

—What a fair proſpect now have we!

Can undiſturb'd together ſtand,

Enjoy our ſelves, and all

The World her goods can call,

And touch the Globe but with our hand,

And all things paſt, preſent, and future ſee.

12.

Here at Earth's puff'd up Bubbles we can ſmile,

Her fucus'd Vanities deſpiſe,

Divert with pleaſant Chat,

Diſcourſe of this or that,

Still aiming to be truly wiſe,

With Books, or harmleſs ſport, the time beguile.

13.

Full of our ſelves, what can we wiſh for more?

We find us work enough, to tend

The habit of our Soul,

Our Paſſions to controul,

To do the Duties of a Friend,

'Tis the miſtaken World, not we, are poor.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=43)

14.

Here in an empty Theater we ſit,

Retir'd to keep our Holy-day,

Our Minds the Scenes muſt be,

The Critical Spectators we,

Of one anothers Life, the Play,

The Authors and the Judges of our Wit.

15.

If we have acted well in Heaven's ſight,

What thô we hear no ecchoing Stage?

Or when our State we change,

What thô our names ſeem ſtrange,

Unknown to a ſucceeding Age?

Without that Witneſs happy Democrite!

16.

Why ſhould we Fame, that treacherous Idol, court?

That ſets us up for Envy's Mark,

That burns us with the Rays

Of undeſerved Praiſe,

Only to blind us in the dark,

To throw us down again, for fear or ſport.

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=43)

17.

Fame's breath is ſhort, when ſhe must trumpet loud:

'Tis ſeldom that ſhe comes alone;

She's an unconſtant Gueſt,

That loves to change her Neſt,

True Worth, true Praiſe would not be known.

The Sun looks brighteſt through a ſilver Cloud.

18.

On an embroider'd Bank here we can pick and chuſe

An unbought, ſavory, wholſome Diſh,

On Leaves ſerve up our Fare,

Perfum'd with the ſweet Air:

Then Corydon! to compleat our Wiſh,

Our Recreation, Friendſhip, and a Muſe.

19.

Sometimes we take a pride to ſtand and ſee

Bees bring their yellow Harveſt home,

Unload their ſwelling Thighs,

And as their Goddeſs wiſe,

Spin it into their Hony-comb.

Happy Spectators! happy Rivals we!

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=44)

20.

Sometimes upon a Downy Couch of Graſs,

On Flowery Cuſhions ſtretcht we lie,

To hear a dying Swan,

More ſenſible than Man,

Warble forth a ſweet Elegy:

Or in ſoft Tunes the purling Rivers paſs.

21.

Or elſe diſſolv'd in Eaſe, lay down our heads

In Slumbers as our Natures kind,

Bound in each others Arms

By Virtue's ſtricteſt Charms,

Lull'd aſleep by the whiſtling Wind,

On eaſie Velvet, fragrant Violet-beds.

22.

The name Diogenes juſtly none can give,

Nor churliſh call our Innocence:

With Solitude thus crown'd,

What Firebrand can be found?

Unleſs our Happineſs give offence:

For in the World, as out of it, we live.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=44)

23.

Sometimes hear Eccho her Misfortunes tell,

See how ſhe'll watch the lovly Boy

Narciſſus, as he looks

Into the Cryſtal Brooks:

Her vocal Reparties enjoy;

Or the melodious Notes of Philomel.

24.

Sometimes in ſhady Groves together walk,

And ſatisfy'd with humble Sights,

See Art and Nature both digeſt

In Milton, Waller, and the reſt:

Full and unparallel'd Delights!

Of Love and Solitude divinely talk.

25.

Each Dryad that is worthy of the Wound,

Each Tree that's worthy of the Mark,

Our mutual Friendſhip know,

Under our Auſpice grow,

Thyrſis and Corydon on the Bark,

Thyrſis and Corydon the Woods reſound.

[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=45)

26.

But above all, the Aſh aſpiring ſhoots,

Thy Badge of Honour proud to wear;

The Aſh, a Tree for Jove,

The Aſh, it ſelf a Grove,

Proud thy Name in hers to bear,

She nods her trembling Head, and ſtrouts her ſwel­ling Roots.

27.

The Nymphs here take their rounds, and dance, and play;

The Hamadryads at us peep;

Crocus and Hyacinth, ſome bring,

Daiſies, the Maidenhead of the Spring:

Others behind us ſoftly creep,

And ſteal our Songs and Paſtorals away.

28.

When our light hearts are for a looſer Rein,

To Banquets we our ſelves invite,

Conſorts of Muſick and of Love,

Ambroſia from above;

Verſes for ſecond Courſe recite,

And with alternate Trifles entertain.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=45)

29.

Or we converſe with Garden Myſteries,

See the emulous Roſes blaſt;

The loving Ivy twine;

The Wall cling to the Vine;

And Flora taking her repaſt:

Adam might envy in his Paradiſe.

30.

And thus withdrawn from buſineſs, noiſe, and ſtrife,

We double our few fleeting days,

And when together fled,

Fate having cut our Thread,

Were we ſent back into this Maze,

We'd act but the ſame Scene, our former life.

Rura mihi & rigui placeant in vallibus amnes;

Flumina amem, ſilvaſque inglorius. O, ubi campi,

Sperchiúſque, & virginibus bacchata Lacaenis

Taygeta! O, qui me gelidis in vallibus Haemi

Siſtat, & ingenti ramorum protegat umbra! &c.

Fortunatus & ille, deos qui novit agreſtes,

Pana (que) Silvanum (que) ſenem, Nymphaſque ſorores.

Vir. Geor. 2.

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=46)

### 1.19. To a young Lady that conſtantly ſlept at Church.

1.

I Often wonder'd, as I lay,

Wiſhing for my Books, and Day,

What Hag ſhould ſit upon my Breast,

That I could neither ſpeak nor rest;

What could that Stranger Morpheus keep

From his nightly Tribute, Sleep.

2.

When Love, with an enchanted Key,

Thus unlock'd the Myſtery:

Sleep ſaw, and not without ſurprize,

The Charms of Idera's piercing Eyes;

Then paid a Viſit to her Heart,

And now he knows not how to part.

3.

But here poſſeſt with Jealouſie,

Himſelf the Watch of her fair Eye,

Leſt with Religion tempting Jove

Should anticipate her Love,

From her Devotion in the day,

Reſolves to raviſh her away.

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=46)

4.

Will ſeize on Thyrſi's heart no more,

Stand Centry only at her door:

Nor will open Caſements truſt,

(Suſpicious are the Rapes of Lust)

But in her Bath a ſweating lies,

I'th' Exhalations of her Eyes.

5.

Yet if 't be ſhe does ſteal my ſleep,

If ſhe my Senſes waking keep,

Let thoſe ſtolen Goods be ſweet,

Proſp'rous the Pillage of her Sheet.

Sleep ſtill refreſh her flagrant Beams,

Till with thee ſhe ſhares my Dreams.

6.

Sleep ſtill be happy, ſtill be proud,

To bear the Office of a Cloud:

For if her Sun thus raging burns,

Unleſs thy Fan the ſcorching Fervour turns:

My Nest will e'en be ſet on fire,

And then the Phoenix muſt expire.

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=47)

### 1.20. To Idera, Putting a Copy of Verſes in at her Window at Midnight.

Nox erat & Coelo fulgebat Luna ſereno,

Inter minora ſydera—

Hor.

THou conſcious Night, my Strategem conceal!

May no perfidious Dreams my Theft reveal!

No Tell-tale Stars come prying near this way,

By ſilent ſigns, dumb motions to betray!

Propitious Venus, only ſhe ſhine bright!

To blind the reſt, and give a Lover light!

Go to the Enemies Quarters, happy Scout!

"There unconcern'd, undaunted look about,

"Soft as thy Meſſage, as thy Maſter ſtout.

"If any rude, uncivil Hand ſhould preſs,

"Exclaim againſt thy own unhappineſs!

"Or ſilent truſt th' event; Thou ſliely fraught

"With Sinon's Art, wilt to the Queen be brought:

"And when into her preſence thou art come,

"She'll read a line or two, then ſee from whom;

"Enquire where taken: ſtill her heart will fail,

"The treacherous Priſoner must be ſent to Jayl,

"That comes to ſteal the Hoſtage of her Heart,

"And lies in Ambuſh with the charming Art.

"[[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=47) Idera
mov'd with pity, will repent,

"Some pretty amorous puniſhment invent;

"Perhaps, as much as ſhe has read, ſhe'll burn,

"'Till Flouds of Tears the Flames ſhall inward turn;

"Sympathy only will the Fire remove,

"In the old Channel ſet the courſe of Love.

"Under her Pillow the Remains ſhe'll lay,

"By night to be her Dream, her Song by day.

"Which whilſt ſhe quavers out, the other part

"May paſs her Guards, and ſeize her captiv'd Heart.

"Thou in Perfumes ſhalt either raviſht die,

"Or in the Milky Way tranſlated lie.

"Go my Embaſſadour! before 't's too late,

"And oft revolve Scaevola's noble Fate.

"Carry theſe Kiſſes, Seals of my command,

"Unſully'd let her have them all at ſecond hand.

"Go—let her Roſie Mouth, her Balmy Lips,

"(Where Cupid all his golden Arrows dips)

"The warm Virginity of theſe Kiſſes taſte;

"Go—nor thy time, nor their ſweet odour waſte.

"Theſe give her, as a Pledge, that I will own

"Thyrſis a humble Slave to Idera's Throne.

"Go—my Soul with thee take—thy Fortune try,

"Dangers and Difficulties all defie,

"What if thou ſhouldſt like Codrus, or like De­cius die?

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=48)

### 1.21. To Idera, Speechleſs.

Dicere quae puduit, ſcribere juſſit amor.

Ov.

1.

LOng has this grand Miſtake deceiv'd Mankind,

To think that Love is only blind;

The Serpent too has loſt his Tongue,

When he has any untaught Novice ſtung.

2.

He leaves his Venom in the rankled Wound,

That cloſes up as it were ſound,

Spreads out into a bluſhing Cheek,

And yet the Lips hard by can nothing ſpeak.

3.

Whether 'tis Ecſtaſie, or Fear, or Zeal,

Whoſe prevalent motions thus we feel,

I know not yet—but this I know,

Theſe are my Symptoms, and my Caſe is ſo.

4.

Here in a Hective Fever I muſt burn,

And I can neither ſpeak nor turn,

Can neither have nor hope for Eaſe;

Sure 'tis an Incubus is my Diſeaſe.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=48)

5.

Fain would I tell her plainly all my mind,

But neither Tongue, nor Heart can find;

My conſcious guilt, and modeſt ſhame,

In Virgin Red ſtifle my youthful Flame.

6.

'Tis true my Eyes long ſince betray'd their ſmart,

When Love ſhot through into my Heart,

When all your Charms took ſo much pains

T'infuſe an amorous Heat into my Veins.

7.

Exceſſive hot, or beyond meaſure cold,

My Fits too violent to hold:

By heat, incapable I'm made;

When cold, I am indifferent and afraid.

8.

Turtles for Mates thus one another Prove,

Their Eyes the meaſures of their Love.

And thus Pygmalion choſe a Wife,

An Ivory Statue carv'd out to the life.

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=49)

### 1.22. INCƲRABLE. To Idera.

Hei mihi! quòd nullis amor est medicabilis herbis.

Ovid.

1.

HOW oft have I, like wretched Dido, ſwore

I'd court Inconſtancy no more?

But 'tis in vain, for I must ſtill adore.

2.

I pluck not up the root, but lop the Tree,

Weave Vows, as Webs, Penelope;

Still tempted I, and ſtill as charming ſhe.

3.

I ſtrive to skin the Wound of Cupid's Dart;

With a new Itch, and tickling Smart,

Still it breaks out again upon my heart.

4.

I pour into the fifty Siſter Urn;

And Siſyphus his Stone I turn;

Leave off, t' begin again, and quench my ſelf to burn.

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=49)

5.

How oft have I dragg'd home my Fugitive?

But ſtill my Heart the ſlip will give,

My Heart, that cannot without vital Paſſion live.

6.

With Books and Buſineſs I would entertain,

But Books are toil, and Buſineſs pain:

He's gone I know not how, and all my Art's in vain.

7.

The Oak and Ivy, which together grow,

If parted by an unkind Blow,

Their Arms will about one another throw.

8.

So Birds that now forſake their Neſts through fear,

When they ſome danger ſee or hear,

Will build again in the ſame place, another year.

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=50)

### 1.23. To the Ingenious Mr. Barker. Saul's Witch of Endor.

A Long and proſperous Reign had Saul enjoy'd,

With the exceſs of Peace and Plenty cloy'd,

Of dayly Triumphs and new Trophies proud,

Not one Eclipſe, nor melancholy Cloud;

In Peace, his Peoples Guardian, and their Shield,

Always his Arms victorious in the Field;

Fraught with Succeſs, and paſſive Duty crown'd,

None that durſt queſtion his Proceedings, found,

When now for Bloud his thirſty Spirits crav'd,

(Like Diomede's Horſes) he for Man's fleſh rav'd.

His Sword already had been ſatisfy'd,

Reaking from Enemy's freſh Wounds, new dy'd

With purple Gore and a polluted Tide.

Well then for change, th' ungrateful wretch intends

To ſheath it in the boſom of his Friends:

And he muſt have that Life, that was laid down

For God's, for Iſrael's Honour, and the Crown;

When conſcious Jealouſie, and pretended Zeal,

Upon Ambition whet the envious Steel.

David, who did a Miracle for Saul,

Muſt ſtand a Mark for Javilins at the Wall:

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=50) Goliah's
head, muſt make him loſe his own,

Becauſe he kill'd the Monſter, he alone,

With a ſmall Sling and little Pebble-ſtone.

Becauſe he did that which none elſe could do,

Six Cubits with five hundred Shekels ſlew.

Unhappy Youth! whoſe ſervice thus repaid

By him that muſt have fal'n, without thy aid!

And muſt his Life and Kingdom be reſtor'd,

To kill thee with the ſame Victorious Sword?

In what, innocent Youth! couldſt thou offend?

A crime to be a Saviour and a Friend?

No Arms waſt thou beholden to from Saul;

A little Stone, and Leather Thong was all.

Goliah did not challenge, but defy,

Not only Treaſon belch, but Blaſphemy:

If to ſave Saul's a capital offence,

Thy death be juſtify'd by that pretence,

It cannot be imputed ſin or ſhame,

To ſtand up bravely for Jehovah's Name.

Nor can they make out any other Plea,

To tax thee with the leaſt diſloyalty:

For David never yet his Prince forſook,

Ambitious only of a Shepherds Crook.

Nothing receiv'd, but what was juſtly due,

Nor that, till promis'd once, and proffer'd too.

Here by the way, could I ſit down, and ſhed

Whole flouds of Tears for thee, and in thy ſtead

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=51) Lay down
my Soul, the Javelin cuts the Air,

And trembling glances through the Champion's hair:

Thou ſtand'ſt upon thy guard, thy own defence,

Arm'd only with the Mail of Innocence.

Canſt unconcern'd, upon thy Muſick play,

And to thy Harp again another day.

To ſee thy troubles and to trace thy flight,

Unſafe by day, yet leſs ſecure by night;

Thy Wife expos'd to danger for thy ſake,

Muſt one diſtracted Vow of Duty break:

Jonathan muſt renounce Father, or Friend,

Or elſe his life, in death for David ſpend.

But cauſeleſly we all our Tears impart,

God needs muſt love the Image of his heart:

And as he can, he will his Darling ſave,

And bury all his troubles in the Tyrant's Grave.

Here then we truſt him to th' Almighty's hand,

And the Philiſtins now invade the Land.

The Scene is chang'd, and for a ſingle Flea

Men, like the Sands or Waves upon the Sea,

Gigantick Warriours, Trees for Javelins wield,

And ſtrut along, and challenge all the Field.

What ſhould Saul do? God and Man perſecute;

His Dreams are ſilent, and his Prophets mute:

Urim's forgot its old prophetick ſtrain,

And Saul's among the Prophets too in vain.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=51) Witches
dare only be with Imps poſſest,

And carry their Familiars in their Breast.

'Tis Death, to draw a Circle in the Sand;

'Tis Death, to have but a Magicians Wand:

Yet for all this (thô it ſeem ſomething odd)

The Devil muſt be the Meſſenger of God.

But hard neceſſity maintains his Cauſe,

To break through God's, his own, and Kingdom's Laws.

A Witch, or no Witch, he would only learn

Th'unknown Event of ſuch a Great Concern.

To Endor then, but not without diſguiſe,

In the extremity of madneſs wiſe;

Where firſt on God, he for the Devil does call,

For ſhe was leſs afraid of him, than Saul,

And with an Oath confirming his deſign,

To theſe infernal Rites conjures divine.

When to her Cabin now the Witch returns,

Sulphur and Pitch, mixt in a Cauldron, burns:

Infuſing Vervain, Moly, Night-ſhade, Rue,

Then on the Floor five Magick Circles drew,

With gloomy Cypreſs round her Temples twin'd,

She ſcatter'd dead mens Aſhes to the Wind;

Thrice Salt and Bran, Venefick Offerings ſtrow'd,

Pouring out thrice a Black fleec'd Lamb's warm Bloud,

And burning Poeony, Fern, and Heliochryſe,

She ſtrikes upon her hollow Cymbal thrice;

And heaving, ſwelling, foaming, then ſhe cries,

With an infernal Howl, Riſe, Samuel, riſe.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=52) The
parting Ground was with Convulſions torn,

By ſubterraneous Winds he upwards born,

Wrapt in his Prophet's Mantle, like a God,

In a bright Fiery Chariot, whirling rode.

But the Witch trembling at ſo ſtrange a ſight,

And terrify'd with ſo divine a Light,

Cried out; and what through wonder, and ſurprize,

Knew not the Fiend aſſuming that diſguiſe.

But eager Saul ſtill preſſing her to tell

What ſhe had wrought by virtue of the Spell,

Samuel thus preventing ſilence broke,

With profound Reverence, in ſoft Whiſpers ſpoke.

Saul! Saul! why troublest thou my Soul at rest?

My Soul, to leave the Manſions of the Blest?

Why, raiſing Tumults thus among the Just,

Offer'ſt thou Violence to my ſacred Dust?

Why ranſackeſt my Grave? and ſummon'ſt me

From my Long Home, Seat of Eternitie?

But Saul, big with Repentance in his Eyes,

And with a Heart as full of Grief, replies:

It was thy Office, Samuel, once to bleſs;

Canſt thou not pity now in my diſtreſs?

When the Philiſtins dare new Wars proclaim,

Defie my Hoſts, deſpiſe my Royal Name,

Whether to ſet up David in my Throne,

Or take my Life, God knows, and God alone;

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=52) But this
I know, God fights againſt me too:

What ſhould a Prince, when thus forſaken, do?

By God, by Man caſt off, diſdain'd, forlorn,

My Peoples Burthen, and my Enemy's Scorn;

His Vengeance perſecutes me, wretched Saul!

The Curſe of God, and a Reproach to all;

My Prophets ſilent, and my inſpir'd Lute,

Together with my Dreams and Viſions, mute:

Therefore it is, by a more powerful Spell,

I call thee up, for thou alone canſt tell

What a diſtreſs'd, abandon'd Prince can do;

Thô God hath left me, let not Samuel too.

Thus trembling Saul bow'd his Anointed Head,

When Samuel thus in hollow Murmurs ſaid:

Can I, poor Saul! reaſon the Caſe with God?

Put by the ſtroak of an Almighty Rod?

Can I, without Heaven's licenſe, ſtand thy Friend,

If God will?—and he will thy Kingdom rend.

Good David muſt and ſhall thy Scepter ſway;

Gladly will Iſrael ſuch a Prince obey:

More gladly ſlip thy Yoak from off their neck,

The Yoak thou ſhouldſt have put on Amalek;

But him, the Enemy of all that's good,

Glutted with Lust, and ſurfeited with Blood,

With Blaſphemy ſwoln big, corrupt within

With ſpurious Seed of every deadly Sin,

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=53) With whom
thou ſhouldſt have ſworn immortal hate,

As falſe to God, and dangerous to thy State;

That Kingdom thou eſtabliſhest by Peace,

Dost Amalek for David's Life releaſe;

A thouſand Shams, to put him by, contrive,

But maugre all, David ſhall King ſurvive.

Truſt in Suſpence, hope only in Deſpair,

Thy Kingdom's won before 'tis loſt: Prepare

To meet with Fate; for all thy Hoſts ſhall flie,

Thou and thy Sons to morrow be with me.

This ſaid, ſurprizing Horror ſwell'd his Veins,

And his ſick mind anticipates his pains;

Speechleſs and cold, he falls upon his Face,

In Frenzy would the fleeting Air embrace,

But Samuel he returns unto his place.

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=53)

### 1.24. To Mrs. B. Wright, On her Incomparable Poetry.

LOng ſince my thoughts did thus forboding tell,

The Muſes would our Governours expel,

To their own Crown raiſe up a Female Heir,

One of their Sex the Diadem ſhould wear:

The time's expir'd, my Jealouſie proves true,

We have a Queen, but thanks to Heaven 'tis you;

Before in all things elſe we did ſubmit,

Madam! in all things elſe, but only Wit:

With this Prerogative we could not part,

But in its ſtead each yielded up his heart.

Such was our vain Self-love and ſtubborn Pride,

What will not bend, muſt break; in vain we try'd

Our Title, nor muſt ev'n the Inheritance divide

But now (as Captives to a Conquerour)

We muſt ſurrender all into your power:

With conſcious Bluſhes muſt your Praiſe exert,

Reflecting on our ſelves in your deſert.

Eve firſt ſought Knowledge from the fatal Fruit;

(Why ſhould we Vertue to falſe ends impute?)

Whilſt lazy Adam ſhrug'd, was very loth

To part with Darling Ignorance and Sloth:

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=54) Noble was
her deſign, had it not been

Branded by Heaven as a preſumptuous ſin.

Your Quest of Knowledge can incur no ſhame,

Unleſs ſome Maſc'line Malice taint your name.

So different as the Cauſe, are the Effects;

For as ſhe ruin'd, you have rais'd your Sex:

She doom'd to Death, you gain Eternity,

For you muſt live until your Works can die.

Had they been like to S.'s Gouty Rhyme,

Or Smithfield-Ballads, in a little time

They'd have been thrown amongſt bald muſty Songs,

When the young Ballad-Wench had tir'd her Lungs.

But Nature, Judgment, Fancy, Art and Wit,

Shall ſooner to one common Fate ſubmit,

Than the rich Structures of your Brain ſhall fall,

Which are the very Quinteſſence of all.

Nor are you ſo deſirous of the Bays,

As to detract from an inferiour Praiſe;

But giving us an everlaſting Name,

You merit to your ſelf a nobler Fame:

Whilſt your own Glory you ſo much neglect,

And others with ſuch skill and care protect,

More laſting Trophies to your ſelf erect.

But oh! how high your Fancy takes its flight,

Whilſt they admire at you gone out of ſight!

So fled Elijah wrapr in Fire and Wind,

And left Eliſha wondring here behind:

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=54) They like
Eliſha, for a Bleſſing call;

You hear their Prayers, and let your Mantle fall.

With this they ſtrange unheard-of things can do,

Had they a Fiery Coach, they'd be Elijah's too.

So did th' aſſociated Nymphs rejoyce,

Whom Dian had thought worthy of her choice;

So they thô fair in all the Gods eſteem,

Yet made her Beauty far more charming ſeem.

Let others ſlander, envy, or deſpiſe,

The Cyprian Goddeſs ſtill muſt have the Prize.

Daphne to Laurel turn'd, a Female Brow

Has the beſt title to a Female Bough.

Had Fate but plac'd you in the Roman State,

The Salique Law would have been out of date.

Alcides ſcorn'd to gain Divinity

By one great labour, but ſtill more would try,

And Heaven, & Earth, and Hell did valorouſly defy.

Farther oblige the World, good Madam! ſtill

With the rich products of your fruitful Quill.

Reſtore the Muſes; and true Poetry,

And ſhew what Charms do in juſt meaſures lie.

And when you find a time beſt to retreat,

Spin out into a curious Web of Wit.

Let me your Muſe a Legacy inherit,

With double portion of your ſacred Spirit.

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=55)

### 1.25. A Fragment of Catullus. Advice to Hemiera.  
To Madam A— R—.

1.

SEE how the naked widow'd Vine,

That in the empty Vally grows,

That wants the happineſs to twine

About a Husband's brooding Boughs:

2.

Is without Virtue, Sap, or Juice,

Nor can it raiſe its drooping head,

Or one ſmall bunch of Grapes produce,

Or gather ſtrength to bud and ſpread.

3.

Alas! it ne'er aſpiring ſhoots,

For all the help of Wind and Weather,

The talleſt Sprigs ev'n touch the Roots,

The Vine tyed neck and heels together.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=55)

4.

The churliſh Shepherds pluck it up,

Or without notice paſs it by;

Nor will the Cattel deign to crop,

Or glance that way one greedy eye.

5.

If wedded to an Elm, they ſtrive

Who can their favours moſt improve,

With emulation make it thrive,

All proud to ſignalize their Love.

6.

The bluſhing Roſe, if let alone,

With ſhame will fade upon the Tree:

A Maidenhead thus over-grown,

Will ſuperanuated be.

### 1.26. The PARADOX, To Idera.

STeſichorus, and Orion blind, receiv'd their ſight,

One by Apollo's Numbers, th'other by his Light.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=56) Orion
basking in his burning Rays;

Steſichorus ſinging Hymns in Helen's praiſe:

Had I not, Idera, on you gaz'd, nor of you ſung,

I had not loſt my Eyes, nor with thoſe Eyes my Tongue.

### 1.27. To Idera, Dreaming ſhe was Angry.

1.

FAirer than all the Grecian Dames!

Idera! too too fair!

Theſe Touchwood Reliques of my Flames,

For Heaven's ſake forbear:

For thô your Anger at a diſtance burn,

My Soul, Love's Tinder, will to nothing turn.

2.

Why would you me from Love diſſwade?

Why would you tye my Tongue?

My Infant Paſſion thus upbraid?

Tell me, I am too young?

Oh! why in Viſions all my hopes deſtroy!

Have you forgot that Cupid was a Boy?

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=56)

3.

If thus in Dreams you can deſpiſe!

If thus you can beguile!

Aſſume a Viſard for diſguiſe!

Do any thing but ſmile!

All the effects of

‘The Weed Heleneius that grows in Rhodes, ſo call'd from He­len, that hang'd
her ſelf upon an Oak near which it ſprung up. Whoever taſted of it, was
provok'd to Anger, Strife, Bawling, and other ill Qualities.’ Ptolem.
Hephaeſt. l. 4.

Helen's Weed will be,

Paſſions eſſential to a Deity.

4.

Ah! Duſeraſtes is undone!

Unleſs your goodneſs ſpare;

For thô the heat of your bright Sun

He can with pleaſure bear,

Yet if your Lightning ſtrike his dazled Eyes,

In horrour and confuſion Duſeraſtes dies.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=57)

### 1.28. Ovid's Amorum Lib. 3. Eleg. 9. On the death of Tibullus. To Mr.
William Lloyd.

IF Heaven's Eye, the bright Aurora, ſhrouds

Her troubled Face under a Veil of Clouds,

And every Morning curſing her own Womb,

With fragrant Tears bedews her Memnon's Tomb:

If Thetis does her watry Fountains drain,

And with ſalt roaring Billows fill the Main;

Black Waves, as Mourners, for her Son provide,

And every day lament him with a Tide:

If Deities themſelves ſubmit to Fate,

Needs muſt Mortality ſink with ſuch a weight.

Come, mournful Elegy, with diſhevel'd hair,

Sad as thy Stile, thy Face, and hopeleſs as Deſpair:

That as too true, thy Nature and thy Name,

So now thy Habit too may be the ſame.

Tibullus ſtampt with every beauteous Grace,

So faintly ſhadow'd in thy penſive Face,

Inſpir'd ev'n from the Womb with thy own ſtrain,

That Soul that ne're conceiv'd a thought in vain;

Thy Pride, thy Heir, thy Glory, and thy Fame,

Thy All is fewel for his fatal Flame.

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=57) Poor
Cupid for his dear Tibullus mourns,

And careleſly his empty Quiver turns;

Puts out his Torch with ſtreaming flouds of Tears,

And broken Arrows for a Trophy rears.

No more his Hymen, nor his Iô ſings,

But ſighs and ſobs, and flags his wanton Wings:

With his own Dart ſcratches and tears his breaſt,

With the ſame Epidemick Rage poſſeſt

As Lovers are in Frenzy or Deſpair,

And digs for his Tibullus ſeated there.

So for Aeneas mourn'd the lovely Boy,

The Pride of future Rome, and Fame of Troy.

Nor could ſweet Beauties Queen be troubled more

For her lov'd Youth, torn by a Savage Boar.

Lov'd Youth (ſaid I) alas! compar'd with thee,

What would a thouſand ſuch Adoni's be?

A Poet's thought ('tis true) to be the Heir

Of Immortality, Heaven's peculiar Care,

Large Souls, a Colony of the Heavenly Line,

With ſomething amiable and divine;

Nought comes amiſs to ſacrilegious Death,

That ſtops the Impious and the devout Breath.

And no Protection can ſecure from Fate,

That loves to prey upon the Good and Great.

What ſignified it, Orpheus to be born

Of Gods, by Furies into pieces torn?

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=58) With
Melody to charm the Beaſts of Prey,

When men themſelves prove greater Bruits than they?

On barren Mountains does the God of Wit,

Mourning in melancholick horror, ſit

Sighing a broken Tune to his mute Lyre,

And wiſhes for his Linus to expire.

Homer, that Tree of Knowledge, Greece's Pride,

(That Pegaſus whom all the Poets ride)

In life hard Fate depriv'd him of the light,

And after ſhaded with eternal Night,

That unexhauſted Spring, to whom we ow

All thoſe ſmall Streams of ours that ſcattering flow.

His glorious Works, and his adored Name,

Only ſurvive as proof againſt the flame.

For Homer's Troy, that Phoenix cannot die,

So may Penelope's honeſt guile defie

The envious rage of Time, and reach Eternity.

And ſo ſhall Nemeſis and Delia prove

As laſting in their Fame as in their Love:

Delia, that firſt his youthful Paſſion warm'd,

And Nemeſis that laſt and longeſt charm'd.

In vain to lazy Gods we duly pray,

And to their Shrines our conſtant Homage pay.

In vain we deaf or helpleſs Stocks implore,

Or drowſie dreaming Deities adore,

That neither will have pity nor regard;

And righteous Souls can merit no Reward,

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=58) But turn
like Bruits unto their native Duſt.

What reaſon then have we to run on truſt?

I'm tempted to believe no God, or Heaven's unjuſt.

Live well, and die well, there's an end of one;

And why ſhould I the fooliſh hazard run

Of being vertuous, when I may as well

In flouds of Pleaſures ſwim the way to Hell?

Death drags us from the Altar to the Grave,

Whilſt careleſs Heaven looks on and will not ſave.

Death makes no Sanctuary of any place,

To whom, when, where, ſhe comes, 'tis all a caſe:

The Laws of Fate, without exceptions, made

Irrevocable, needs muſt be obey'd.

Is Pluto blind? what then? the blind can hear:

And cannot Verſes charm the Tyrant's Ear?

If ſo, would our Tibullus thus have died?

Tibullus Beauty's Prince, the Poet's Pride?

See now, of that Great Man the ſmall Remains

A little narrow Urn in Duſt contains.

How durſt the flames (dear Friend) accoſt that breaſt

With ſuch an hallow'd Veſtal Fire poſſeſt?

What dare not they, that Vengeance can provoke,

And down with Gods and Temples at a ſtroke?

The Queen of Love with pity, and with dread,

At ſuch Preſumption turn'd away her head;

Nay ſome affirm, the Deity preſent there,

Could ſcarce from melting drops of Tears forbear.

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=59) Yet
thanks to Heaven that thou diedſt at home,

Corcyra could not be ſo ſweet as Rome.

Thy Mother here clos'd thy departing Ey's,

And ſet that Sun that never more would riſe.

In the cold hands of unrelenting death,

Gather'd the fragrant Reliques of thy breath,

And paid her laſt Devotion to thy Urn:

With her thy Siſter did in Conſort mourn;

For thee ſhe did her lovely Treſſes tear,

For thee in flouds of tears ſhe waſh'd her ſcatter'd hair

And when too forward on thy way to Bliſs,

Delia and Nemeſis ſecur'd a Kiſs:

A Kiſs (ſaid I!) millions they laid in ſtore,

Since they were never like to ſee thee more;

Some of thy parting breath they did receive,

And for each Sob a thouſand Kiſſes give,

Kiſſes on which they might for ever live.

The Rivals both with emulous paſſion ſtay,

Until the Flames had raviſht thee away.

Thus Delia parting, for ſhe left him firſt,

(The Wounds of Boſom-friends are always worſt)

"'Twas I that ſeaſon'd firſt thy untaught heart,

"And did the ſecret Rites of Love impart.

"Hadſt thou been true, Albius, thou hadſt not died;

"But thank thy own inconſtancy and pride,

"One and the ſame Divorce did me and life di­vide.

"[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=59)
Vengeance has found thee out in my defence,

"And took the part of injur'd Innocence.

"Ah! that thou hadſt but thy own intereſt known,

"And lov'd thy Delia, and lov'd her alone.

But Nemeſis with Tears, (reſolv'd to prove

She had beſt right and title to his Love)

Replies—

—"To me Grief only does belong,

"And if you ſhed a Tear, you do me wrong.

"Long ſince your Tyranny you did reſign,

"Tibullus ſince was mine, and only mine.

"He graſp'd me in his Arms, and held me faſt,

"Nor would he let me go, whilſt breath would laſt.

"When Death's Convulſions Nature's Fabrick tore,

"His Organs loos'd, and he could ſpeak no more,

"In broken Accents this I heard him breath,

"My Soul into thy arms, my Nemeſis, I bequeath.

If there be ought of us ſurvives the Flames,

Ought of us but our ſhadows and our names,

T' Elyſium ſhall Tibullus be convey'd,

And there his Soul become the brighteſt Shade.

There ſhalt thou Calvus and Catullus find,

(About his Temples ſacred Ivy twin'd:)

There in thoſe Regions of Eternal Day,

If Fame belie him, (as I wiſh it may)

Shalt thou Tibullus with thy Gallus meet,

And your ſtrange ſhades your former loves repeat.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=60) Gallus,
inſpir'd with an ambitious Flame!

Gallus, too prodigal of Life and Fame!

But whilſt his Shade wanders amongſt the Juſt,

Thou Urn be careful of thy precious Truſt,

Nor let his ſacred Aſhes touch the common Duſt.

Lie light, thou Earth, indulgent to his reſt,

Whilſt his great Soul converſes with the Bleſt.

### 1.29. To Idera, Having by ſome Miſchance ſo hurt her ſelf as to halt.

1.

* CEres in queſt of Proſerpine,

Seeing th' reflexion of her Face,

Not as 'twas formerly divine,

Grief diſpoſſeſſing every Grace;

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=60)

2.

She unconcern'd at ſuch a ſight,

Yet made her Glaſs the Stygian Lake,

To mourning turn her cryſtal white,

And of her Grief the Streams partake.

3.

Bluſh not, ſweet Nymph! thô envious Fate,

Proud on your Feet to ſet a mark;

Let them that dare provoke your hate,

Not at your Altar light a ſpark.

4.

Vulcan was lame, althô a God:

(Nor must the Truth be always ſaid)

Let them not kiſs the Ground you trod,

Scrupulous Fools! but ſtrike them dead.

5.

Timorous Fate, like Diomede,

Struck Venus on the lower parts:

They that dare make the Wound to bleed,

Set hungry Vultures at their hearts.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=61)

6.

Set them a Mark for your fair Eye,

And kill them, kill them with Deſpair,

They need not with worſe Torments die,

Than to ſee Heaven, but not come there.

7.

When Nature, with Ambition fir'd,

Some ſtrange and wondrous thing deſign'd,

And to out-do her ſelf aſpir'd,

She took you out of Womankind.

8.

All their Perfections knit in one,

Thy Soul preſented from above,

Jealous to ſee her ſelf out-done,

With her own Works ſhe fell in love.

9.

Cupid could ſcarce his Mother know,

Venus and Idera were ſo like;

But Fate with a deciding Blow,

The Mark on Idera's ſide did ſtrike.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=61)

10.

Yet thanks to Fate, whoſe common Brand

Has ſet us both on even ground;

Yet thanks to Fate, whoſe heavy hand

Could forbear a mortal Wound.

11.

Achilles by an Arrow fell,

Struck through his heel, whilſt you ſtill live,

With Scars that can your Valour tell,

And yet a thouſand Deaths can give.

12.

A thouſand cas'd within my Breast,

Glance Idera a diſſolving Smile,

If you would have them diſpoſſeſt,

Or with the Quiver of my Heart recoil.

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=62)

### 1.30. To Mr. Omnibon.  
A Diſſwaſive from that Effeminate Paſſion of Love.

OFF (Thyrſis!) with this melancholick Fit,

Nor like a Purgatory Freſh-man ſit;

In love, my Thyrſis, and pretend'ſt to Wit!

What, reconcil'd! and canſt thou not forbear?

What, pardon thoſe that did to pieces tear

Thy Brother Orpheus? what, not Love forſwear?

Love, that damn'd Leproſie, infectious Pest,

All Africa's Monſters kennell'd in his breaſt.

Tell me not 'tis a ſin to break your Vows

Of Lovers, perjury Jove himſelf allows.

No—he's an Aſs that Womankind adores:

Let Bacchus kick the Baſtard out of doors.

Come then dip the blind Rogue in a full Bowl,

And let Wine's Spirits elevate your Soul.

For Love will vaniſh at his Brother's ſight,

So Phoebus dims the Lamps that rule the Night:

So Antidotes rank Poyſon can expel:

And ſo one Witch undoes another's Spell:

So Muſick helpeth when Tarantula's ſting;

And Orpheus can as well as Sirens ſing.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=62)

### 1.31. To Idera, Writing her Name in Snow, which melt­ing to Water, froze,
and ſoon after thaw'd.

YOur Name on fallen Snow I ſeal'd;

The melting drops to Ice congeal'd:

In Cryſtal Prints the Letters ſhine,

And their material white refine.

Here daily, hourly as I paſs

By this heavenly Looking-glaſs,

I ſee the picture of my Face,

And the reflecting Name embrace.

But as by Images of Wax

The Witch a real Body racks;

So as my Heart within conſumes,

Ice Snow, Snow Water, reaſſumes.

My Flames do all your Cold withdraw,

Till we reſolve on better Law,

That you ſhall never freeze, to thaw.

For thus well arm'd, you can defie

A thouſand Deaths at once let flie,

Laugh to ſee Duſeraſtes die.

With your Temptations, millions ſtrong,

To do me right, you do me wrong.

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=63) Nay—ev'n
with Chymical Experiments entice:

Your very Name can make a Burning-glaſs of Ice.

### 1.32. A Propitiatory Sacrifice, To the Ghoſt of J— M— by way of Paſtoral,
in a Dialogue between Thyrſis and Co­rydon.  
To his dear Brother Mr. Aſh Wyndham.

THYRSIS.

GOod morrow, Corydon! but why ſo ſtrange?

What makes your jolly Countenance thus change?

What, have you loſt a Kid? or pine and mourn

For Galatea's ſlights, or Amarylli's ſcorn?

Did melancholy Dreams diſturb your reſt?

Eaſe then on me the burthen of your breaſt,

A hearty Friend will not your Grief deſpiſe,

And Thyrſis will be proud to ſympathize.

CORYDON.

Ah, Thyrſis! ſee, after unpleaſant food,

The very Cows will chew no bitter Cud;

Can my repeated Sorrows do thee good?

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=63) And yet
for thee my Grief will I controul,

For thee I'll offer Violence to my Soul:

Know then, nor need I give that Caution, weep,

Thy Eyes are neither drie, nor Heart aſleep:

Know then, the riſe of it is Daphny's death;

And ſince the Fates have ſtopt my Daphny's breath,

I have my Pipes, my Flocks, my Loves forſwore,

And well I might, ſince he is now no more.

THYRSIS.

When the Day's Lamp's ſhadow'd before the Night's,

And ſpangled Heaven ſets out her glittering Lights,

Sweet Philomel her little Throat does tune,

And charm with warbling Notes the liſtning Moon.

When the ſharp watchful Thorn has gor'd her breaſt,

And bleeding Philomel can take no reſt:

So may your Muſe unfledg'd yet try her Wing,

And Grief and Love joyntly together ſing.

So may we well pull up the Sluces of our Eyes,

For Death has ſtopt the Springs of Paradiſe;

Which in profuſe Meanders curling ran,

Baptiz'd us Poets, and gave life to Man.

For Death has ſeiz'd our Mint of learned Ore,

And ſweep'd away all our Poetick ſtore.

So when an ancient Oak falls on the ground,

The Woods all tremble, and the Rocks reſound;

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=64) Nor
falls alone, but hovering in the Air,

A thouſand little Fates the Branches bear.

Arcadians mourn! Daphnis a publick loſs,

And well may all our Tears and Grief engroſs.

Sound then his Obſequies, Daphnis deceaſt!

Come ſing away the burthen of thy Breaſt,

For he deſerves thy Song, and well deſerves the best.

Or both alternately our parts will ſing,

You ſhall the Laurel, I the Myrtle bring.

CORYDON.

Ord'nary Tears ſufficient are to fall

Attendants of a common Funeral:

Daphnis deſerves for each a drop of Blood,

And for each ſingle drop a ſcarlet Flood.

As Nightingales ſing ſweeter than the Thruſh;

The Cedar's better than the Bramble-buſh;

Sweet Marjoram and Musk, than ſtinking Weeds;

Daphnis our Merit and our Praiſe exceeds.

The Elm for Daphnis groans, will let the Vine

No more in his embraces fondly twine.

Bees leave their Flowers, which droop their ſickly head,

Have loſt their ſweet repast on which they fed,

Since he whoſe breath inſpir'd it all, is dead.

Our Flocks all keep a Fast for Daphnis ſake:

Our Iſle the ſweet-tongu'd Chanters too forſake.

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=64) None but
the inauſpicious Ravens croke,

The Nymphs and Demy-Gods their Pipes have broke,

And bid adieu to all their Fairy Kings.

The Scriech Owl howts, and the black Swallow ſings.

Nature her ſelf puts on her Mourning-Weed.

One Wound makes the whole Univerſe to bleed.

THYRSIS.

As Day without the proſpect of the Sun,

As Night without the conduct of the Moon,

Such, Daphnis, is the World, now thou art gone!

For Daphnis, too too well belov'd of Heaven,

Only to teach us Self-denial given,

Is dead alas! O Paradox! is dead,

Voracious Grave! and conſecrated Head!

What, could not Daphnis charm ambitious Death,

From gathering all the Reliques of his breath?

Could He not ev'n the Powers of Hell defy,

And by ſoft Airs bring them to Harmony?

Been ſomething more than Mortal? No—Hard Fate

Spares not the Rich, the Good, the Wiſe, the Great.

The proudeſt Duſt muſt hid in ſilence lie:

The proudeſt Dust must in oblivion die.

CORYDON.

Thô Fortune acted oft the Stepdame's part,

Yet would not Daphnis curſe her in his heart:

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=65) Thô Gall
infus'd into his bitter Cup,

Taught by Philoſophy, he drank it up.

Ah too too ſoon a ſhining Cherub made

Of that bleſt place thou hadſt ſo long ſurvey'd!

My Muſe muſt tell the Groves Great Daphnis dead!

Whilſt pining Eccho anſwers what is ſaid:

Eccho for him muſt die a ſecond death,

Us'd to retort his words, and ſuck his fragrant breath.

THYRSIS.

Trees full of Tears hide their heads, bowing down,

All Rivals once which ſhould be made his Crown:

All proudly conſcious of their welcome Shade,

Where Judgment, Wit, and Innocence were laid:

Nurſe of his Thought, and Midwife of his Brain,

That fruitful teeming Womb that knew no pain;

But brought the well-digeſted Product forth,

Pregnant with joy, and boaſting ſuch a Birth.

Nor muſt we here his forward Youth forget,

To pay whoſe Portion Nature ran in debt.

So ſoon the Bard, and ſo divine a ſhare

He well deſerv'd, who was her only Heir,

Her Darling-Son, and her peculiar Care.

He could teach Reverend Sages how to write,

And preſcribe Rules ev'n to the God of Wit.

(Like Tages) born a Poet from the Womb,

And ſung himſelf from 's Cradle to his Tomb.

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=65) Inſpir'd
with Melody, with his firſt breath,

Improving Art and Learning, till his death.

Still as his annual Circles rowl'd about,

They unknown Worlds of Sciences found out.

Here only Mother Nature, for his ſake,

Did her own Laws out of Indulgence break,

From Youth and Age one ſpiritual Compound make.

But when his Age and Fruit together ripe,

(Of which blind Homer only was the Type)

Tireſias like, he mounted up on high,

And ſcorn'd the filth of dull Mortality.

Convers'd with Gods, and grac'd their Royal Line,

All Ecſtaſie, all Rapture, all Divine.

CORYDON.

So the Philoſopher would needs be blind,

T' improve the nobler Eye-ſight of his Mind,

Not to mean earthly Opticks be confin'd.

THYRSIS.

No wonder, if th' ambitious Laurel's dead,

Degraded to a Mercenary Head.

If Birds forget their Notes, and ſit alone,

With melancholy Progne in the Deſerts moan,

Since this our Bird of Paradiſe is flown.

Daphnis! the great Reformer of our Iſle!

Daphnis! the Patron of the Roman Stile!

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=66) Who
firſt to ſence converted Doggrel Rhimes,

The Muſes Bells took off, and ſtopt their Chimes,

On ſurer Wings, with an immortal flight,

Taught us how to believe, and how to write.

And could we but have reach'd his wondrous height,

We'd chang'd the conſtitution of our State.

Where Reaſon muſt enlightned Souls confute,

To common Earth 'tis ſtill forbidden Fruit:

For all in Torrents his Inventions flow,

And drown the little Vales that lie below.

And yet ſo ſweet, Malice would ſilenc'd die;

So perfect, they could Prejudice defie.

Daphnis! whoſe Modeſty might juſtly boaſt,

His Errours leaſt, his Excellencies moſt.

Well might we bluſh at every ſacred Line,

To ſee a Soul ſo Humble, ſo Divine.

But I offend—and whilſt I praiſe his Stile,

Do in Apoſtate Rhimes his Worth defile.

His Guardian Angel does begin to frown,

His Spirit looks with indignation down.

CORYDON.

Ev'n Tombs of Stone in time will wear away;

Braſs Pyramids are ſubject to decay;

But lo! the Poet's Fame ſhall brighter ſhine

In each ſucceeding Age,

Laughing at the baffled Rage

Of envious Enemies, and deſtructive Time.

THYRSIS.

[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=66)

Reſt Phoenix! in thy Paradiſe above,

Thy Works enjoy a Paradiſe of Love:

Thô ſome with a rank emulous Poyſon ſwell,

Others admire, and praiſe, but none excel.

May our poor Ruſtick Muſe add Cyphers to thy Fame.

Thy Works are everlaſting Monuments to thy Name.

### 1.33. Oldham's GHOST. A Dream. To Mr. Ro. Townſhend.

ALL huſht and ſtill, Night's melancholy ſhade

The dusky Arch of Heaven had overſpread;

The very Beaſts of Prey their Wandrings ceaſt;

The little Birds their murm'ring Notes ſuppreſt:

No Star appear'd, no Noiſe, no Wind was heard,

And neither Bough, nor Leaf, nor Bloſſom ſtir'd.

When on the ſweating ground I ſilent lay

On Flowery Beds under a fragrant Bay,

Whoſe ſweetneſs ſuck'd my emulous breath away.

Now parting with my Reaſon and my Sence,

Slumbers as ſoft, as ſweet as Innocence,

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=67) Had
ſeiz'd my Eyes, and the great God of Rest

Had drawn his drowſie Wand along my Breaſt.

Methought I ſaw an Angel by me ſtand,

With Laurels on his head and Myrtles in his hand.

And all the way the Meſſenger of God

Had with his hallow'd Feet in Glory trod:

Sprung up Elyſian Flowers here and there,

Sweet as their Climate, as their Parent fair.

His heavenly Locks lay curl'd by Nature's Arts:

A Quiver for his Brother Cupid's Darts,

Sweating Ambroſian Dew: His Eyes too bright:

His Roſes were too red: his Lillies were too white.

His Smiles kind entertainment did beſpeak,

His Smiles ſpread in a pleaſant Lip and bluſhing Cheek:

Narciſſus ſmiles not half ſo ſweet as they,

Althô he lov'd, and ſmil'd himſelf away.

Preſumption yet they check'd, I know not how,

With a Majeſtick Cenſure on his Brow.

So ſweet a Cherub of the Heavenly Quire!

The Gods themſelves did their own Works admire.

Thus ſtood the winged Mercury, array'd

In Purple Robes of State—

Which to his Buskins reach'd, kiſs'd them, and with them play'd.

Thus ſtood the Prophet, preſſing me to take

A Vizard, and a Book, for Oldham's ſake.

By which I knew I had acceptance found;

And falling down, I kiſt the Holy Ground.

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=67) But he
proceeded thus—for I was dumb—

"Hail Thyrſis! little Bud of Fame! I come

"Fraught with an Embaſſie, ſent from above,

"An Embaſſie of Favour, Grace, and Love.

"Thy Wiſh is enter'd in the Rolls of Fate:

"Thy Prayers are heard, nor fear thou ſhalt be great.

"Thy Parts the only Talent Heaven will give,

"(On ſuch a Portion Prodigals might live.)

"Thô Honour is not in the leaſt thy aim,

"Yet Wits a hunting, often light on Fame.

"Friends thou ſhalt have, but few, faithful, and free,

"As thou deſir'ſt, deſerv'ſt, if that can be.

"Wedded to a young Widow Colledge-life,

"Thy Books thy Children, and thy Muſe thy Wife.

"And ſince thou doſt only invoke my Muſe,

"Me and my Works for thy ſole Pattern chuſe:

"By my own ſelf I ſwear, thou ſhalt inherit

"A double Portion of Apollo's Spirit.

"Nor my adopted Son! when thus retir'd,

"(The Bleſſing which thou haſt ſo long deſir'd)

"Shalt thou not find a heart to laſh the Crimes,

"The bold notorious Strumpets of the Times.

"Nor ſhalt thou want a Teleſcope from far:

"Deep Caves alone by day deſcry a Star.

"Secure from danger on the ſilent ſhore,

"The horrour of a Storm others ſee more,

"[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=68) Than
they, that without hope and help complain,

"And loſe their ſenſe in the Abyſs of pain:

"By ſad experience their own miſery find;

"Can't utter the confuſion of their mind;

"But ſwallow'd up, plunge deeper in Deſpair;

"Carry'd they know not how, they know not where.

"My Works ſhall both thy Mint and Optick be;

"Here at one proſpect thou ſhalt all things ſee:

"All things Sarcaſtical, that juſtly fall

"Under that common head, compendious All.

"My Works ſhall be thy Forge to form thy Skill:

"The World finds Matter, and thy ſelf a Will.

"Improve thy Worth, Worth is it ſelf a Name:

"Trace but my Stile, and you ſecure my Fame.

"Satyr's a plain, Satyr's a pleaſant Road,

"Provided that the way be not too broad.

"But in a full career 'tis hard to miſs

"Running upon a dangerous Precipice.

"Be neither trivial, nor take too much pains;

"Let Malice never guide your furious Reins.

"When grave, be not elaborate, nor write

"For ſolid, intricate: for eaſie, ſlight:

"Theſe and the reſt for your inſtruction learn,

"And between good and evil to diſcern.

This ſaid, rapt in an Ecſtafie of Love,

Fed with vain hopes, I would my Viſion prove.

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=68) Of blind
Deluſions in falſe Dreams afraid,

Strove to embrace the Evangelick Shade.

When lo! he vaniſh'd from my dazled Eyes,

And thus my filial Love, and thus my Duty did de­ſpiſe.

Fanning his ſilver Wings, he cut the Sky,

Which gathering in thick fleecy throngs, did fly

To ſee the great Embaſſadour of Heaven paſs by.

And where the Clouds parted to give him way,

My Cries did poſt along as faſt as they.

My Father! Father! kept the Chariots track,

Hung on the Wheels, and would have brought him back,

But left ſo far behind, I ſtart and wake.

### 1.34. On The Death of the late Duke of Ormond.  
To Mr. William Butler.

Ipſe tibi jam brachia contrahit ardens

Scorpius, & coeli juſtâ plus parte reliquit.

Vir. Geor. 1.

UNder a fatal Yew, as I was laid,

Pleas'd with the diſmal melancholick Shade,

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=69)
Democritus in a black Veil appears,

Democritus his Ghost in flouds of Tears.

Horrour my Senſes in confuſion ſeal'd,

The icy current of my Bloud congeal'd.

Each Joynt and Sinew loos'd: my ſwelling Veins

Were cold and ſtiff, bound on the Rack of Pains.

Smother'd in ſilence thus I panting lay,

And heard the hollow Specter ſighing ſay,

He's gone—the Pillar of the Church and State

With honour ſinks under the mighty weight;

The Britiſh Atlas falls a Sacrifice to inſulting Fate.

Who would not ev'n the Laws of Nature break?

And be a* Polyzaelus for his ſake?

Democritus, the lighteſt Mould of Earth,

Whoſe Life was one continu'd Scene of Mirth,

A Deluge of religious Tears muſt ſhed,

To waſh the Hero; for a Hero's dead.

Fame! thou chief Attribute of his great Soul!

Proclaim the doleful News from Pole to Pole:

Employ thy hundred Tongues, that all may come,

And pay their laſt Devotion to his Tomb.

Here at this† Agelaſtos ſigh and groan,

Till Niobe's fate more juſtly be their own.

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=69) Let
Nature her unhappy loſs bewail,

And hide her head under a Widow's Veil:

Or like Evadne, with her Husband burn,

As he to Aſhes, ſhe to Chaos turn.

The Sun and Moon eclips'd!—where am I now?

Stars claſhing fall!—the ſinking Heavens bow!

The Sun and Moon would Ormond both embrace!

The Sun and Moon would both reſign their place:

The Conſtellations all together croud,

And hide themſelves behind a baſhful Cloud!

The Signs contracted, ſhrink to make him room!

Concern'd where Ormond will vouchſafe to come!

Each for the honour of his preſence vy!

Yet bluſh Ormond ſhould have no Rival in the Sky!

Hah! what ſtrange Light is this that ſtrikes my Eyes,

And from thoſe Miſts of Darkneſs ſeems to riſe!

—What blazing Comet's that I ſee

Newly inſtall'd chief in the Galaxy!

Perſeus and Caſſiopeia round him twine,

To blind his Luſtre, both their Forces joyn;

But he does all the heavenly Hoſt out-ſhine!

'Tis Ormond, by that Spotleſs Robe of white!

Nor could another Sign be half ſo bright!

'Tis He—inſert him in your Kalendar,

A worthy Saint, and an auſpicious Star.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=70) Thou
World, alternately rejoyce and mourn,

But rather drop more Tears into his Urn:

Whilſt I to my own ſelf and to my place return.

### 1.35. To Mr. R. Nichols. On the Little Man that was ſhow'd for a Sight all
over England. In imitation of a Greek Epigram out of Lucilius.

A Grave Philoſopher of old, that taught

The World at firſt was out of Atoms brought,

Had Fate projected in his time, thy Birth;

When Epicurus thus conceiv'd the Earth;

He would have made the Univerſe of thee:

As much leſs than diminutive Atoms be.

Or this at leaſt he would for granted take,

Heaven did out of thee thoſe Atoms make.

Man, the World's Microcoſm, all allow:

The Microcoſm of an Atom Thou!

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=70)

Solomon's Song, cap. 1. ver. 2.‘Let him kiſs me with the kiſſes of his mouth.’

### 1.36. To Mrs. Mary Nichols.

WHat Angel's voice thus ecchoes thrô the Sky,

Thus rowls along, and breaks in Harmony?

Rejoyce, rejoyce, for thy Redemption's nigh.

Ah! what ſoft welcome Airs ſalute my Ears!

Airs! that enchant the Stars, and charm the Spheres!

The Clouds all melt away! ſucceeding Light

And glorious Pomp dazle my fixed ſight!

The Elements give back, and bow the knee,

Whilſt Seraphs dance unto the Melody;

But I alone ſtand weeping by the Tree:

Not yet the Tree of Life, a melancholy Croſs;

There ſeek for Remedy, and bewail my loſs.

For in my Saviour's abſence, that long while,

Nothing could force, no not a feigned ſmile;

Nor make me blot the Copy he had ſet,

Whoſe Eyes were never wanton, often wet;

Whoſe Sufferings Agonies, drops of Bloud his Sweat.

But now He's come! the Herald did proclaim,

And bow'd with Reverence at his Sacred Name.

My raviſh'd Soul fell down before his Throne,

And now I knew it was the Holy One.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=71) 'Twas my
Beloved I had ſought ſo long,

Whom I had found, had I not ſought him wrong.

And art thou come?—And is it thou, bleſt Dove?—

Can I believe my Eyes, or truſt my Love?

Pardon, dear Jeſu! ſuch a jealous Faith;

Thô weak my Trust, my Love's as ſtrong as Death.

Pardon me too, for ſince I ſaw thee laſt,

The Flouds have laid my fruitful Garden waſt.

Alas! what pleaſure could a Widow take,

Who only lov'd that Garden for thy ſake!

What's all the reſt, when Sharon's Roſe is gone?

The Roſe that's all my Garden's Sweets in one?

Let me but hugg that Roſe within my Breaſt,

And then, my Love! let who's will take the reſt.

No—that has lain all open to the South,

And I have only kiſs'd thy hands and feet;

Now kiſs me with the kiſſes of thy mouth,

The kiſſes of thy mouth, for they are ſweet!

My Spouſe, let me ſuck up thy fragrant breath,

For ah! my Love's as ſtrong as Wine or Death.

For a Kiſs for our laſt parting I muſt ſue;

And one at meeting juſtly is my due.

Pay all thy Debts for abſence, theſe and more,

With uſury pay off that divine Score.

Do not my Paſſion, O my Spouſe! diſdain,

Nor let my Sighs and Tears be all in vain:

[[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=71) But give
me Balmy Kiſſes in exchange,

Nor let unhappy Abſence make thee ſtrange.

Come—let us ſtrive which firſt their Lips can joyn,

Which can the cloſeſt to their Rivals twine;

Until our ſtrugling Spirits both releaſe,

Till theſe our Seconds make a perfect peace.

Victorious Captives both with joy return,

Both with new Love and Emulation burn.

As for my Soul, thou ſhalt new life inſpire,

In gratitude with zeal I'll blow the Fire.

Come then—dear Jeſu! come—and no more part,

But take the full poſſeſſion of my Heart.

### 1.37. To Idera, The Apology for Silence.

1.

LOng has the Store-houſe of my heart

Been laying Fewel in;

Here and there Cupid's left a Dart,

The fire for Matches to begin.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=72)

2.

But my Combuſtibles, as yet

Have not their Caverns broke:

And whilſt they can no paſſage get,

Send only Vollies out of Smoke.

3.

Yet by theſe Sparks you might have gueſt

What Balls of Flames do rowl

Within the Furnace of my Breaſt,

And ev'n conſume my melting Soul.

4.

Veſuvius hollow Entrails glow,

Red-hot with hidden Fire;

And yet they nothing upwards throw,

But keep their ſtock of Flames entire.

5.

Their ſtock of Flames which once a year

They pour upon the fruitful Plain;

Their Forge of loads of Aſhes clear,

And to their Smithy work again.

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=72)

6.

Thô Preludes yet I only ſhew,

Nor tell you all my mind,

Idera! truſt me to be true,

And think, my Fair One! th' more's behind.

### 1.38. The Dumb Diſcovery.  
To Idera.

THô Cupid flames from Vulcan ſtole,

And made a Bonfire of my Soul;

Reſolv'd from Aetna to remove,

There to ſet up his Forge for Love:

With this perſwaſion prepoſſeſt,

That Flames pent in a narrow Breaſt,

Would diſpatch ſooner poyſon'd Darts,

None ſo hot as Lovers hearts:

Yet thought I none this Shop can know,

Hid, like Aetna, under Snow.

None ſuſpect, an outward Styx

With Phlegeton under ground ſhould mix:

But my Aſhes all betray,

And to my Work houſe ſhew the way.

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=73) Thus the
Philoſopher, who fraught

With an ambitious fury, thought

To be inſtall'd a God, by night

Took downwards an immortal flight:

By his deſcenſion would aſpire

Through the burning Mount, in fire:

Aetna, to undeceive the World,

His Iron Slippers upwards hurl'd.

He, greedy to advance his Name,

Beguil'd at once of Life and Fame.

### 1.39. In praiſe of Wine mixt with Water. A Greek EPIGRAM, Out of Meleager.  
To Mr. Francis Nichols.

THE Nymphs, when Bacchus, like an Embryo, came

Out of his Mother's Aſhes, on a flame,

Dipt the young Deity in a cool ſtream,

To quench the fire, and take away the ſteam.

The Nymphs and Bacchus ever ſince agree,

Without the Nymphs, Thunder and Lightning He!

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=73) Thus
Water moderates the rage of Wine,

And Fire it ſelf proves cool and anodyne.

Wine all the Waters crudities conſumes;

Water feeds on her hot and heady fumes:

To one another both a flavour give,

And make a Cordial of a Corroſive.

### 1.40. Parting with Mr. Tho. Bebington.

DOwn by a River's ſide together ſat

Thyrſis and Hylas, (ſuch was once the State

Of our First Parents, in a friendly Strife,

Thus Innocence might learn to ſquare her life)

Where ſinging Waters lull'd themſelves aſleep:

And clouded Heaven did ſympathizing weep.

When penſive Thyrſis thus did ſilence break,

And all in Tears to his lov'd Hylas ſpeak.

THYRSIS.

And canſt thou, Hylas, thou, be ſo unkind

Thus to leave me and Life behind?

And canſt thou think of me without regret?

On Love's account for millions run in debt?

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=74)

HYLAS.

No Thyrſis! Hylas can't unconſtant prove,

Nor have I yet been wavering in my Love;

But emulous Fate ſummons us both to part:

Haſt thou not a ſufficient Pledge, my Heart?

THYRSIS.

Yet out of ſight I ſhall be out of mind:

Ah! Hylas, ſhould you prove unkind,

Officious Fate would need no other Knife

To cut in two my ravell'd Thread of Life.

HYLAS.

Nature her ſelf ſhall firſt unhinged be;

The whole Creation loſe its Symmetry:

Iron th' attractive Loadſtone ſhall forſake,

When I the ſacred League of Friendſhip break.

THYRSIS.

Into a confus'd Chaos ſhall be hurl'd

The ſhatter'd Atoms of the World:

The Needle too the Northern point ſhall ſhun:

And with my Promiſe Rivers backwards run.

HYLAS.

To Hylas then be ſure you never fail

Kiſſes to ſend by every gentle Gale.

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=74) Let
Hylas be your talk, Hylas your Dreams:

Tranſport me Sighs over the Belgick Streams.

THYRSIS.

To Thyrſis, without intermiſſion, pay

Your bounden Duty night and day;

And nothing leſs to Thyrſis, than to Heaven,

For Life and Love by both alike are given.

Pray to the Gods; but I can hardly ſay

Whether to them you firſt preſume to pray:

No—your firſt and laſt thoughts muſt be my due.

Come, Hylas! then once more renew

Your everlaſting Vow, before your long Adieu.

HYLAS.

I ſwear by all the Thunderbolts of Jove;

By thoſe revengeful Darts of injur'd Love:

By Life and Death, and all the Powers above;

To comprehend them all, I ſwear by You,

That I for ever will be just and true.

THYRSIS.

May all the Plagues that Vengeance has in ſtore

For Infidelity, theſe and more,

With Aggravations, light on perjur'd Me,

If I be guilty of Unconſtancy.

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=75) Or if an
Action be againſt me brought,

Of one ſuſpicious Deed, or doubtful thought.

This ſaid, raviſh'd into an Ecſtaſie,

They would in their perfection die;

And ſtrugling hardly to themſelves can come,

Like Prophets with their Inſpiration dumb.

Cupid the heavenly Mediator came,

And with two Arrows dipt in Honours Flame,

Their golden points piercing through both their hearts,

For tryal of their Faith and Vertue, parts.

Hylas the Seas to Holland troubled bore,

And left deſerted Thyrſis ſighing on the ſhore.

### 1.41. A Greek EPIGRAM.  
To Idera.

SHot by th' Artillery of your fair Eye,

So great my pains, I would, but cannot die:

Sicilian Tyrants never yet could Death deny!

Tears from my feſter'd Wound, like Matter, flow,

And ſtill the Fire you will not quench, but blow.

[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=75) What
ſhall I do? I've ranſack'd Nature's ſtore,

She has no Plantain for a Lover's Sore:

* Leucas the only Remedy is no more.

Ah! Madam, you, and only you can ſave,

Your Beauty that muſt heal the Wound it gave.

I'm Telephus, you have Achilles Arms,

You have, and know you have all their inherent Charms.

However, let me not like† Chiron lie

Curſing my ſelf, and you, and Immortalitie!

—Qualis conjectâ cerva ſagittâ,

Quam procul incautam nemora inter Creſia fixit

Paſtor agens telis, liquit (que) volatile ferrum

Neſcius: illa fugâ ſilvas ſaltuſ (que) peragrat

Dictaeos: haeret lateri lethalis arundo.

Vir. Aeneid. 4.

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=76)

### 1.42. On John Pig, who was very famous for his great NOSE.  
To Mr. R. Nichols.

TO ſay, the Noſe of Pig! that cannot be;

There's no compariſon, 'tis all Hyperbole!

But he that would the naked Truth expoſe,

Muſt for diſtinction ſay, Pig of the Noſe!

### 1.43. Part of the 14th Satyr of Juvenal, Against Covetouſneſs: With a long
Preface taken out of the ſame Satyr.  
To Mr. Will. Percival.

Et quando uberior vitiorum copia? quando

Major Avaritiae patuit ſinus?

Juv. Sat.

TOO many things (Cenſorius!) there be

That do entail an endleſs Infamy,

That brand a man with a deſerved ſhame,

And ſpoil the luſtre of an honeſt Name,

Which Parents to their Children do tranſmit,

And ground them in before their Alphabet.

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=76) 'Tis no
ſuch wonder now-a-days to ſee

How liquoriſh a little Boy will be,

Still craving change of Dainties to invite

A ſqueamiſh Stomach to an Appetite,

Diſdaining hearty Fare, and wholſome Meat,

Conſulting with Apicius what to eat;

When the old toothleſs Grandſire with his Gums

Mumps Muſhrooms, Marmalade, and Sugar-plums;

Sucks from Herculean Bowls the choicest Wines,

And does whatever Luxury enjoyns:

Go, cries that Luſt, he runs: Come, and he'll fly:

What Belly-God his Palate can deny?

No wonder if the Son preciſely tread

In the ſame path where his good Father led.

If he's for this and t'other coſtly Bit,

Can down with nothing but what's delicate;

And by Tradition keeps to the old Wiſh,

A Princely Kitchin, and a Dainty Diſh.

Thus Nature binds us by too hard a Law;

Domeſtick patterns eaſily withdraw;

Led by the Ignis Fatuus of their Vice,

We make no queſtion but they must be wiſe,

And we fall on, refuſing to be nice:

Loth to be made Subjects for Ridicule,

Single exceptions from a Common Rule.

[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=77) But moſt
when great Authorities enforce,

We hurry on, and follow the ſame courſe,

And ſtrive, if poſſible, to be much worſe.

Some few there be more vertuouſly inclin'd,

Whom Titan made of Clay the best refin'd,

Whom Titan has inſpir'd with a more generous mind:

Who ſcorn by evil Precepts to be ſway'd,

And by authentick wickedneſs betray'd,

Whilſt others keep the track their Anceſtors have made.

The generality go the common Road,

In which their bigotted Forefathers trod,

Conſidering not the way's too eaſie and too broad.

Abſtain from Vice, if nothing elſe can move,

Thô other Reaſons inſufficient prove,

Let this prevail, a Father's Duty, and a Father's Love.

Leſt your Poſterity imitating you,

Quote your Authority for what they do;

Your vile Example ſhould infect the Times,

And you muſt bear your own and others Crimes.

There is a natural Veneration due

Not only from your Son, but for him too.

If an ill thought but comes into your head,

His preſence ought to ſtrike that Rebel dead,

And ev'n the Cradle-Infant ſtifle the miſdeed:

[[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=77) Like
Hercules that in his Swadling-bands,

Two Serpents cruſh'd between his Infant-hands.

Contemn not Children that are young and green,

They're old enough to imitate your ſin.

Beſides with what Authority, what face

Can you reprove a Child for want of Grace?

And never think your ſelf how many grains

Muſt be allow'd for your own ſhallow Brains?

'Tis a conſiderable thing thou'ſt done,

In getting of a true and lawful Son,

And adding to thy People's number one:

But that's not all; fit him for Peace or War,

The Clergys Pulpit, or the Lawyers Bar,

The Tradeſman's Shop, or honeſt Ploughman's Share.

Capacitate him for ſome good Vocation,

The Service of his God, his King and Nation:

Elſe to what purpoſe is this Propagation?

The Vultures leave their Storehouſe in the Fields,

And bring their young ones what that Store-houſe yields.

Theſe, as they older grow, hunt the ſame Prey

From their Dams mouths they gobled t'other day.

Breed up your Children well, on that depends

Their future State; their good or their bad ends.

To other Vices Youth it ſelf is prone,

Sordidneſs, that unnatural ſin, alone

Muſt be inculcated, nor dares appear

Without the Mask of provident and ſevere.

[[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=78) By theſe
inſinuations ground he gains,

Then wins the Field, and as a Tyrant reigns.

Nor is it ſtrange the covetous Gripe ſhould be

Prais'd for the vertue of Frugality,

That all reſpect to his bald pate be pay'd,

A long experienc'd Artist in his Trade!

Whoſe Furnace melts down the rich Ore of grounds!

Whoſe Hammer beats out Pennies into Pounds!

Rare Alchymist! makes Money out of Mould!

Rare Midas! at a touch turns all to Gold!

Now he that do's this pinching Art profeſs,

Will only Brother Miſer's practice bleſs,

And to his ſilver God aſcribe true happineſs.

Him will he teach his Children to adore,

Tell them there is no Hell but to be poor.

That Heaven's Treaſure lies in ſwelling Bags,

The Mark of all Believers holy Rags.

(Vice has her Horn-book and ſucceſſive Schools,

And ſteps by method Rudiments and Rules.

The quickest Wits can't all at once be taught;

'Twas by degrees that Mithridates brought

Poyſon to be no Poyſon, but a cordial Draught.)

Here then he enters Children that are young,

Infants who have not yet well loos'd their liſping tongue.

To little ſordid things firſt works their Brain,

Then to inſatiable deſires of gain.

[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=78) No
Maſters but muſt Graduates firſt be,

Vice will not truſt a Novice with the Key

That picks the Lock of her Philoſophy.

See how the Wretch feeds on a buried Chest,

With Famine ſtarv'd, of golden Dreams poſſeſt!

See how he will his Servants of their Wages cheat!

And grutches every fragment that they eat!

Each fragment of dry cruſt, thô mouldy Bread,

What! Servants pamper'd? upon Sallads fed?

See how he locks up Cabbage, Sprouts, and Leeks!

A parted Onion, counting all the ſtreaks!

See how wild rotten Olives he'll devour!

And quaff off dregs, Vinegar not ſo ſour!

On his own Birth-day, through a ſmall Crow's quill,

Foul ſtinking Oyl upon his Herbs diſtil:

In raging Dog-Stars putrefying heat

Bring out a Meſs of yeſterdays minc'd Meat.

On Beds of Straw free choice of pennance lie,

The Swines Alcove is richer in the Stie.

Frugality! of a Sprat a Dinner makes;

For change of Raiment in the Dung-hill rakes.

Hang ſneaking! for a Feaſt in his best Cloaths,

He to the Beggar-boys a mumping goes.

In Winter runs to Bed before the Sun,

With Turfs and Ruſh-lights he ſhall be undone.

But to what purpoſe doſt thou hoard up Pelf,

To ruin Prodigals, and cheat thy ſelf?

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=79) Why like
the Bee thy time for nothing waſt?

Nor of the fruits of all thy labours taſt?

Honey for others luxury prepare?

A Beggar to the World, rich only to thy Heir.

Why be a Pimp to proſtitute thy ſtore?

Like Damocles hungry, like a* Cynick poor.

Thy Soul is in a Dropſie, and her thirſt

Will then be ſatisfy'd when ſhe can burst;

Elſe pour down millions, ſtill thou art not well,

But thy inordinate deſires with Riches ſwell,

Thy Sieve ſtill gapes, and yet can nothing hold:

Craſſus his Cure was a ſweet Drench of melted Gold.

He that has leaſt of Wealth, deſires it leaſt:

Content is happineſs: Enough's a Feaſt.

When two Farms will not do, a third you'll buy,

And ceaſe to purchaſe with Eternity.

You cannot ſee a Neighbours Vineyard yield

A plenteous Vintage, or a fruitful Field

A better crop of Corn, but you muſt long,

All my own, cries Extortion, right or wrong.

Such things are branded with notorious ſhame,

Loud ſounds the Trumpet of an evil Fame.

Words are but wind, Riches to me are more,

Than to be call'd an honeſt man, but poor.

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=79)
Yes,—Wealth includes Proſperity and Eaſe,

Security from pains, peace, plenty, what you pleaſe!

'Tis ſtrange to think how times degenerate!

That which was formerly a good Eſtate,

Goes for a trifle: Avarice ſo abounds,

The Prodigal's ſo profuſe, ſo rich the Miſer's grounds.

Avarice, that ſwoln Python! that Big-bellied Devil!

Who bore, and bred the Hydra of all evil.

That firſt the uſe of Steel and Poyſon taught,

And bare-fac'd Murther into faſhion brought:

For he that is ſo eager to be rich,

The more he rubs, the more he frets his Itch.

Pygmalion thus, of Homicides not the leaſt,

For Money ſlew a Brother and a Priest.

Live with your little hills and huts content,

'Tis better in your Bodies to be pent,

Than in your minds. Thus good Fabricius ſaid,

And Curius upon Rapes from Earthen Veſſels fed.

Theſe Precepts did thoſe reverend Sages give,

And by their practice taught us how to live.

He that the Yoke of Poverty can bear,

Nor under want ſinks deeper in deſpair:

Need not into the mouth of danger run,

Kill or be kill'd, at once made or undone.

This would the Ancients on their Children preſs;

In Vertue only lies true happineſs.

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=80) Now the
old covetous Gripe like Stentor bauls,

His Clerk at Midnight to his buſineſs calls.

When the poor ſhivering Youngster ſcarce can hold

His Pen, for the extremity of cold.

Riſe! riſe! you Sluggard, riſe! Fitzherbert look,

Or carefully peruſe the Statute-book.

Copy out this Indenture; make a Deed,

And give me an account of what you read.

Quibbles have neither profit, nor delight,

Sophiſtry nothing tempting to invite:

Then give your mind to any other thing;

Preſent a Panegyrick to the King:

Even to thee his bounty may extend,

A Mandate for a Fellowſhip to lend.

For a Lieutenant's or a Captain's place,

Shew your broad Porter's ſhoulders to his Grace.

Nine-pin Legs, Hairy Noſtrils, brawny Fiſt,

Be ſure your Name'll be enter'd in the Liſt.

But if you tremble when you hear a Gun,

And an Alarum rather makes you run,

Turn Chimny-ſweeper, Broker; never care

What Envy may object, but deal in any Ware;

For Gain ſmells ſweet, come it from what it will,

None will ſay, Gain has an offenſive ſmell.

He hugs his Gold that in the Kennel rakes,

Come it from Common-ſhore, or Sink, or Jakes.

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=80) None
queſtion whence a man grows rich, or how;

But money must be had, that we all know.

This every Infant learns of his old Dad,

Without it there's no Farthing to be had.

The little Boys and Girls theſe Terms of Art,

Before their A b c, muſt have by heart.

Why all this ſtir to teach a Child to be

No ſtranger to his Parents knavery?

Alas! there's no ſuch need for him to kiſs the Rod,

'Tis eaſie following where his Father trod.

He's an apt Scholar, let him but alone,

When's corrupt Native Seeds full ripe are grown;

He cannot miſs his Father's fatal Shelf,

Yet he has had no time to ſhew himſelf.

When come to age, and in his hot mad blood,

And all the Doctor's practice underſtood:

He'll ſwear, forſwear, in Villany take delight,

Kill his rich Wife upon his Wedding-night;

And when the witty Rogue has done the feat,

Put a Jeſt on't, and laugh at the conceit:

I've purify'd my Gold, cries he, from droſs,

And ſeparated my Lumber without loſs.

Whilſt others ſweat and labour night and day,

By Sea and Land through unknown places ſtray,

He has a ſhorter cut, a more compendious way.

'Twas but the letting a young Widdow blood,

That betwixt him and Miſer's Heaven ſtood:

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=81) Now
he'll be rich, and in a little time,

A new invention! and a rare deſign!

The Reaſon's evident, the caſe is plain,

Sin comes into the world not without guilt, but pain.

You! no not you! ne're taught your Child to be

A ſordid Hoarder, baſe, or niggarlie:

What then? thoſe covetous Seeds he had from thee.

They're naturally engrafted in his mind,

And he's a Miſer not by Rule, but Kind.

A ſordid Principle was in his blood,

And as he's yours, he'll never come to good.

He that commends Frugality, and allows

The leaſt ſuſpicious action in his houſe,

Of Errour his own Judgment he convicts;

And whilſt his Reaſon thus he contradicts,

Youth of that ſlip an ill improvement make,

That as an univerſal Licenſe take,

To cheat, defraud, and ſwear out an Eſtate,

Do any thing to be rich, do any thing to be great.

Give them an Inch, and they will take an Ell,

Blow you the Fire, their greedy Paſſions ſwell,

They think they muſt exceed, or elſe they can't excel.

You've bred a Viper, that in time will eat

Through your own Bowels, and begin the cheat

Upon your ſelf: ſo the wild ſavage Bear

Will his own Maſter firſt to pieces tear.

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=81) Half his
allowance he'll to Saffold give,

To know how long th' Old Man is like to live.

Gapes for your Gold, and curſes every Knell,

That he miſtakes to be your Paſſing-bell.

At length impatient for your lingring doom,

He will not let it ſoft and fairly come:

Saves Hell the trouble, and will Fate foreſtal,

Be Executioner, and have at all.

From your own fleſh and bloud you're forc'd to guard your Throat,

And carry up and down an Antidote.

Hail Democritus! tune up your Lungs for mirth!

Here's the Ludibrium of Heaven and Earth,

That might your laughter for your lives engroſs,

To ſee refined Clay thus hoard up droſs.

With pains, and care, and danger, graſp up ſtore,

With pains, and care, and danger, keep it more,

But in reverſion rich, emphatically poor!

The Miſer's Life's a pleaſant Comedy!

None ſo ridiculous a Fool as he!

The Dancer on the Ropes leſs laughter makes,

H'as better grounds for what he undertakes;

By hazarding his neck he gets his Bread,

And Nature to ſuſtain, ventures his head:

Like Nero, you for Mounts of Golden Ore,

To tumble up and down on ſilver floor.

See what vaſt throngs of Veſſels plough the Main,

And all to find out unknown Worlds of Gain.

[[Page 148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=82) By
Hercules his Pillars take their rounds,

Shoot Gulfs, like Remus leap o'er Nature's bounds.

'Tis worth the while to run the riſque of Fate,

Stare Death i'th' face, to raiſe a vaſt Eſtate.

He that to this degree of confidence arrives,

Thô Pluto be his Guide, by Pluto thrives;

'Tis not one Fury, nor one Devil drives.

He that one plank from Hell can lie and ſleep,

With both the Indies loaden, dance along the deep,

Thô he to ſave his Purſe may well forbear

Revenge upon his Cloaths, and pulling off his Hair:

Yet Bedlam for him groans, Bedlam ne're had

One under her correction half ſo mad.

A Storm comes hovering, and Phoebus ſhrouds

His watry Rays under eclipſing Clouds;

Cimmerian darkneſs falls upon the Air,

Black as th' Abyſs, and hopeleſs as Deſpair;

Flaſhes of Lightning's all the light is given,

And Thunder-bolts rowl o're the Plains of Heaven;

Yet cries the Scrape: Trust my Aſtrologie,

Clear is the lowring Sky, and calm the troubled Sea.

Theſe are but Lambent flames, what men afraid of light?

Of harmleſs Crackers in a Summers night?

Which a ſcorcht Air and ſultry heat produce?

Come hoiſe your Sails, and let your Rudders looſe,

Let frowning Heaven ſcare us then no more,

The God will ſave me whom I ſtill adore.

[[Page 149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=82) Blind!
vain! unhappy man! perhaps to night

His Soul to Charon goes, and his delight

To Pluto offers him a Sacrifice:

The Conj'rer ſo by his Familiar dies.

Methinks I ſee him ſtrugling hard for breath,

Oh, how he gnaws his Purſe, and grinds his teeth!

And that muſt be his life, or that muſt be his death!

If Fortune favour, he comes ſafe to ſhore,

Whom all the World could not ſuffice before,

Nor Tagus nor Pactolus with their Golden Ore.

Now without Houſe or Home, ready to ſtarve,

Torn Rags to hide his nakedneſs will ſerve,

Fragments of mouldy Bread, and ſcraps of Meat,

Which Beggars proffer'd, would refuſe to eat,

Go down ſo chearfully, and oh! a Cruſt's ſo ſweet!

Oh! the delicious Fare of Bread and Cheeſe!

Oh! how the Miſer begs upon his knees!

To get a Farthing do's his miſeries relate,

And prove his Shipwrack by Certificate:

And this is to be rich! and this is to be great!

Wealth with ſuch trouble and ſuch care procur'd,

Wealth ſo impoſſible to be ſecur'd

From Fire and Thieves, turns but to little Gains;

Nothing can recompence eternal pains.

C—n that rich poor man, can take no reſt,

With ſlaviſh Fears like Mill-ſtones on his breaſt;

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=83) Muſt
have three ſturdy Fellows always on their guard,

And for their uſe Engines and Arms prepar'd.

Yet jealous Whims his Eyes ſtill waking keep,

Poor C—n cannot take a wink of ſleep.

There's no rude hand would touch the Cynick's Den,

If burnt or broken by malicious men;

He would another Tub to morrow make,

Or out of this a ſtately Lodging take.

This Alexander knew, and curs'd his Fate,

That caſt his Lot ſo much below the State

Of wiſe Diogenes, Diogenes the Great!

Small was the Shell, great the Inhabitant!

Who nothing had, and yet did nothing want!

Happier than he that fain would befor ever known,

Monarch, and God, and make the World his own:

Whoſe Glories would to Dangers ſoon betray,

Whoſe Dangers would his Glories far outweigh.

He that to Wiſdom's Light conforms his Soul,

Can never loſe his way, nor miſs the Goal.

No Deity is wanting to the Wiſe,

For Prudence is the best of Deities.

Which he that ſingle harbours in his breaſt,

In her alone comprehends all the reſt.

Fortune! thy Godhead ſo implor'd below,

Only to Fools and Mad-men thou doſt owe.

Thou doſt no God-like Attributes partake,

A Demy-Goddeſs of a Humane make!

[[Page 151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=83) If any
one will accept of my Advice,

To know juſt what Ingredients may ſuffice

To make up a good honeſt Livelihood,

Too little by Pretenders underſtood:

Firſt ℞ q. ſ. of Meat,

To keep out Cold and Hunger, freely eat

Of temp'rate Socrates his wholſom Diſh,

And take an ounce or two of Cowly's Wiſh.

Retire ſometime from Company by ſtealth,

For Meditation ſake, and for your health,

To Epicurus Garden, and there ſee

Nature in every Variety.

There every day ſome time for ſtudy ſhould be ſpent,

Eat freely of the only Fruit, Content.

Nature and Wiſdom always ſay the ſame,

Nature and Wiſdom here do differ but in name.

Still thirſts your Soul as if your Heart would break,

Another Julep then more uſual make,

Two thouſand pound for a Pearl-Cordial take.

Still can you make a Face? contract a Frown?

As if you could not get your Pect'ral Potion down?

Once more your former Cordial then repeat,

And add four thouſand pound to make it ſweet.

Still take you up a prejudice againſt this Receipt?

Then all the Wealth that both the Indies boaſt,

To this, were thrown away, and meerly lost:

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=84) Would
never ſatisfie your damn'd exceſs,

Nor in the leaſt contribute to true Happineſs.

—Omnis enim res,

Virtus, fama, decus, divina humanaque pulchris

Divitiis parent! quas qui conſtruxerit, ille

Clarus erit, fortis, juſtus! &c.

Horat. Sat. lib. 2. ſ. 3.

### 1.44. An EPIGRAM. To Mr. H. Northcote of Exeter-Colledge, Oxon.  
The Happy Miſer.

WHy ſhould we to this World our Souls en­ſlave,

That never yet true ſatisfaction gave,

That has no happineſs but in the Grave?

She throws us Pleaſures only to bereave,

To decay Subject, Subject to deceive,

They us, We them muſt once for ever leave.

Our Title's good no longer than our Life,

Our Friends inherit little elſe but Strife.

In death the Miſer's only happy found,

Who goes t' enjoy his Treaſure under ground.

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=84)

### 1.45. An EPIGRAM. In praiſe of John Pig's Diminutive Noſe, in imitation of
the Emperour Trajan's.  
To Mr. Frederick Colman.

WEll—all the Dyal-makers are undone!

Let Pig but turn his Noſle to the Sun,

'Twill ſerve for both Steeple and Weather-cock,

And on his Teeth tell Travellers what's a Clock.

### 1.46. Another out of Ammianus. To Mr. T. Woolley.  
Concerning John Pig's Mountainous Noſe and Quick-ſilver Feet.

WIth both his hands Pig cannot ſnight his Snout,

But he muſt go near half a mile about;

So long the Promontory of his Noſe!

So ſhort, ſo ſlender, are his Petty-toes!

Nor can he wind his horny Trunk with eaſe,

No—nor, to ſpeak the truth, hear himſelf ſneeze.

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=85) So far
that Marrow-bone's diſtant from his Ears,

He has not ſaid, God bleſs me, for this fifty years.

I'th' ſtrength of ſuch a Staff, Pig (as they talk)

May well from London to New-Caſtle take a walk.

### 1.47. To a young Lady reading the ſeventh Verſe of the firſt Chapter of
Proverbs.  
To Idera.

‘The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, &c.’

WHilſt the Contents of this one Verſe

So paſſionately you rehearſe,

In it we comprehended find

The perfect Copy of your Mind.

You teach us, and inform us too,

What we ſhould, and what you do.

This is your Noon, our early Dawn,

In miniature your Picture drawn.

Compendious Hiſtory of your Life:

In Vertue your victorious ſtrife:

Like wreſtling Jacob, whilſt you halt,

You make us bluſh at our Revolt.

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=85) Here in
this Looking-glaſs we ſee

The Beauties of your Soul, what we

Like you, and for your ſake deſire to be.

We came, and heard, and were undone!

With earthly flames the Fire begun,

When heavenly too conſpir'd to joyn

United Forces, humane and divine:

High Winds more dangerous than they;

In vain our Engines then we play:

When the chief Caſtle is burnt down,

'Tis more than time that we ſurrender up the Town.

### 1.48. To his Valentine Hemiera, Madam A. R.

WEll▪—Fortune! proſtrate at thy feet

I'll do my Penance in a Sheet;

For want of ſight I call'd thee blind,

All thy Revenge was to be kind.

Amongſt the Lots upon thy Throne,

Thou Omnipreſent ſat'ſt alone.

I laid my trembling hand on all,

And as I took them, let them fall.

But confident in thee my Guide,

That which did ſhrinking from me ſlide,

I gently preſt, and it comply'd.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=86) With
this encouragement I draw,

But when the happy Name I ſaw,

Ye Gods! with what amazement ſtruck!

I kiſs'd my Valentine and bleſt my Luck?

A. firſt was offer'd to my ſight,

With a ſweet reliſh to invite

My over-eager Appetite.

My Soul reſolv'd on life or death,

Of an auſpicious ALPHA full, took breath.

Then to ſuck Honey out of Love,

To the ripe Roſe did next remove.

Her ſhe rob'd of all her Red,

And on her fragrant ſweetneſs fed.

My raviſht Soul her ſtation took

Here, and durſt no further look.

R was the Centre of my Heart:

R my only vital part:

R pleas'd and ſatisfy'd my taſt:

As Roſes beautiful, as Lillies chaſt.

Pythagoras may his y admire,

'Tis R that ſets my Heart on fire:

R never yet came out of time;

R is my Reaſon and my Rhime.

R ſo ſweetly runs along,

R the burden of my Song.

But ſince R at a diſtance only darts a Smile,

Which at a diſtance muſt recoil;

[[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=86) My Vow I
firſt will ſend, before I bring

In perſon a Religious Offering.

Here this I abſent lay before her Shrine,

Kiſſes by proxy to communicate my deſign,

Remember Eaſter, and Good Morrow, Valentine.

### 1.49. To Idera. Who would not be ſeen to ſteal a Look from Duſeraſtes, by
turning her back.

Malo me Galatea petit laſciva puella,

Et fugit ad ſalices, & ſe cupit ante videri.

Vir. Bucol. Ecl. 3.

1.

WHy, Cupid, thus at hide and ſeek?

Why all thoſe Bluſhes on your Cheek?

Are you aſham'd that priviledge to give,

That man ſhould ſee your face, and live?

Or would you at a diſtance keep,

And never kiſs Endymion but aſleep?

2.

Are you afraid that ſhould your Sun ſhine bright,

Whilſt Duſeraſtes only prays for Light,

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=87) My
dazled Eyes with too much glory blind,

Earth and my ſelf ſhould hardly find?

Or that I ſhould to Phaeton's Wiſh aſpire,

To ſet my little World on fire?

3.

Why ſo cruel? why ſo coy?

Never, never to enjoy?

Have we profan'd Love's Deity all this while,

Ah, Madam! now to ſteal a Smile?

This is with time to kep Virginity,

And take the meaſure of Eternity.

### 1.50. To Hemiera.

Utraque formoſa eſt: operoſae cultibus ambae:

Artibus in dubio eſt haec ſit, an illa, prior.

Pulerior hâ illa eſt, haec eſt quoque pulcrior illâ:

Et magis haec nobis, & magis illa placet.

Quid geminas, Erycina, meos ſine fine dolores?

Nonne erat in curas una puella ſatis?

Ov. Amor. lib. 2. eleg. 10.

1.

TEll me, individual Pair!

Beyond a Mediocrity of Fair!

Whoſe Beauties Heaven can ſcarce improve;

Whom I was born to love:

[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=87)

2.

How ſhall I divide my Heart?

Tell me, ye that have there a double part.

Diviſion multiplies my pains;

Diſtraction lays more weight upon my Chains.

3.

When ſtately Idera I ſee,

I think of Jove's high love for Semele:

Love that in Thunder and in Lightning came;

Oh! my Soul burns to die by ſuch a flame.

4.

Hemiera, by Nature kind,

Has Idera's face wrought in her mind.

Her ſweet temper melts my Soul:

Which Idera's imperious Eyes controul.

5.

Idera with a haughty Air,

Affects to be thought ſomething more than fair.

Hemiera is as good, as Idera's great:

High, courtly Idera! made for me and State.

6.

Hemiera's melancholy Face

Has leſs Charms, but more of Grace:

Does both my Pity and my Love,

Thoſe Springs of my Affections move.

[[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=88)

7.

Idera's comely Winter's pride,

With Heſperian Fruits ſupply'd;

Other proud Summers dare not vy,

Nor in her preſence wear their Livery.

8.

Hemiera's Autumn's youthful Bloud

Does ſooner bloſſom, ſooner bud,

Than other Springs with April-ſhowers,

Diſſolv'd into ubiquity of Flowers.

9.

Idera on point of Honour ſtands,

My Soul by right of conquest ſhe demands:

All that of my ſelf is mine,

I to Hemiera reſign.

10.

But if Idera, with diſdain,

Would make me fear, not love her, 'tis in vain:

She'll repent, when 'tis too late:

I'll ſooner undergo Saguntum's Fate.

Me mea diſperdat nullo prohibente puella,

Si ſatis una potest: ſi minus una, duae.

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=88)

### 1.51. To P. P. being to run a Race after Dinner.

SHarp Gormandizer! heavy-heel'd Racer! run

With nimble Chaps; and to ſupply them, eat

A hearty Meal with your defective Feet:

By this exchange the Race is eas'ly won.

### 1.52. An Epigram out of Alphaeus Mitylenaeus. To Mr. Humphry Lind.  
Mediocrity.

WE envy not, Philaphelus! the Great,

Nor would pull down their Pinacles of State:

Nor prop them up, projecting to aſpire:

A Competency only we deſire.

Yet Poverty we would not hug as ſuch,

Leſt ne quid nimis we ſhould love too much.

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=89)

### 1.53. Another. To Mr. Denham.  
Diogenes in his Kingdom.

WHen the old Cynicks ſhade with Croeſus met,

He ſmil'd to ſee the meager Monarch fret;

And thus accoſted him—But why ſo pale?

What, doos the Yellow Jaundice ſtill prevail?

No—Croeſus! no—for all your earthly ſtore,

You, call'd to an account, not I, am poor.

All that I had, here I have with me brought,

You've travell'd to another World with nothing fraught.

### 1.54. An EPITAPH on old Oliver.  
To Mr. Andrew Snapes.

LIe light, thou Earth, on Noll's ſoft Noddle;

His Corps in Putrefaction coddle.

Lie light, that Dogs may ſmell and rave

To ſcratch the Tyrant from his Grave:

That Dogs may lay his Carcaſe bare,

And Meſſes of his Mummy tear.

Dogs his polluted Gelly ſup,

And dig the Devil's Relicks up.

[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=89)

### 1.55. A Greek EPIGRAM. A ſhort Life and a ſweet. To his dear Friend Mr.
Edw. Taylour.

MY Fortune-tellers this ill Caution give,

Oh! 'tis ſad news, I have not long to live.

So ſay my Stars and they, but what care I?

Sooner or later, all muſt die.

But let us ſtay and drink before we go,

'Tis a way I never went, and do not know.

Bacchus is well acquainted with the Road,

And never goes this Stage without a load.

On ſuch a Horſe if I below can ride,

Why ſhould I go on foot without a Guide?

### 1.56. To Mr. Henry Palmer, going to Sea.

THrow not my life away, of your own free,

'Tis tender Mother Earth, but Stepdame Sea.

[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=90)

### 1.57. To Mr. Butler.  
A Greek EPIGRAM.

I In the flower of my days was poor,

Now Age comes creeping with unwelcome ſtore.

Unhappy ſtill! I can't my ſelf enjoy:

My hopes of Heaven two Extreams deſtroy;

And will not let me my deſires fulfil,

Then want of Power, now a want of Will.

### 1.58. To his dear Friend Mr. Will. Percival. That Poetry is Witchcraft.

WIth Legion ſure the Muſes are poſſeſt,

That play the Devil in every inſpir'd breast.

What Epidemick Plague runs in mens Veins?

What an eternal dribling of the Brains?

My greateſt Enemy I'd wiſh no worſe,

Than th' Itch of Scribling, and a Poet's Curſe.

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=90)

### 1.59. Antipater's Epitaph upon Homer.  
To Mr. John Penneck.

HEre lies (with reverence to his ſacred Name)

The Hero's Herald, and the Trump of Fame,

The World's Poetick Tongue, the Muſes Flame.

The Prophet of the Gods, and Greece's Sun,

Homer that comprehends them all in one.

### 1.60. To Mr. Nat. Smith.  
On a covetous old Miſer, a religious Gripe.

W—the Miſer's Treaſurer, old and grey,

For fear of want, would make himſelf away:

His Houſe in order ſet, he falls to Pray'r;

Then makes his Will, and leaves himſelf ſole Heir.

But what a pity 'tis his labour's lost,

At leaſt a Halter will a Farthing coſt.

No—he had rather Hell's Election wait,

Than buy a Hanging at ſo dear a rate.

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=91)

### 1.61. To Mr. King.  
A Greek Epigram againſt the Aſtrologers.

HOW canſt thou, Aſtrius, Heaven and Earth ſurvey?

Thou little crum of a ſmall lump of Clay!

Firſt know thy ſelf, thy own Dimenſions find,

And take the narrow compaſs of thy Mind.

For if thou canſt not meaſure ſuch a Clod,

What wouldſt thou do with all the wondrous works. of God?

### 1.62. To Mr. Hen. Fane.

POor fooliſh Dick, ſtung by his Brother Gnat,

Jump'd out of Bed to fetch old Proctor's Cat.

Mouſer, thô a brave Souldier, loſt his ſport,

For Mouſer could not ſpeak the Language of the Court;

Nor underſtand what formal Priſcian ſaid

In Babel's Tongue, thô othewiſe well bred.

With that Don Quixot's Rival would engage

* Gingerbread Gentleman in warlike rage,

[[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=91) Rapt out
a terrible dimidiate Oath,

And in his own defence, Sir, challeng'd both:

His Rapier out of ruſty Scabbard drew;

But Puſs, who his undaunted Courage knew,

All on a ſweat, down Stairs like Lightning flew.

Nor ſhall he ſo eſcape by all the Gods,

(Says Sancho Pancho Dick) for two to one is odds.

Spaniard tied neck and heels he laid upon his back,

And hung him by his Whiskers on the Rack.

Friend Gnat! (quoth he) thô now I'm almoſt ſpent,

Yet thy affront I cannot but reſent.

All night I'll make thee at a diſtance keep,

Put on revenge when I put off my ſleep.

This ſaid, as merciful as he was ſtout,

Knight Errant put his* Royal Candle out.

(Candles Traditional, ſo long, ſo large, ſo white,

Worthy to give the King and Dicky light;

Worthy to make a† Fairy-ring on Birth-day-night.

Fit Torches for a Sacrifice to Clio,

A heavenly Muſe made of a waxen Io.)

And then a Hymn Poean the Champion ſang,

Defy'd Gnat, Bug, or Flea, all the Backbiting Gang.

[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49425&page=92) Afraid
that they ſhould hear, in Whiſpers ſaid, Good Night!

And hugg'd himſelf to think they could not ſee to bite.

### 1.63. An EPIGRAM out of Plato.  
To Madam Amara.

I Lais! once a heavenly Whore!

But now thoſe happy days are o'er!

Sweet Lais! Divine Lais! now no more.

This Looking-glaſs to Venus give,

My too true Repreſentative:

Since what I am I would not ſee,

Since what I was I cannot be.

Me verò primum dulces ante omnia Muſae

(Quarum ſacra fero ingenti perculſus amore)

Accipiant.

Virg.

FINIS.

Notes

|

Oreſtes, who kill'd his Mother.

†

Pylades.

* 

This, ac­cording to Tully's Maxim in his Treatiſe De Amicitiâ, proves, that
theſe two could not be true Friends; for, ſays he, Amicitia ni­ſi in bonis
eſſe non poteſt. Quid igitur? an caedes, bonum?

‖

An Apoſtrophie to his Friend.

†

An Alluſion to the Phoenix.

* 

‘Ceres in her Travels over all the World, in queſt of her Daugh­ter
Proſerpine, that was ſtole away by Pluto, meeting with Nep­tune, who by his
troubleſome company increaſed her grief, ſhe turn'd her ſelf into a Mare, and
coming to Styx, a River in Arcadia, where ſhe ſaw her Face, ſhe dyed the Water
of a black colour.’ Ptolem. Hephaeſt. Lib. 3.

* 

Polyzaelus a Cyrenian, who never laughed. v. Ptolemaeus Hephaeſt. Lib. 3.

†

Agelaſtos, a Stone ſo called from Ceres her ſorrow for the loſs of her
Daughter, not far from the Well Callichorus. v. Apollod. Lib. 1. Cap. 5. § 1.

* 

Leucas, a Rock ſo called from Leucus one of the Companions of Ulyſſes, who was
ſlain by Antiphus, as Homer tells the Story. Whoſoever leap'd down from the
top of this Rock, was freed from the ſlavery and tyranny of Love, as Jupiter,
Venus, Artemiſia, Hippomedon, and ſeveral others experienc'd. See the reaſon
of this wonderful Vertue, that was ſo peculiar to this Rock, given by
Pto­lemaeus Hephaeſtion. Lib. 7.

†

Hercules upon ſome quarrel with the Centaurs for broaching a new Hogſhead of
their Wine for his own drinking, as he ſhot at Ela­tus one of their company,
the Arrow ſtruck through his arm into his Friend Chiron's knee; who by reaſon
of his immortality, was forc'd to endure a great deal of miſery; but at laſt
was releas'd, being per­mitted to change life for death with Prometheus. v.
Apollodor▪ Lib. 2. Cap. 4. § 4.

* 

According to the old Proverb, Cynicè vivere, (i. e.) canino more vivere, non
ob impudentiam tantum ſed & ob ſordes. Cynicè  [...]. Torrentius.

* 

Gingerbread Gentleman; this is applicable either to his ſhapes, or the old
ſtory of his Weekly-Allowance, which was a Gingerbread pair of Gloves, and a
Gingerbread Ring.

* 

Such as his Worſhip made his boast, the King and his Father only burnt.

†

On his Birth-day at night he cut a pound of Candles in halves, and ſetting
them in a Ring, light them, and danc'd round them, ſinging a Hymn to his Muſe
Clio, whom he worſhips in the form of a waxen Cow, and ſacrifices to her, to
the end ſhe may inſpire him more fully.

[Home](/)

Goodall, Charles, 1671-1689.. Date: 1689  

