## (unknown project)

# Choice presidents upon all Acts of Parliament relating to the office and
duty of a justice of peace. With necessary notes and instructions thereupon
taken out of the said Acts of Parliament, and other particular cases in law
adjudg'd therein. As also a more useful method of making up Court-Rolls than
hath been hitherto known or published in print. By Rich. Kilburne, Esq; late
one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the county of Kent, and
principal of Staple-Inn.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=1)

CHOICE PRESIDENTS Upon all Acts of Parliament, Relating to the OFFICE and DUTY
OF A JUSTICE of PEACE. WITH Necessary Notes and Instructions there­upon taken
out of the said Acts of Parliament, and other particular Cases in Law adjudg'd
therein. As also A more usefull method of making up Court-Rolls than hath been
hitherto known or published in print. By Rich. Kilburne, Esq late one of His
Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the County of Kent, and Principal of
Staple-Inn.

The second Edition, with many usefull Additions. Made publick by G. F. of
Grayes-Inn, Esq

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Rich. and Edw. Atkins, Esquires, for Richard
Tonson within Grayes-Inn-Gate next Grayes-Inn-Lane. 1681.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=2)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=3)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=3)

## THE Publisher's Preface TO THE READER.

THE good Reception this Trea­tise hath met with in the World, hath put me upon
the Revi­sing of several of the Author's Papers that came to my hands since
his Death, which, for the publick good, I have with all Faithfulness and
Candour (strictly observing his own Method) reduced into order. But withall, I
cannot but let the Reader know, that tho' the Title Courts be added to this
Collection, which at first sight may seem something Foreign to the rest of the
Matter, yet it being col­lected by the same Author (who was an Attorney as
well as a Justice of the Peace,) and his Design alwaies
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=4) being to
improve the Method of ma­king up Court-Rolls in a more suc­cinct and
beneficial manner than o­thers understood, I thought it my Duty to oblige all
Persons concerned in that Practice, by incerting that Title in the second
Impression of this Book. The other Additions the Reader will find extreamly
suitable to the first Intention of the Author, being Precedents which have
recei­ved their Forms from late Acts of Parliament, and otherwise since the
Author's Death to the time of this second Publication. Only I must further add
that no small pains hath been taken in this second Edition, to fit the several
Authorities quoted in the Margin to the last Impressions of the Statutes at
large, and Dalton's Iustice, which I hope will find a fa­vourable Acceptance
and Esteem from the Purchaser, which is the utmost desire of

G. F.

Grayes-Inn, May 12. 1681.

## Table of contents

  * THE Publisher's Preface TO THE READER.
  * 1\. OF ALEHOUSES, &c.
    * 1.1. A Licence to keep an Alehouse.
    * 1.2. Or thus:
    * 1.3. A License to Brew, and keep an Alehouse.
    * 1.4. A Recognizance thereupon.
    * 1.5. Another Recognizance for an Alehouse-keeper.
      * 1.5.2. The Condition.
    * 1.6. Against an Inn-keeper, Alehousekeeper, &c. suffering to Tipple▪ 
    * 1.7. A Warrant to levy Money for Tippling.
    * 1.8. A Mittimus (for an Alehouse-keeper suffering to Tipple) for want of Distress.
    * 1.9. A Mittimus for an Unlicensed Alehouse-keeper.
    * 1.10. The like upon the Statute 3 Car. the first Conviction.
    * 1.11. The like, for the second Conviction.
    * 1.12. The like, for the third Conviction.
    * 1.13. A Warrant for Witnesses against an Unlicensed Alehouse-keeper.
    * 1.14. For Suppression of an Alehouse for Disorder.
    * 1.15. For renewing Licenses of Alehousekeepers.
    * 1.16. Against an Alehouse-keeper for selling less than Measure.
    * 1.17. A Mittimus for selling less than Measure for want of Distress.
    * 1.18. For Suppressing an Alehouse after Suppression at the Quarter-Sessions.
    * 1.19. A Licence to keep an Alehouse with Articles.
      * 1.19.1. The Condition.
  * 2\. Apprentices.
    * 2.1. A Warrant to put out poor Children Apprentices.
    * 2.2. An Indenture for an Apprentice so put out.
    * 2.3. A Warrant against them which refuse to take Apprentices.
    * 2.4. A Warrant against a Master for abusing his Apprentice.
    * 2.5. A Warrant against a disorderly Apprentice.
    * 2.6. A Discharge of an Apprentice.
    * 2.7. A Warrant against one that departeth out of Service before his time expired.
  * 3\. Bail.
    * 3.1. Recognizances for Bail.
    * 3.2. A Condition to prefer a Bill and give Evidence.
      * 3.2.1. If at the Sessions, then say:
    * 3.3. A Condition to give Evidence.
      * 3.3.1. If it be to appear at the Sessions, then say:
      * 3.3.2. A Condition for Felony or suspicion of Felony.
      * 3.3.3. If it be to appear at the Sessions, then say:
      * 3.3.4. If the Fellon be in Prison.
  * 4\. Bastards.
    * 4.1. For the apprehending and conveying the Woman to the House of Correction.
    * 4.2. A Mittimus of the Mother of a Bastard-Child to the House of Correction.
    * 4.3. A Warrant against the Mother (for the second Offence) to commit to the House of Correction, and find Sureties of good Behaviour.
    * 4.4. To convene the Mother and reputed Father.
    * 4.5. A Warrant against the reputed Father of a Bastard-Child.
    * 4.6. An Order for Releif of the Parish touching a Bastard-Child, and for punishing the Mother and reputed Father.
    * 4.7. A Warrant to be written under the Order aforesaid, for giving notice thereof to the Mother and reputed Father.
    * 4.8. A Warrant for the Punishment of the Mother and reputed Father of a Bastard-Child.
    * 4.9. A Warrant and Mittimus against the reputed Father for not obeying the Justices Order.
    * 4.10. An Order for Relief of the Parish in case of a Bastard out of the Estate of the reputed Father.
    * 4.11. A Warrant for Punishment of the reputed Father of a Bastard-Child, for not keeping the Child, and obeying the Order.
    * 4.12. A Warrant for sending a Bastard-Child (found wandring) to the place of its Birth.
    * 4.13. A Warrant for apprehending a Woman on suspicion of having murthered her Bastard-Child.
    * 4.14. A Condition of a Recognizance for the Appearance of the reputed Father of a Bastard-Child.
    * 4.15. The Condition of a Recognizance, of one charged to be the Father of a Bastard-Child, before its Birth, to appear at Sessions.
    * 4.16. A Condition to discharge Church-wardens and Parishioners of a Child born in the Parish.
  * 5\. Good Behaviour.
    * 5.1. A Warrant and Mittimus for Good behaviour.
    * 5.2. Causes for the Good behaviour.
    * 5.3. Another Warrant for Good behaviour.
    * 5.4. A Mittimus to the Gaol for one that refuses to find Sureties for his Good behaviour.
    * 5.5. A Supersedeas for the Good behaviour.
    * 5.6. A Recognizance thereupon.
    * 5.7. A Condition of a Recognizance for the same.
    * 5.8. Another Condition.
    * 5.9. Another Condition.
  * 6\. Bridges.
    * 6.1. A Warrant to a Hundred for Assessing a proportionable Rate of a Tax (appointed by the Body of the County) towards repair of the County Bridges.
    * 6.2. A Warrant to make a Tax for County Bridges repaired.
    * 6.3. A Warrant to collect a Tax for repairing County Bridges.
    * 6.4. A Warrant for not paying the same.
  * 7\. Carriages for the King.
    * 7.1. A Warrant to provide Carriages.
    * 7.2. Another Warrant for providing of Carriages for the King's use.
    * 7.3. A Warrant to levy the Penalty for not appearing with Carriages for the King upon notice.
    * 7.4. A Mittimus for one that doth impress or take away any Cart or other thing from the Owner, under pretence of power from the Greencloath for Carriage of His Majestie's Provisions, without lawfull Authority.
  * 8\. Certificates.
    * 8.1. A Certificate from the Minister and chief Inhabitants of the Parish of a man's Honesty.
    * 8.2. A Certificate for continuing of an Alehouse-keeper.
    * 8.3. A Certificate for the time of the Birth of a Child.
    * 8.4. A Certificate for one that hath not been touched of the Evil.
  * 9\. Chimney-money.
    * 9.1. A Mittimus for disturbing a Collectour.
  * 10\. Church.
    * 10.1. For not coming to Church.
    * 10.2. To levy the Forfeiture for not coming to Church.
    * 10.3. A Mittimus to the Gaol of one not repairing to Church (for want of Distress.)
    * 10.4. To Distrain for a Church-Tax.
    * 10.5. Against a Minister for not reading Prayers, &c. once in a month.
    * 10.6. A Mittimus for Preaching whilst Disabled.
  * 11\. Coals.
    * 11.1. Upon Complaint touching Coals.
    * 11.2. For delivering a Moiety of such Coals as are sold contrary to the Statute to the Informer.
    * 11.3. Touching Prices of Coals.
  * 12\. Constables Charges.
    * 12.1. A Warrant for making of Constables.
    * 12.2. Or thus,
    * 12.3. A Warrant for a Tax for the Constable's Charges in the Execution of his Office.
    * 12.4. To appear and shew cause for their not paying the said Charges.
    * 12.5. For refusing to appear to shew Cause for not paying the said Charges.
    * 12.6. To levy the Charges upon their refusing to pay the same.
    * 12.7. A Condition of a Recognizance to appear and answer the not paying the same at next Sessions.
    * 12.8. A Warrant for levying 3 s. 4 d. upon a Constable for neglect of his Duty, in giving an account of Rogues, Vagabonds, &c.
    * 12.9. A Warrant to sell the Goods of an Offender that refuseth to bear his own Charges to the Gaol.
    * 12.10. A Warrant to make a Tax for conveying a Felon to the Gaol.
  * 13\. Conventicles.
    * 13.1. A Condition of a Recognizance in case of an Appeal made touching Conventicles.
    * 13.2. A Record of a Conventicle.
    * 13.3. A Record concerning Conventicles where several persons are convicted.
    * 13.4. A Record of the Conviction of certain persons taken at a Conventicle.
    * 13.5. Memorial of a Record of a Conventicle.
    * 13.6. A Mittimus thereupon, upon the first Offence.
    * 13.7. A Mittimus upon the second Offence.
    * 13.8. A Mittimus upon the third Conviction.
    * 13.9. A Record against one that suffereth a Conventicle, &c. to be kept in his house.
    * 13.10. A Mittimus thereupon, upon the first Conviction.
    * 13.11. A Mittimus thereupon, upon the second Conviction.
    * 13.12. A Mittimus thereupon, upon the third Conviction.
    * 13.13. A Warrant to levy the Penalty of the Statute upon the Teacher in a Conventicle.
    * 13.14. A Warrant pro testes to prove the Conventicle.
    * 13.15. A Warrant to levy the money upon the Offenders.
    * 13.16. A Warrant to levy the money upon the Offenders.
    * 13.17. To levy money upon a Gaoler, &c. for suffering one committed (upon this Act) to go at large.
    * 13.18. The like for suffering one at large to joyn with the Offender in custody in the exercise of Religion, &c.
    * 13.19. Against a Peer of the Realm for being at a Conventicle, the first Conviction.
    * 13.20. Upon the second Conviction.
    * 13.21. Against a Peer for suffering a Conventicle, &c. to be kept in his House, &c. the first Conviction.
    * 13.22. Upon the second Conviction.
    * 13.23. A Mittimus for a Nonconformist, &c.
    * 13.24. A Certificate to the Militia, &c. for Aid, in Case of a Conventicle.
    * 13.25. A Certificate made by a Iustice, where the Offenders live in a Corporation.
    * 13.26. A Certificate for the taking the Oath, according to the said Act.
  * 14\. Corporations.
    * 14.1. A Certificate upon taking the Oaths, and subscribing the Declarations mentioned in the Act for Regulating Corporations.
  * 15\. Court-Leet and Court-Baron.
    * 15.1. A Precept directed to the Bailiff of the Mannor by the Steward of the Court-Baron to warn the Court.
    * 15.2. A Precept to warn a Jury▪ for a Court-Leet.
    * 15.3. A Precept for a Borsholder, or other Officer, to take upon him the said Office, and to repair to a Justice of Peace to take his Oath for his faithfull execution of the same.
    * 15.4. A Precept to bring in a Scould to be tried at a Court-Leet.
    * 15.5. The manner of making up of Court-Roles.
    * 15.6. The manner of making up of Estreates.
  * 16\. Customs.
    * 16.1. A Warrant against those who abuse an Officer of the Customs, in the due execution of his Office.
    * 16.2. Against carrying away Goods without paying Custom, &c.
    * 16.3. A Mittimus upon the precedent Warrant, for the first Offence.
    * 16.4. Upon the second like Offence.
  * 17\. Deer.
    * 17.1. A Warrant for stealing Deer.
    * 17.2. A Warrant to levy 20 li. for stealing Deer.
    * 17.3. A Mittimus to the House of Correction for want of Distress.
    * 17.4. Another Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress.
    * 17.5. A Warrant for a Buck.
  * 18\. Drunkenness.
    * 18.1. A Warrant for Drunkenness, the first Conviction.
    * 18.2. The second Conviction.
  * 19\. Excise.
    * 19.1. A Certificate upon taking the Oath about Excise.
    * 19.2. A Warrant to summon those who refuse to pay the Excise.
    * 19.3. A Warrant for Distress on Alehousekeepers, for not paying Excise.
    * 19.4. A Mittimus where not sufficient to pay Excise.
    * 19.5. To levy the Forfeiture for not making a due Entry.
    * 19.6. A Warrant to levy the double value of the Excise on a Brewer for not paying according to Entry made.
    * 19.7. Loss of Allowance for making false Entries.
    * 19.8. Upon Complaint of false Entry to appear.
    * 19.9. Not suffering to gage the Vessels.
    * 19.10. A Warrant against one that procureth a false Return to be made in the Office of Excise.
    * 19.11. A Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress.
    * 19.12. A Warrant (against several persons) to distrain for the Duties of Excise, &c.
  * 20\. Felony.
    * 20.1. A Warrant to apprehend a Felon.
    * 20.2. A Mittimus of a Felon.
    * 20.3. Another.
    * 20.4. A Warrant to search for a Felon on suspicion.
    * 20.5. A Warrant for apprehending of one that hath dangerously hurt another.
    * 20.6. A Liberate to deliver a Prisoner committed for Felony.
    * 20.7. A Warrant to Bind persons to give in Evidence against a Felon.
    * 20.8. Or thus:
    * 20.9. A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill, and give Evidence against Principals and Accessary in case of Felony.
    * 20.10. A Condition of a Recognizance where two Felonies are committed to give Evidence.
    * 20.11. A Condition to give Evidence for Felony, thus.
    * 20.12. A Condition of a Recognizance to appear upon Felony.
    * 20.13. A Condition to appear upon suspicion of Felony.
    * 20.14. A Bond.
    * 20.15. A Condition to save one harmless who was bound for the appearance of a person suspected for Felony.
  * 21\. Fire.
    * 21.1. A Testimonial for Iustices of the Peace for Poor men that have had loss by Fire.
    * 21.2. A Charitable Request made by certain Iustices of the Peace to the Inhabitants of a Division for Relief of F. S. who had been therein lately ruined by Fire.
  * 22\. Forceable Entry.
    * 22.1. A Warrant to return a Iury to inquire of a Forceable Entry.
    * 22.2. A Record of a Forceable Entry.
    * 22.3. A Warrant to the Sheriff for Restitution.
    * 22.4. A Mittimus upon view of Forceable Detainour.
  * 23\. Foreign Wares.
    * 23.1. A Warrant to search for, and seize Foreign Manufactures prohibited, &c.
  * 24\. High-ways.
    * 24.1. A Warrant to levy 5 li. on the Inhabitants of a Parish for not chusing Surveyors of the High-ways.
    * 24.2. To distrain for High-way Tax.
    * 24.3. For not sending in Teams, to work in the High-ways.
    * 24.4. Against those that refuse or neglect to work in the High-ways.
    * 24.5. To impower the Surveyors to dig Gravel, &c. upon Wasts or Commons out of the Parish.
    * 24.6. To appoint what shall be paid by the Surveyors for digging Gravel, &c. in any man's Ground.
    * 24.7. Against Surveyors for not accounting.
    * 24.8. Against the Surveyors who have not paid the moneys in their hands to the next Surveyors.
  * 25\. House of Correction.
    * 25.1. A Warrant and Directions for general privy Search.
    * 25.2. A Mittimus of a Rogue thither, taken in the general Search.
    * 25.3. Of an idle Person out of Service, &c.
    * 25.4. A Mittimus to the House of Correction of an idle Person, that would run away, and will not work to maintain his Family.
    * 25.5. A Liberate from thence.
  * 26\. Huy and Cry.
    * 26.1. The Examination of a Person robbed on the High-way praying an Huy and Cry.
    * 26.2. Another.
    * 26.3. The Examination of a Person robbed on the High-way by three Persons, one of which he knew.
    * 26.4. An Huy and Cry upon the escape of a Prisoner from the Constable.
    * 26.5. A Warrant for a Huy and Cry after a Felon.
    * 26.6. A Warrant to search for a Person (who hath committed a Robbery,) and for Goods stoln.
  * 27\. Inns of Court.
    * 27.1. A Warrant from one of the Judges, a Member of an Inns of Court, against one of that Society, for refusing to observe the Order of the House.
  * 28\. Irish Cattel.
    * 28.1. A Warrant to seize certain Cattel, imported from Foreign parts into England.
    * 28.2. A Warrant to deliver to the Owners certain Cattel seized, as forfeited for being Imported from Foreign parts, upon proof that they were not so Imported.
    * 28.3. A Warrant to kill the said Cattel.
    * 28.4. A Warrant to levy 40 s. upon the Seizor or Church-wardens that shall fail in killing, or making distribution as aforesaid.
  * 29\. Lent.
    * 29.1. A Warrant for the observing of Lent.
  * 30\. Licences.
    * 30.1. A Licence for a Badger of Corn.
    * 30.2. A Licence for a petty Chapman.
    * 30.3. A Licence or Pasport for a Poor man to his Friends for Relief.
    * 30.4. Another.
    * 30.5. A Licence to Beg.
    * 30.6. A Licence to Travel by Water on the Lord's day.
    * 30.7. Another.
    * 30.8. A Licence to Travel on the Lord's day.
  * 31\. Misdemeanours.
    * 31.1. A general Warrant for the same retornable before a particular Justice.
    * 31.2. Or thus:
    * 31.3. The like retornable before any Justice, and the Accuser to have Notice.
    * 31.4. A Condition of a Recognizance for Misdemeanour.
  * 32\. Murther.
    * 32.1. A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment, and to give Evidence at the next general Gaoldelivery, alias Assizes, to both Iuries in case of Murther.
    * 32.2. A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill, and give Evidence at Assizes.
    * 32.3. A Recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment, and to give Evidence to both Iuries at the next general Gaoldelivery, alias Assizes, in case of an Abettor in Murther.
  * 33\. Nets, Dogs and Conies.
    * 33.1. A Warrant to search for Nets and Setting-dogs, upon the Statute of 7 Iacobi.
    * 33.2. The like upon the Statute of 22 and 23 Caroli Secundi.
    * 33.3. A Mittimus against persons that refuse to enter into Recognizance, to appear at Sessions for their keeping Ferrets, and Nets to kill Conies.
    * 33.4. A Warrant for one that Hunts with Spannels in Ear'd Corn.
  * 34\. Oaths.
    * 34.1. The Oath which is usually ministred to a Iustice of the Peace in the several Counties of England.
    * 34.2. The Oath of Supremacy.
    * 34.3. The Oath of Allegiance.
    * 34.4. A Mittimus for refusing the Oath of Allegiance.
    * 34.5. The Oath of Abjuration.
    * 34.6. The Oath of an Excise-man.
    * 34.7. The under Sheriffs Oath touching the Impannelling of Iuries.
    * 34.8. The Oath of a Bailiff.
    * 34.9. The Oath usually given to Churchwardens.
    * 34.10. Or thus:
    * 34.11. The Oath of Obedience Canonical.
    * 34.12. The High Constable's Oath.
    * 34.13. The Oath taken by the Officers of the Marshal's Court.
    * 34.14. The Oath of a Constable.
    * 34.15. The Oath of an Ale-caster.
    * 34.16. The Oath of a Commissioner of Sewers.
    * 34.17. The Oath of a Searcher in the Custome House.
    * 34.18. The Oath given to a Iury, before Evidence given in against a Prisoner at the Bar.
    * 34.19. The Oath given to a Bayliff or Serjeant that attendeth on any Iury or Inquest at an Assise.
    * 34.20. The Oath of him who craves the Peace against another.
    * 34.21. Or thus.
    * 34.22. Another Oath to give a man upon examination or upon information.
    * 34.23. The Oath of him that gives Information.
    * 34.24. Sometimes you pump a Witness by this Oath, thus.
    * 34.25. The Oath to be given to any Iury, by whom a Nisi prius is to be tryed.
    * 34.26. The Oath to be given to such as are to give Evidence between a Party and Party at a Nisi prius.
    * 34.27. The Oath of a great Inquest.
    * 34.28. The Oath of those that give Evidence upon Bills of Indictment.
  * 35\. Officers.
    * 35.1. The Nomination of Officers by Iustices of the Peace.
  * 36\. Orchards.
    * 36.1. A Warrant against Robbers of Orchards, &c.
    * 36.2. Upon non-payment, to be whipt.
  * 37\. Peace.
    * 37.1. A Warrant to find Sureties for the Peace.
    * 37.2. A Warrant to find Sureties for the Peace where an Assault is made upon an Officer in discharge of his Office.
    * 37.3. A Supersedeas of a Warrant for the Peace.
    * 37.4. A Mittimus for breaking the Peace.
    * 37.5. A Release of the Peace.
    * 37.6. The Condition of a Recognizance to appear at Sessions and keep the Peace.
  * 38\. Plague.
    * 38.1. A Pass or certificate in the time of Plague.
  * 39\. Poor.
    * 39.1. A Warrant for the Overseers of the Poor to account and name other fit persons.
    * 39.2. A Warrant for the making new Overseers of the Poor.
    * 39.3. A Warrant to make Overseers of the Poor, impowering them, and the Church-wardens to collect the Poors Tax, and upon non-payment to destrain.
    * 39.4. A Confirmation of the Rates for the Poor.
    * 39.5. A Warrant to levy the Arrears (due to the Parish) from the former Overseers Account, by Distress.
    * 39.6. A Warrant against an Overseer of the Poor for not keeping of Monthly Meetings.
    * 39.7. A Warrant to distrain for the Poors Tax.
    * 39.8. A Mittimus where there is not sufficient to Distrain.
    * 39.9. A Warrant for removing one come to a Parish.
    * 39.10. A Warrant to send a Wife and Child to her Husband, in the Parish from whence they came.
    * 39.11. A Warrant for apprehending one for returning to the Parish from which he was removed.
    * 39.12. Against those who come to Work, and return not at the end of their Work.
    * 39.13. A Mittimus to the House of Correction of one that refuseth to be removed after his Work finished.
    * 39.14. A Warrant and Mittimus for one who runs away, and leaves his Family upon the Parish.
    * 39.15. A Mittimus on the foregoing Warrant.
    * 39.16. A Warrant to the Overseers of the Poor to pay Arrears, and continue weekly Relief to Poor persons.
    * 39.17. A Warrant to levy Relief for the Poor.
    * 39.18. A Bond and Condition to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor to save a Town harmless upon inhabiting there.
    * 39.19. A Release (from the Overseers of the Poor) to one that pay'd five pounds to be free'd from keeping a Bastard Child.
  * 40\. Prisoner.
    * 40.1. To allow a poor Prisoner Relief.
    * 40.2. A Discharge of a Prisoner to a Gaoler.
    * 40.3. Or thus:
    * 40.4. For a Prisoner to be Bailed.
    * 40.5. A Warrant from a Judge to bring a Prisoner from a Gaol to give Evidence.
  * 41\. Quakers.
    * 41.1. A Mittimus of Quakers.
  * 42\. Rape.
    * 42.1. A Warrant concerning a Rape.
  * 43\. Rates for Hay, Oats, &c.
    * 43.1. A Warrant to appoint Rates for Hay, Oats, &c. upon His Majestie's passing through any place.
    * 43.2. A Warrant for levying the Penalty forfeited for not observing the Rates aforesaid.
  * 44\. Recognizances.
    * 44.2. The manner of entring the note of Recognizances in your Book of Recognizances.
      * 44.2.1. Subscribe the Cause thus.
      * 44.2.2. Every Condition of a Recognizance must have these things.
    * 44.3. A single Recognizance taken before Justices of the Peace.
    * 44.4. Another single Recognizance.
    * 44.5. A Recognizance to prefer an Indictment, or to prefer a Bill, and give Evidence.
    * 44.6. A Recognizance for two to give Evidence.
    * 44.7. A Recognizance to give in Evidence against a Prisoner.
    * 44.8. For the Good behaviour.
    * 44.9. Another.
    * 44.10. A Recognizance to give in Evidence against one that is suspected of Felony.
    * 44.11. A Recognizance for keeping of a Tavern.
    * 44.12. A Recognizance for one that is Bail for a Boy that lay under a Bed in the Night.
    * 44.13. A Recognizance for Bastardy where two are Manucapters for the man in custody.
    * 44.14. A Recognizance for a married Woman upon a Rescue.
    * 44.15. A Recognizance for one that hath hurt another, and on the Warrant of Behaviour.
    * 44.16. For the Peace.
    * 44.17. For Felony.
    * 44.18. A Release of a Recognizance written under the Recognizance thus, by the same Iustice, or by some other, &c.
    * 44.19. The Parties Release of the Peace.
  * 45\. Riot.
    * 45.1. A Precept to the Sheriff to return a Iury to inquire upon a Riot, Rout, or unlawfull Assembly.
    * 45.2. The like Precept in Latine.
    * 45.3. A Warrant for certain Riotous Persons.
  * 46\. Rogues.
    * 46.1. For Apprehending and Committing a dangerous Rogue.
    * 46.2. A Mittimus of a dangerous Rogue.
  * 47\. Sacrament.
    * 47.1. A Certificate for Receiving the Sacrament and Oath.
    * 47.2. A Certificate of Receiving the Sacrament according to the Act.
    * 47.3. A Testimonial upon the Receiving the Sacrament according to the Act.
    * 47.4. A Declaration to be subscribed according to the Act.
  * 48\. Scavingers.
    * 48.1. A Warrant for Scavingers to Distrain.
  * 49\. Search.
    * 49.1. A Warrant to Search for stoln Goods.
    * 49.2. A Warrant to make general Search for Rogues, Vagabonds, &c.
  * 50\. Servants.
    * 50.1. For sending a Servant to his Service to serve the time agreed, to prevent Charge on the Parish.
    * 50.2. A Mittimus against one that returneth into a Parish after he was removed.
    * 50.3. A Warrant to levy 40 s. on the Master for putting away his Servant before the end of his term.
    * 50.4. For not paying Wages.
    * 50.5. A Warrant for Relief of a Man-servant that is out of Service.
    * 50.6. A Warrant against one that departeth out of Service before his time expired.
    * 50.7. To fetch back a Servant.
    * 50.8. A Discharge of a Servant from his Service within the time agreed, upon his absenting himself.
    * 50.9. A Testimonial for the discharge of a Servant.
  * 51\. Silk-Throsters.
    * 51.1. An Order for the payment of monies to a Silk-Throster by his Workman who imbezils his Silk.
    * 51.2. Against an Offender for not performing the Order before mentioned.
  * 52\. Souldiers.
    * 52.1. A Warrant to warn in a Muster at a certain day, &c.
    * 52.2. A Certificate for a Trained Souldier.
    * 52.3. To order an Allowance to a poor Souldier out of the Stock for Maimed Souldiers.
    * 52.4. The like for Allowance to Wife or Orphan.
  * 53\. Swearing.
    * 53.1. To pay 1 s. for Swearing in the presence of a Justice of the Peace.
    * 53.2. A Warrant to levy Monies for prophane Swearing.
    * 53.3. A Certificate of Conviction for Swearing.
  * 54\. Tax.
    * 54.1. A Warrant to the Assessors to make a Tax upon an Act of Parliament for Royal Aid.
    * 54.2. The Preamble of the Tax Book.
    * 54.3. A Warrant to the Collectors of the Tax upon the Royal Aid.
    * 54.4. A Warrant to levy 5 li. upon the Collectors for neglecting to collect their Assessment.
  * 55\. Testimonials.
    * 55.1. A Testimonial for conveying a Rogue who hath been punished.
    * 55.2. A Testimonial for one that hath suffered shipwreck.
  * 56\. Tiling.
    * 56.1. A Deputation for Tile-searchers.
  * 57\. Trespass.
    * 57.1. A Warrant upon Hedg-breaking, &c. where the Party's not able.
    * 57.2. A Warrant or Order to pay where he is able.
    * 57.3. To whip where not paid according to Order.
    * 57.4. A Warrant from the Justices at a Quarter-sessions for apprehending one indicted for a Trespass.
  * 58\. Uagrants.
    * 58.1. A Warrant for apprehending Beggars and other Idle persons.
    * 58.2. A Testimonial or Pass for him to the place of his Birth.
    * 58.3. The like where the Place of his Birth is not known.
    * 58.4. The like where neither the Place of his Birth, nor last abode is known.
    * 58.5. The like where the Vagrant is apprehended in a general privy Search.
    * 58.6. To pay two shillings for apprehending a Vagrant.
    * 58.7. Upon not payment of the same.
    * 58.8. A Certificate of apprehending a Vagrant in the confines of another County.
    * 58.9. To pay the two shillings thereupon.
    * 58.10. Upon non-payment of the same.
  * 59\. Waggons and Carts.
    * 59.1. An Affidavit to be made before a Warrant granted, for destreining for 40 s. forfeited for drawing with six Horses in length in a Team, Cart, or Waggon.
    * 59.2. A Warrant to destrain upon such as travel with a Waggon or Cart, drawn with six Horses at length.
  * 60\. Watch and Ward.
    * 60.1. A Warrant to the High Constable for putting in Execution the Statute of 13 Car. 2. (Renting the Statute,) and for keeping good Watches (upon His Majestie's going to Oxford.)
    * 60.2. Another Warrant upon the same Statute.
    * 60.3. A Warrant for Watch and Ward, and to apprehend idle persons.
    * 60.4. A Warrant by order of Quarter-Sessions to set Watch and Ward.
  * 61\. Weights and Measures.
    * 61.1. A Warrant to warn in all Tradesmen, and others, to have their Weights and Measures examined by the Standard.
    * 61.2. The Clerk of the Market's Warrant.
  * 62\. Witnesses.
    * 62.1. A Warrant for Witnesses touching Felony.
    * 62.2. For a Witness to appear and give Evidence at the Sessions.
  * 63\. Wood.
    * 63.1. A Warrant against one that stole Wood, &c.
    * 63.2. To make a general Warrant to search for stoln Wood, &c.
    * 63.3. A Warrant to search for stoln Wood, &c. upon a particular Complaint.
    * 63.4. An Order against a person apprehended with Bundles, &c. of Wood, &c. to make satisfaction, &c. for the same to the Owner. The first Offence.
    * 63.5. For not obeying that Order.
    * 63.6. A Mittimus to the House of Correction for the second like Offence.
    * 63.7. An Order against the Buyer of stoln Wood, &c. to pay treble the value thereof.
    * 63.8. A Warrant to distrain for non-payment of the Money according to the foregoing Order.
    * 63.9. A Mittimus against the Buyer of stoln Wood, &c. for want of Distress.
  * 64\. Woollen.
    * 64.1. A Certificate for burying in Woollen.
    * 64.2. Or this.
    * 64.3. The Minister's Certificate for being buried in Woollen.
    * 64.4. A Minister's Certificate of not bringing an Affidavit of a Corp's being buried in Woollen.
    * 64.5. A Warrant for levying the 5 li. for not burying in Woollen according to the Act.
  * 65\. Additional Presidents to the former.
    * 65.1. The form of the Record that is returned of the Alehouses that are licensed.
      * 65.1.3. Overseer's Warrant.
    * 65.2. The Return made by one Justice of Peace when he swears another.
    * 65.3. The Examination of a Felon himself.
    * 65.4. The Information of the Witness when no Confession.
    * 65.5. A Mittimus for Whores.
  * 66\. Law-Cases relating to the foregoing Subject.
    * 66.1. Apprentice.
    * 66.2. Bastard-child.
    * 66.3. Behaviour.
    * 66.4. Conventicles.
    * 66.5. House of Correction.
    * 66.6. Deer.
    * 66.7. Drunkenness.
    * 66.8. Gaol.
    * 66.9. High-way.
    * 66.10. Huy and Cry.
    * 66.11. Poor.
    * 66.12. Peace.
    * 66.13. Rogue.
    * 66.14. Riot.
    * 66.15. Souldiers.
  * Appendix A THE TABLE.
  * Appendix B ADVERTISEMENT.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=4)

## 1\. OF ALEHOUSES, &c.

### 1.1. A Licence to keep an Alehouse.

Kent ss. MEmorandum, That we5 & 6 Ed. 6. cap. 25. 2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum.
whose Names are hereun­to subscribed, Justices of the Peace within the said
County, have Admitted, Licensed, and Allowed A. B. Victualler, to keep a
common-Ale-house in the house where he now dwelleth in C. in the County
aforesaid; and not elsewhere, for the space of one whole year next ensuing the
date hereof and no longer. Which said A. B. hath entred into Recognizance with
two Sure­ties before us in certain summs of money, to the use of our Sovereign
Lord the King, under Condition that he shall not, during the time aforesaid,
permit, or suffer, or have any play­ing at Dice, Cards, Tables, Shovel-board,
Bowls, Quoits, or any other unlawfull Game or Games, in his House, Yard,
Garden, or Back­side; nor shall suffer to be or remain in his house any person
or persons (not being of his ordina­ry [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=5) Family) to drink
any Beer, Ale, or Tobacco, on the Lord's day, Humiliation or Thanksgi­ving-
day, during the time of Divine Service or Sermon; nor shall suffer any person
to lodge or stay in his house above one day and one night, but such whose true
Name and Sirname he shall deliver to some one of the Constables, or (in his
absence) to some one of the Officers of the same Parish, the next day
following, or such as he will answer for; nor shall refuse to lodge any person
that shall be brought to him by the Constable or Officer; nor suffer any
person to remain in his house tippling or drinking, con­trary to the Law; nor
shall willingly admit or receive into his House, Barns, Stables, or
other­where, any Players of Interludes, Rogues, Va­gabonds, sturdy Beggars,
Masterless men, or any person notoriously defamed for Theft, Inconti­nency,
Drunkenness, or any other notorious Crime; nor shall buy or take to pawn any
stoln Goods, or other, of any Wayfaring man, or other that shall bring the
same to sell, but of such as he shall be able always to produce, and have
forth-coming: And also shall sell his Beer and Ale by sealed Measure,
according to the Assise, and not otherwise: And lastly, shall in all things
behave himself according to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom in that case
pro­vided. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals, the 6.
day of S. in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the
Second, of England, &c. Annoque Domini 1679.

### 1.2. Or thus:

We whose Names are hereunto written; His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of
the said Coun­ty, [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=5) do (according to
the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) License, Admit and
Allow A. B. Victualler, to keep a common Alehouse or Tipplinghouse in the
house wherein he now dwelleth in C. aforesaid. Provided al­ways, that the said
A. B. do not suffer any un­lawfull Games to be used in his said House, but do
use and maintain good Order and Rule with­in the same. Provided also, that
this our Li­cence shall not continue in force above the space of one year now
next ensuing at the most. G [...] ­ven under our hands and seals at, &c.

### 1.3. A License to Brew, and keep an Alehouse.

K. ss. WHereas A. B. of C. in the said County of K. &c. hath come before us I.
Doe and Ric. Roe, two of His Ma­jestie's Justices of the Peace within the said
County, and bound himself in a Recognizance with sufficient Sureties to Brew,
to Sell, and to keep a common Alehouse, according to the Statu [...]e of
Brewers made in the fifth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King
Edward the Sixth: Now know ye us, the said Iohn Doe and Rich. Roe, to have
Licensed the said A. B. to Brew, Sell, and keep a common Alehouse, according
to the said Statute. Given under our hands the 10. of September, in the, &c.

### 1.4. A Recognizance thereupon.

#### 1.4.1.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod primo die5 & 6\. E. 6. cap. 25. Two Justi­ces, one
of the Quo­rum. Octobris, Anno Regni Domini Caroli Secundi, Dei gratia
Angliae, Sco­tiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, &c. vicesimo
[...]ono apud C. in Com' praedict' A. B. de, &c. D. E. de, &c. [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=6) & F. G. de, &c.
personaliter venerunt co­ramObserve to bind the Principal in 20 li. and each
of the Sureties in 10 li. nobis H. J. & K. L. Iustic' dicti Domini Regis ad
pacem in Com' praedicto conservand' assignat', & recognoverunt se debere dicto
Domino Regi modo & forma sequen', viz. praedict' A. B. viginti libras legalis
monetae Angliae, & uterque praedictorum D. E. & F. G. decem libras consimilis
monetae, sepa­ralit' levand' de separalibus bonis & catallis, terris &
tenementis suis, ad opus & usum dicti Domini Regis, haered' & successorum
suorum, si defalt' fieret in performatione Con­ditionis sequen'.

H. J. K. L.

#### 1.4.2.

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas the within bounden A.
B. is by the Justices within named licensed, admit­ted and allowed to keep a
common Alehouse in the house wherein he now dwelleth in C. within written: If
therefore the said A. B. shall not (during the continuance in force of the
said Licence) suffer any unlawfull Games to be used in his said house, but
does use and maintain good Order and Rule within the same, That then this
Recognizance to be void, or else it shall stand in full force.

### 1.5. Another Recognizance for an Ale­house-keeper.

Quarto die Sept. Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, &c. tricesimo secundo
Annoque Domini, 1680.

#### 1.5.1.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod die & Anno supradictis J. R. de G. in Com' [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=6) praedict'
victualler recog' se debere dicto Do­mino Regi—&c. T. N. de eadem in Com'
praedict' victualler & G. B. de eadem in Com' praedict' Yeoman, & uterque
eorum re­cog' se debere Domino Regni 5. li. si praedict' Johannes Desalt'
fecerit in performatione Conditionis indorsat; Capt' & Recog' coram nobis E.
F.

R. H.

#### 1.5.2. The Condition.

The Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas I. R. of G. in the
within named County, is by the Justice within named Li­censed and allowed to
keep a Common Ale­house or Victualling-house in  [...]. aforesaid for the
space of one whole year next ensuing the Date hereof, If therefore the said I.
R. shall and do observe and perform all the Restitutions and Clauses mentioned
in his said Licence, That then this Recognizance to be void, or else to stand
in full force and vertue.

### 1.6. Against an Inn-keeper, Alehouse­keeper, &c. suffering to Tipple▪ Inn-
kee­per, Victu­aller, or Alehouse­keeper. 1 Iac. c. 9. 21 Iac. c. 7. View.
Con­fession. 1 Witness that can or will justifie.

To the Constable of the Hundred of H. and to the Church-wardens of the Parish
of C. in the said County.

Kent. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly proved before me this present day,
That A. B. of C. aforesaid, Victualler, did upon the first day of A. suffer D.
E. of, &c. to remain and continue drinking and tippling in the house of the
said A. B. in C. aforesaid, con­trary to the form of the Statute in that case
[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=7) made and
provided: These are therefor [...] (in1 Car. c. 4. Vintners within the
Statute. And I con­ceive by 1 Car. c. 4. it must be 2 Witnesses for suffering
a stranger to tipple. The Ale­housekeeper is disabled for 3 years. 7 Iac. c.
10. 21 Iac. c. 7. His Majestie's name) to command you, that you the said
Constable and Church-wardens do levy for the offence aforesaid ten shillings,
(to the use of the Poor of the said Parish) by way of Distress of the goods
and chattels of the said D. E. to be taken and detained for the same. And for
default of satisfaction within six days, that then you do presently appraise
and sell the same, and deliver the Surplusage or Remainder over and above the
said ten shillings unto the said D. E. And for want of sufficient Distress,
that you certifie the same unto me within twen­ty days next ensuing, (to the
end that I may farther proceed therein as to Justice doth ap­pertain.) Here of
fail not at your perils. Gi­ven under my hand and seal at, &c.

### 1.7. A Warrant to levy Money for Tippling.

To the Constable of the Hundred of H. and the Church-wardens of the Parish of
C. in the said County.

K. ss. FOr [...]smuch as it hath been this pre­sent1 Iac. c. 9. 4 Iac. c. 5.
21 Iac. c. 7. 1 Iustice. View. Confession. 1 Witness. Within six months. In
Inn, Victual­ling-house, or Alehouse. day duly proved before me, That A. B. of
the Parish of C. aforesaid, did upon the first day of A. last past remain and
continue drinking and tippling in the house of C. D. in C. aforesaid,
(contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided:) These ar
[...] therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you the said
Constable or Church-wardens do require the said A. B. to pay for the said
Offence (to the hands of you [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=7) the Church-
wardens, to be by you accompted for to the use of the Poor of the same Parish)
the summe of three shillings four pence of cur­rant money of England, within
one week now next ensuing. And if the said A. B. shall refuse or neglect to
pay the same as aforesaid, that then you the said Constable or Church-wardens
do levy (to the use aforesaid) the said three shillings four pence of the
goods of the said A. B. (by Distress and Sale of the same, ren­dring unto him
the overplus of the money re­maining of the said Sale.) And if the said A. B.
be not able to pay the said three shillings four pence, that then you the said
Constable do set him in the Stocks by the space of four hours. H [...]eof fail
not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

Convicted upon my View.

4 Iac. c. 5. 21 Iac. c. 7.

Convicted by his Confession before me.

### 1.8. A Mittimus (for an Alehouse-keeper suffering to Tipple) for want of
Distress.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas upon the first day of1 Iac. c. 9. 1 Iustice. 2 Witnesses
forfeit 10 s. to the use of the poor. A. last past it was duly pro­ved before
me, That W. L. of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, Alehouse-keeper,
did upon the tenth day of, &c. suffer I. G. to re­main drinking and tippling
in the house of the said W. L. in C. aforesaid, (contrary to the form [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=8) of the Statute in
that case made and provided;) And whereas, by Warrant under my hand and seal,
I did upon the said first day of August command, that you the said Constable
or the Church▪wardens of the said Parish should levy (for the offence
aforesaid) ten shillings to the use of the Poor of the said Parish, by way of
Distress of the goods and chattels of the afore­said W. L. to be taken and
detained for the same, and for want of sufficient Distress, you the said
Constable or the Church-wardens aforesaid should certifie the same unto me
within twenty days then next ensuing, (to the end that I might farther doe
therein as to Justice doth ap­pertain;) And forasmuch as the said Constable
and Church-wardens have this present day cer­tified unto me, that the said W.
L. hath no suf­ficient Distress to be taken for the said ten shillings, and
that the same is not yet satisfied: The [...]e▪ are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Bor­sholders, that you,
some or one of you, do take the said W. L. and him safely convey to the Gaol
aforesaid, and there deliver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, together
with this Precept. Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive the said
W. L. into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, untill the said ten
shillings be truly paid to the use afore­said. Hereof fail not at your peril.
Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=8)

### 1.9. A Mittimus for an Unlicensed Ale­house-keeper.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. &c. hath5 & 6 Ed. 6. cap. 25. 2 Iustices one
of the Quorum. been this present day convicted be­fore us of (obstinately and
of his own authority) keeping a common Alehouse at C. in the Coun­ty
aforesaid, contrary to our commandment: These are therefore (in his Majestie's
name) to command you, the said Constable and Bor­sholders, that you, some or
one of you, do take him the said A. B. and him safely convey to the Gaol
aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, together with
this Precept. Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive the said A. B.
into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, without Bail or Mainprise,
by the space of three days, and untill he shall enter into Recognizance
withPay 20 s. 2 Witnesses. This Con­viction is to be certified to the next
Sessions. two Sureties, (according to the form of the Statute in that case
provided) that he shall not keep any common Alehouse or Tippling­house, or use
commonly selling of Ale or Beer, besides the penalty of 20 s. Hereof fail not
at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=9)

### 1.10. The like upon the Statute 3 Car. the first Conviction.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them,
and to the Church­wardens of the Parish of C. in the said County.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. aforesaid3 Car. c. 3. 1 Iustice. View.
Confession. 2 Witnesses that can or will. To keep a common Alehouse or
Tippling­house. To use com­monly sel­ling of Ale, Beer, Cy­der, or Per­ry.
hath this present day been (accord­ing to the form of the Statute in that case
made and provided) convicted before me of taking upon him, upon his own
authority, (not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse
in the Parish aforesaid; by reason whereof he hath forfeited and lost the
summe of twenty shillings of currant money of Eng­land, to the use of the Poor
of the said Parish: These are the [...]fore (in his Majestie's name) to
command you, that you the said Constable or Church-wardens do levy (by way of
Distress of the goods and chattels of the said A. B. to be by you taken and
detained) the said twenty shillings, (to the use aforesaid.) And for de­fault
of satisfaction of the said twenty shillings within three days after such
Distress taken, you do appraise and sell the said Distress, and deliver the
overplus thereof to the said A. B. And if he shall not have sufficient goods
and chattels whereby the said twenty shillings may be le­vied by way of
Distress, as aforesaid, and shall not pay the said summe of twenty shillings
within six days next ensuing, that then you the said Constable and
Borsholders, or some or one of you, do openly whip him for the offence
aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at,
&c.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=9)

### 1.11. The like, for the second Conviction.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to the Keeper of the
House of Correc­tion for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of the Parish of3 Car. c. 3. 1 Iustice. View.
Confession. 2 Witnesses that can or will. To keep a common Alehouse or
Tippling­house. To use com­monly sel­ling of Ale, Beer, Cy­der, or Per­ry. C.
&c. hath this present day been (according to the form of the Statute in that
case made and provided) convicted before me of taking upon him of his own
authority (not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse in
the Parish aforesaid;  [...]d forasmuch also as the said A. B. hath been once
before in like manner convicted of the like of­fence: These are therefore (in
his Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, that
you, some or one of you, do take the said▪ A. B. and him safely convey to the
aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the
same, toge­ther with this Precept. Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to
receive him into the said House, and him there safely to keep for the space of
one month, and to deal with him as an Idle, Lewd and Disorderly person.
Here­of, &c.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=10)

### 1.12. The like, for the third Conviction.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to the Keeper of the
House of Correc­tion for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of the Parish of3 Car. c. 3. 1 Iustice. View.
Confession. 2 Witnesses that can or will. To keep a common Alehouse or
Tippling­house. To use com­monly sel­ling of Ale, Beer, Cy­der, or Per­ry. C.
&c. hath this present day been (according to the form of the Statute in that
case made and provided) convicted before me of taking upon him, of his own
authority, (not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse
in the Parish aforesaid; And forasmuch as the said A. B. hath been twice
before in like manner convicted of the like offence;  [...]ese are therefore
(in His Ma­jestie's name) to command you the said Con­stable and Borsholders,
that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to
the aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of
the same, together with this Precept. Command­ing also you, the said Keeper,
to receive him into the said House, and him there safely to keep, untill by
good order of the Justices in their general Sessions for the County he shall
be delivered from thence. And that you do in the mean time deal with him as an
Idle, Lewd and Disorderly person. Hereof fail not, &c.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=10)

### 1.13. A Warrant for Witnesses against an Unlicensed Alehouse-keeper.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as complaint hath been3 Car. c. 3. 1 Iustice. made unto me,
That A. B. of the Parish of C. &c. doth take upon him of his own authority
(not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse in theKeep a
common Alehouse or Tippling­house. To use com­monly sel­ling of Beer, Ale,
Perry, or Cyder. Parish aforesaid; And forasmuch as I am cre­dibly informed,
that the several persons here undernamed can (if they will) testifie that the
said A. B. doth so doe: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
command you, that you, some or one of you, do give notice unto the said
several persons, that they and every of them are by me required to come
be­fore me at C. upon Monday the first day of, &c. at eight of the clock in
the Forenoon of the same day, then and there to testifie their several
knowledges touching the premisses. Whereof they nor any of them are to fail at
their perils. And what you shall doe herein, you shall make known unto me at
the time and place aforesaid. And have you there then this Precept. Given
under my hand and seal at, &c.

A. B. C. D. E. F.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=11)

### 1.14. For Suppression of an Alehouse for Disorder.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as we are credibly in­formed,Dalt. 34. 2 Iustices, 1
Quorum. That A. B. of C. &c. doth suffer evil Rule and Disorder to be kept in
his house in C. aforesaid, (contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm)
for whichImprison­ment, Fine, and Bond for the good Behaviour. we have thought
fit to Suppress him from any longer keeping any Alehouse or Tippling-house, or
using commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Perry, or Cyder: These are therefore (in
His Ma­jestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do
forthwith repair to the said A. B. and charge him to surcease from keeping any
longer any Alehouse or Tippling­house, and from common selling of Ale, Beer,
Perry, or Cyder, at his peril. And that what you shall doe in the premisses,
you, some or one of you, (so giving notice) do make known unto us, some or one
of us, with all convenient speed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under
our hands and seals at  [...]. in the said County, the, &c.

### 1.15. For renewing Licenses of Alehouse­keepers.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of
them.Dalt. 34. 2 Iustices, 1 Quorum.

Kent ss. THese are (in his Majestie's name) to command you, to warn all [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=11) the licensed
Alehouse-keepers, Victuallers, and such others within the said Hundred, as do
use commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Perry, or Cyder, personally to appear
before us at the house of I. G. &c. upon Friday the ninth day of O. at ten of
the clock in the  [...]renoon of the same day; and to bring with them then and
thither, as well their former Licences, as also a Certifi­cate of the civil
Demeanours and Fitness of themselves for that purpose to be new licensed; and
of the conveniency of Situation and Ac­commodation of their said respective
houses for that purpose. The same Certificate to be signed with the hands at
least of two substantial, ho­nest, discreet, and civil Inhabitants of the
re­spective Parishes where they do so now dwell. And have you there the names
of such persons as you shall have so warned, together with the names of the
several Parishes and places of the said Parishes where their said houses are
situate, and by what Signs the same are known; to the end that such of them
may be continued, and such of them suppressed, as shall be thought fit. And
have you there also this precept. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

### 1.16. Against an Alehouse-keeper for sel­ling less than Measure.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to the Church-
wardens of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly1 Iac. c. c. 9. 1 Iustice. 1 Witness.
View, or Confession by 21 Iac. c. 7. Inn-keeper, Alehouse­keeper, or
Victualler. Disabled for 3 years. 21 Iac. c. 7. proved before me, That A. B.
of the aforesaid Parish of C. did lately utter and fell in his house in C.
aforesaid less than one full Ale-quart of the best Beer for a penny, (against
[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=12) the form
of the Statute in that case made and provided) by reason whereof the said A.
B. hath forfeited for his said offence twenty shil­lings to the use of the
Poor of the said Parish of C. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
command you, that you, some or one of you, do levy to the use aforesaid the
said twenty shillings by way of Distress of the goods and chattels of the said
A. B. to be by you, some or one of you, taken and detained for the same; And
for default of satisfaction within six days next ensuing, that then you
presently appraise and sell the said Distress, and deliver the sur­plusage or
remainder over and above to the said A. B. And for want of sufficient
Distress, that then you, some or one of you, do within twenty days next
ensuing certifie unto me the default of such Distress, to the end that I may
farther doe therein as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

### 1.17. A Mittimus for selling less than Mea­sure for want of Distress.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the common Gaol at M. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas it hath been duly1 Iustice. 1 Iac. c. 9. proved before me,
That A. B. of the Parish of C. in the said County did lately utter and sell in
his house in C. aforesaid less than one full Ale-quart of the best Beer for a
penny (against the form of the Statute in that case made and provided;) And
whereas I did thereupon, by Warrant under my hand [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=12) and seal,
command you the said Constable and Borsholders and the Church-wardens of the
Pa­rish of C. aforesaid, that you, they, or some or one of you or them, should
levy (to the use of the Poor of the said Parish) twenty shillings, for the
offence aforesaid, by way of Distress of the goods and chattels of the said A.
B. to be taken and detained for the same; and that for want of sufficient
Distress, you, they, or some or one of you or them, should within twenty days
then next ensuing certifie unto me the default of such Distress, to the end
that I might farther doe therein as to Justice doth appertain; And forasmuch
as it hath been certified unto me, that no sufficient Distress can be found
whereby the said twenty shillings may be levied, and that the same is not yet
satisfied: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to com­mand you the
said Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do take the said
A. B. and him safely convey to the Gaol afore­said, and there deliver him to
the Keeper of the same, to be by him there kept untill the said twenty
shillings shall be truly paid. Com­manding also you, the said Keeper, to
receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, untill the said
twenty shillings shall be paid accordingly. Hereof fail not at your pe­rils.
Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=13)

### 1.18. For Suppressing an Alehouse after Sup­pression at the Quarter-
Sessions.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of Marden and West Barnfield,
and to every of them.

Kent ss. WHereas at the general Quar­ter-Sessions of the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord the King holden at M. in the said County, upon Tuesday in the
first week next after the Close of Easter last past; it was (for the reasons
therein mentioned) ordered by the said Court, That A. B. of G. in the said
County should forthwith surcease, and be sup­pressed from selling Ale- or Beer
in his then dwelling-house, (or elsewhere) and that the Constables of the said
Parish of G. or one of them should require him to forbear to sell any more Ale
or Beer; which if he should refuse to doe, that then he should be immediately
after­wards dealt withall as an unlicensed Victualler, (any Licence to the
contrary in any wise not­withstanding;) of which said Order the said A. B. had
notice; And whereas notwith­standing the said Order at the last monthly
meeting of the Justices of the Peace of the said County for this lower
Division of the Lath of Scray, upon Thursday the fourth day of Septem­ber last
past, being the day for new Licensing of the Alehouse-keepers in that
Division, a­mongst the multiplicity of business there that day, a new Licence
for the said A. B. to keep a common Alehouse in the house wherein he dwelt (at
the time of his aforesaid Suppression) was, amongst several other such
Licences, laid [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=13) down before us,
and by us signed and sealed, in the so doing whereof we were surprized: Upon
consideration of all which, and forasmuch also as the same reasons and causes
for which the said A. B. was as aforesaid suppressed do (as we are informed
and believe) still remain; We have therefore thought fit to suppress him from
any longer keeping any Alehouse or Tip­pling-house, or using commonly selling
of Ale, Beer, Cyder, or▪ Perry. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name)
to command you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith repair to the said
A. B. and charge him to sur­cease from keeping any longer any Alehouse or
Tipplinghouse, and from commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Perry, or Cyder; and
that what you shall doe in the premisses, you, some or one of you, (so giving
notice) do make known unto us, or one of us, with all convenient speed. Hereof
fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at C. in the said
County, the second day of October 1679\. 31 Car. II. Regis.

### 1.19. A Licence to keep an Alehouse with Articles.

Articles to be observed and kept by A. B. admit­ted to keep a common Alehouse
or Victualling­house in his now dwelling house in C. in the said County of
Kent as followeth, viz.

Kent ss. IMprimis, If he here of any Robery or other hainous offence
commit­ted against the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, he shall certifie
to the Constable or Borsholders of the Hundred where for the time [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=14) he then
dwelleth, or some of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for this County, of
such persons as lodged at his house within two days before or after such
Robery or hainous offence committed, and what apparrel they had and used, and
the Christian name, or Sirname, or names of them or as many of them, as he
shall know.

2\. Also he shall not use or keep, nor suffer to be used or kept any Carding,
Dicing, Bow­ling, or any other unlawfull Game or Games at any time in his
house or yard.

3\. Also he shall not permit or suffer any per­son or persons to continue
drinking, or remain tippling in his house otherwise then is per­mitted and
allowed by the several Statutes in that case made and provided.

4\. Also he shall not suffer any person or per­sons to lodge at his house
above one day and one night together, but such as he will answer for, and have
forth coming if occasion shall require.

5\. Also he shall keep one or more beds in his house, as also Mens meat and
Horse meat during the time of Licence, conveniently fur­nished to lodge any
way-faring Man or Tra­vellor.

Lastly, He shall not utter or sell less than one full Ale-quart of the best
Beer or Ale for one penny, and of the small two Quarts for one penny, and
shall have in his house Beer and Ale of both sorts, and also Bread for the
Poor and sueh others as will buy the same.

We whose Names are hereunder written, Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign
Lord the King within this County of K. do hereby license and allow the said A.
B. [[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=14) to
keep a common Alehouse or Victual­linghouse in his now dwellinghouse, known by
the name of the Sign of the George in C. aforesaid, for the space of one whole
year next ensuing.

The said A. B. observing and keeping all and singular the Articles above
written, for ob­serving whereof he is bound by a Recognizance in 10 li. and
two sufficient Sureties with him, viz. C. D. and E. F. in 5 li. a piece to the
use of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors. Dated at C.
the 8 day of Sep­temb. 1671.

The Recognizance as in Pag. 3.

#### 1.19.1. The Condition.

The Condition of the Recognizance with­in written is such, That whereas the
within named A. B. is by the Justices within named, licensed, admitted, and
allowed to keep a com­mon Alehouse or Victuallinghouse in C. for the space of
one whole year next ensuing; If there­fore the said A. B. doe well and truly
observe and keep all and singular the Articles contained in his said Licence,
That then, &c.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=15)

## 2\. Apprentices.

### 2.1. A Warrant to put out poor Children Apprentices.

To the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A.
in the said County, and to every of them.

Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name)Dalt. 162. 1 Iac. c. 25. 21 Iac.
28. 3 Car. c. 4. 2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum. 43 Eliz. cap. 2. to command you,
that you do present unto us, or some of us, in writing under your hands, at
the house of A. B. in, &c. upon the third day of Iune next, at nine of the
clock in the morning of the same day, the names of all such poor Children of
your said Parish as are Orphans, or whose Parents shall not by you, or the
greater number of you, be thought able to keep and maintain them; toge­ther
with the names of the Parents of the said Children, (if they have any living)
and the se­veral Ages of the Children aforesaid: And that you do cause such of
the said Children as be able to come thither, (and more especially such of
them as by you shall be thought fit to be put forth Apprentices) to appear
before us, (at the time and place aforesaid,) to be by us there viewed: And
likewise that you do then and there also present unto us (in writing as
afore­said) the names of such substantial Inhabitants of your said Parish, to
whom you shall think fit to put the said Children, or any of them,
Apprentices; and more especially of such of the said Inhabitants as have not
formerly taken such poor Children of the said Parish Appren­tices: And lastly,
that you do give notice7 Iac. 3. [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=15) to the said
Inhabitants, that they are by us re­quired then and there to appear before us,
to shew cause why you (by our assent) shall not bind such of the said Children
Apprentices unto them, (as to you shall seem convenient) unless they shall in
the mean time consent to take and receive the same accordingly; and that you
your selves be then and there also present, and have there this Precept. Of
all which you are not to fail at your Perils. Given under our hands and seals
the, &c.

### 2.2. An Indenture for an Apprentice so put out.

THis Indenture made the, &c. day of, &c. 43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Iustices, 1 of the
Quorum. Man-child till he shall come to the age of 24 years; Wo­man-child till
she shall come to the age of 21, or the time of her mar­riage. in the year of
the Reign, &c. Between A. B. and C. D. Church-wardens of the Pa­rish of E. in
the County of &c. and F. G. H. I. Overseers of the Poor of the same Parish,
&c. of the one part, and K. L. of, &c. of the other part, Witnesseth, That the
said Church­wardens and Overseers, by the Assent of His Majestie's Justices of
the Peace of the said County, whose names are hereunto written, (according to
the form of the Statute made in the 23. year of the Reign of the late Queen
Elizabeth, intituled, An Act for the Relief of the Poor) have put out and
bound M. L. a poor Child of the said Parish of E. Apprentice to the said K. L.
till the said M. L. shall come to the age of 24 years. During which time the
said Apprentice his said Master well and faithfully shall serve, his Secrets
keep, his Command­ments lawfull and honest every-where willingly shall doe. He
shall do no hurt nor damage to his said Master, nor consent to be done of
[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=16) others,
but to his power shall lett the same, or forthwith give notice to his said
Master there­of. He shall not waste the Goods of his said Master, nor lend
them to any person without his consent. He shall not frequent Taverns, Inns or
Alehouses, (except it be about his said Master's business there to be done.)
He shall not (during the said term) play at Cards, Dice, or other unlawfull
Games. He shall not, either by day or night, absent himself from his said
Master's service: But in all things (as a good and faithfull Servant) shall
demean himself to­wards his said Master and all his. And the said K. L. his
said Apprentice shall (during the term aforesaid) educate and bring up, or
cause to be educated and brought up, in his Trade, with due and reasonable
Chastisement; and find and allow unto him (during the said term) suffi­cient
wholesome and competent meat, drink, lodging, washing, apparel, and all other
ne­cessaries meet for such an Apprentice: And in the end of the said term
shall find, provide for, and deliver unto his said Apprentice double Apparel,
that is to say, Apparel meet for him to have and wear as well on the Lord's
days as on the working-days, both of Linnen, Wool­len, Hose, Shoes, and all
other necessaries meet for such an Apprentice to have and wear. In Witness
whereof the parties above said to these present Indentures their hands and
seals inter­changeably have set, the day and year first above written.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=16)

### 2.3. A Warrant against them which refuse to take Apprentices.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of K. and to every of them.

Kent ss. WHereas the Church-wardensOn refusal to be bound to good Be­haviour,
or Indicted for a Contempt, and there­upon to be Fined and Imprisoned. Dalt.
163. and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid did
by our assent by Indenture, bearing date the, &c. put and bind out unto B. C.
of the Parish afore­said D. E. a poor Child of the said Parish Ap­prentice,
(according to the form of the Sta­tute in that case made and provided in the
43 year of the Reign of the late Queen Eliza­beth, intituled, An Act for the
Relief of the Poor,) And forasmuch as the said B. C. doth refuse to take,
receive and keep the said Apprentice ac­cordingly, and doth likewise refuse to
seal the Counterpart of the said Indenture: These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the
said B. C. to come before us, or one of us, or some other Justice of the Peace
of the said County, to enter into Recognizance unto His said Majesty
conditioned for personal appearance at the next general Sessions of the Peace
to be holden at E. in the County afore­said, then and there to answer the
premisses, and farther to doe and receive as the said Court shall then
consider of him in this behalf. Hereof fail not at your perils, Given under
our hands and seals at, &c.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=17)

### 2.4. A Warrant against a Master for abu­sing his Apprentice.

To the Constable and Borsholders of H. &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath5 Eliz. 4. been made unto me by A. B. an
Apprentice, against C. D. his Master, both of the Parish aforesaid, That he
the said C. D. doth not allow unto his said Servant competent meat, drink, and
apparel, and doth immode­rately correct him without any cause at all, (or
turneth him out of his house and will not suffer him to return) as the Case
requireth. These are therefore (in his Majestie's name) to command you, that
some or one of you, do cause both the said Parties to come before me at H. on
Monday the tenth day of this instant Iune, at four of the clock in the
afternoon, to the end that I may examine the same mat­ter. Hereof fail not,
&c. Given under my hand and seal this, &c.

### 2.5. A Warrant against a disorderly Ap­prentice.

To the Constable, &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath5 Eliz. 4. been made unto me by A. B.
Joyner, against C. D. his Apprentice, both of your Parish of H. in this
County, That the said C. D. is a stubborn and disobedient Ser­vant, and doth
very much misbehave himself towards his said Master, (or that the said C. D.
[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=17) hath
departed from his said Master, &c.) These are therefore, &c. as in the
foregoing Warrant.

### 2.6. A Discharge of an Apprentice.

K. ss. WE R. K. H. D. E. F. G. H. four5 Eliz. 4. of His Majestie's Justices of
the Peace, &c. for the County of K. aforesaid, Whereas Complaint having been
made unto us by A. B. an Apprentice, against C. D. his Master, both of your
Parish of H. within this County, That the said C. D. his Master hath not
allowed to his said Servant competent diet, and apparel befitting such
Apprentice, and hath sometimes corrected him without any just cause at all,
and when he had cause, corrected him above measure, and we having ordered the
said Parties to appear before us, and ha­ving examined the Complainant find it
to be true, and therefore we do think fit to discharge the said Apprentice of
his Apprenticeship, And therefore do by these presents, under our hands and
seals pronounce and declare, That we have for the causes aforesaid, discharged
the said A. B. the Apprentice of his Appren­ticehood the eighth day of Iuly,
Annoque Dom. 1679\. Giv [...]n under our hands, &c.

### 2.7. A Warrant against one that depar­teth out of Service before his time
expired.

To the Constable and Borsholders, &c.

Kanc. ss. WHereas Complaint hath been made unto me this [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=18) present day by
A. B. of, &c. That one C. D. having been bound and put Apprentice to him the
said A. B. is now lately, contrary to Law, departed from his said Master
without his Li­cence, or other Lawfull discharge. These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to charge and command you, that you, some or one of you, do
attach the said C. D. when and where he shall be found within your several
Limits and Precincts. And thereupon do fur­ther bring him before me, or some
other of his Majestie's Justices of and within the said County to answer to
the premisses. And fur­ther to be dealt withall according to Law. Hereof. &c.

## 3\. Bail.

### 3.1. Recognizances for Bail.

#### 3.1.1.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod primo dieIf it be ta­ken before 1 Justice, say, uno
Iu­sticiarior' Domini Re­gis, &c. Maii, Anno Regni, &c. A. B. de, &c.
personalit' venit coram me C. D. uno Iusticiar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem
suam in Com' suo praedicto conservand' assign', & recognovit se debere eidem
Domino Regi decem libras legalis monetae Angliae, de bo­nis & catallis, terris
& tenementis suis fieri & levari, ad opus & usum dicti Do­miniAnno Do­mini not
necessary. Regis, haered' & successorum suorum, si defalt' fieret in
performatione Conditionis indorsat'.

#### 3.1.2.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quinto dieIf it be ta­ken before 1 Justice, say,
uno Iu­sticiarior' Domini Regis, &c. Octobris, Anno Regni, &c. A. B. de, &c.
G. H. de, &c. & J. K. de, &c. personalit' venerunt coram nobis [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=18) C. D. & E. F.
Iusticiar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com' suo praedicta conservand'
assignat', & recognoverunt se de bere eidem Domino Regi modo & forma sequen',
viz. praedict' A. B. viginti libras legalis monetae Angliae, & uterque
praedic­torum G. & J. decem libras consimilis monetae, de separalibus bonis &
catallis, terris & tenementis suis, separalit' fieri &Anno Do­mini not
necessary. levari, ad opus & usum dicti Domini Regis, haered' & successorum
suorum, si defalt' fieret in performatione Conditionis indorsat'.

### 3.2. A Condition to prefer a Bill and give Evidence.

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do
perso­nally appear before His Majestie's Justices of Gaol-delivery at the next
general Gaol-delivery to be holden for the within named County of Kent, and do
then and there prefer or cause to be preferred a Bill of indictment against W.
T. for the matters wherewith the said W. T. is charged before, The Iustices
within na­med (or the within named Iu­stices.) and do also then and there give
such evidence as he knoweth concerning the same, as well to the Jurors that
shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to
the Jurors that shall pass upon the Trial of the said W. T. for the same; That
then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force.

#### 3.2.1. If at the Sessions, then say:

Do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace
in the within named County of Kent, at the next general Sessions of the Peace
to be holden for the said [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=19) County at M. in
the County aforesaid, and do then and there prefer, &c. as in the foregoing
Condition.

### 3.3. A Condition to give Evidence.

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if thé within bound A, B. do
per­sonally appear before His Majestie's Justices of Gaol-delivery at the next
general Gaol-delivery to be holden for the within named County of Kent, and do
then and there give such Evidence as he knoweth against I. K. concerning the
matters wherewith he is charged, as well to the Jurors that shall enquire
thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors
that shall pass upon the Trial of the said I. K. for the same; That then this
Recogni­zance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force.

#### 3.3.1. If it be to appear at the Sessions, then say:

Do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace
in the with­in named County of K. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to
be holden for the said County at T. in the County aforesaid, and do then and
there give such Evidence, &c. as before.

#### 3.3.2. A Condition for Felony or suspicion of Felony.

The Condition of this Recognizance is2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum. If charged
but with suspicion, then say, such, That if the within bound A. B. do
per­sonally appear before His Majestie's Justices of Gaol-delivery at the next
general Gaol-delivery to be holden for the within named County of [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=19) Kent, then and
there to answer our Sovereign Lord the King for and concerning the the
sus­picion of his, &c. Fe­lonious taking and stealing of (as the Case is)
whereof he stands charged. where­withall he standeth charged before, &c. and
to doe and receive, &c. and do not depart the said Court without licence for
the same; That then this Recognizance to be void, or else it shall stand in
full force.

#### 3.3.3. If it be to appear at the Sessions, then say:

Do personally appear before His Majastie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace
in the with­in named County of K. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to
be holded for the said County at T. in the County aforesaid, then and there to
answer, &c. as before.

#### 3.3.4. If the Fellon be in Prison.

These are to charge and require you that immediately you bring before me the
body of A. B. now in your Custody to be Bailed, as Law requireth. Whereof fail
you not, &c. Given, &c.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=20)

## 4\. Bastards.

### 4.1. For the apprehending and conveying the Woman to the House of
Correction.

To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundreds of B. and C. in the said
County, and to every other His Majestie's Officers in the County a­foresaid,
whom the Execution thereof may con­cern.

Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or
one of you, do apprehend I. L. of B. in the said County, Single woman, and her
safely convey to the House of Correction for the said County at T. in the
County afore­said; and there deliver her to the Keeper of the same, together
with the Mittimus here­withall delivered unto you. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under our hands and seals at H. in the said County the second
day of Iune 1679\. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Se­cundi 31.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=20)

### 4.2. A Mittimus of the Mother of a Ba­stard-Child to the House of
Cor­rection.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at B. in the
County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. hath lately7 Iac. c. 4. May be chargeable to the
Pa­rish. 2 Iustices, Quaere, if not fit one to be of the Quorum, according to
18 El. c. 3. If she put in security to discharge the Parish, she cannot▪ be
punished by the Statute 7 Iac. but by that of 18 Eliz. Coke▪ Magna Charta,
fol. 733. had a Bastard-Child; These are therefore (in his Majestie's name) to
com­mand you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and her safely con­vey to the
aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver her to the said Keeper of the
same, (together with this Precept.) Command­ing also you, the said Keeper, to
receive her into the said House, and there punish and set her on work during
the term of one whole year, (according to the form of the Statute in that case
made and provided.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and
seals, &c.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=21)

### 4.3. A Warrant against the Mother (for the second Offence) to commit to
the House of Correction, and find Sureties of good Behaviour.

To the Constable and Borsholders of, &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. hath lately7\. Iac. cap. 4. &c. May be chargeable
to the Pa­rish. 2 Iustices; if not fit one be of the Quorum, according to
[...]8 El. c. 4. If she put in surety to discharge the Parish, she cannot be
punished by the Sta­tute 7 Iac. but by that of 18 Eliz. Coke Mag. Ch. fol.
733. had a Bastard-Child; And for asmuch as she hath before offended in the
like kind: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the
said Constable and Borsholders and every of you, That you, some or one of you,
do take the said A. B. and her safely convey to the aforesaid House of
Correc­tion, and there deliver her to the said Keeper of the same, (together
with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to re­ceive her into
the said House, and there punish and set her on work, untill she do put in
good security for her good Behaviour not to offend so again, (according to the
form of the Statute in that case made and provided.) Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

### 4.4. To convene the Mother and repu­ted Father.

To the Constable and Borsholders of, &c.2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as we are informed, That A. D. of the Parish of B. [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=21) in the County
aforesaid (within the said Parish)18 Eliz. cap. 3. hath lately been delivered
of a Bastard-Child (begotten and born out of lawfull Matrimony) yet living,
and chargeable to the Parish afore­said; And forasmuch as the said A. D. upon
her Examination taken hath charged E. F. of, &c. to have begotten her with
Child of the Bastard-Child aforesaid: These are there­fore (in His Majestie's
name) to command you and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do bring
the said Woman before us at the house of R. in T. in the County aforesaid,
upon the tenth day of Iune at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same
day, to be by us farther examined touching the premisses; and that you give
notice thereof unto the said E. F. (if conveniently you can) to the end that
he may likewise be at the time and place aforesaid to make his lawfull Defence
therein, (if he shall so think fit.) And farther, that you, some or one of
you, do give notice to the se­veral persons whose names are here under
writ­ten, that they and every of them are by us required to appear at the time
and place afore­said, to certifie their several knowledges touch­ing the
premisses; to the end that upon the examination of the Cause and Circumstance,
we may take such order therein as to Justice doth appertain. And lastly, that
what you shall doe in execution of this our Precept, you do make known unto us
at the time and place aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under
our hands and seals at, &c.

A. B. of, &c. C. D. of, &c. E. F. of, &c.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=22)

### 4.5. A Warrant against the reputed Fa­ther of a Bastard-Child.

To the Constable, &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as upon ExaminationDalt. 39. of A. B. of, &c. Single woman,
this day taken before me, (upon Oath) it ap­peareth that she is at present
with Child of a Bastard-Child, which is likely to be chargeable to the Parish
when it shall happen to be so born; And forasmuch as (upon her Examina­tion)
she hath confessed that C. D. of, &c. did beget her with Child of the Child
aforesaid, and hath before me charged him with the same: These are therefore
(in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders,
that you, some or one of you, do cause the said C. D. to come before me, or
some one of His Majestie's Justices of the PeaceLamb. 122. Cromp. 196. of the
said County at, &c. aforesaid, then and there to receive as by the said Court
shall be injoyned; and also that he shall in the mean time be of good
Behaviour, as well towards His said Majesty, as towards all His liege people.
Which if he shall refuse to doe, that then (without expecting any farther or
other War­rant) you, some or one of you, do safely con­vey him to the Gaol of,
&c. and him there deliver to the Keeper of the same, together with this
Precept. Commanding also you, the aforesaid Keeper, to receive him into the
said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, untill he shall find such sufficient
Security as aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your peril. Given under my hand and
seal at, &c.

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=22)

### 4.6. An Order for Releif of the Parish touching a Bastard-Child, and for
punishing the Mother and reputed Father.

Kent ss. THE Order of us W. B. and R. K. 18 Eliz. cap. 3. 2 Iustices, 1 of the
Quorum. Esquires, two of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said
County, (whereof one of us is of the Quorum) and both residing in the limits
where the Parish-Church of H. in the County aforesaid is the 19. day of April
in the year of our Lord 1672. (according to the form of the Statute in that
case made and provided) touching the male Bastard-Child late born in the
Parish of H. aforesaid, of the body of A. G. of the same Parish, Single woman,
(the keeping of which said Bastard-Child hath ever since the birth thereof
been, and still is chargeable to the Pa­rish aforesaid, and so likely to
continue charge­able.)

First, (upon our Examination of the Cause and Circumstance, and due
Consideration thereof by us had) we do adjudge W. S. late of H. aforesaid,
Tayler, the reputed Father of the said Bastard-Child.

And for Punishment of the said Mother and reputed Father, and the better
Relief of the said Parish, we do hereby order as followeth: that is to say,

We do order, That the said Mother shall by the Constable and Borsholders of
the Hun­dred of Great B. in the said County, or by some or one of them, (upon
some day, be­tween the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the common
High-way at or [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=23) near, &c. in the
Parish aforesaid) be stripped naked from the middle upwards, and then and
there shall be tied to the tail of a Cart or Dung­court, and being so stripped
and tied, shall be there openly whipped untill her body be bloudy.

We do also order, That the said reputed Father shall by the Constable and
Borsholders of the Hundred aforesaid, or some or one of them, (upon some day,
between the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the com­mon High-way
in the Parish aforesaid, over against the dwelling-house of I. S. there) be
stripped naked from the middle upwards, and shall then and there be tied to
the tail of a Cart or Dungcourt, and being so stripped and tied, shall be from
thence drawn to the Watch-house aforesaid, and on the way well whipped, in
such manner as is in such cases accustomed.

We do farther order, That the said Mother shall within three days next after
notice of this our Order render her body to the said Con­stable and
Borsholders, or to some or one of them, ready to undergo her Punishment before
ordered:

And that the said reputed Father shall with­in six days next after notice of
this our Order render his body to the said Constable and Bors­holders, or to
some or one of them, ready to undergo his punishment before ordered.

We do likewise farther order, That the said reputed Father shall within six
days next after notice given unto him of this our Order pay, or cause to be
paid, to the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid, or to some or one
of them, twenty shillings of lawfull money of England, towards the moneys by
them dis­bursed (before the said notice given) for or [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=23) towards the
charges of the keeping of the said Bastard-Child, from the time of the birth
thereof untill the time of the giving of the said notice.

And that upon every Friday which shall be next after the end of the said six
days, untill the said Bastard-Child shall attain unto his age of ten years,
the said reputed Father shall like­wise pay unto the Overseers of the Poor of
the said Parish (for the time being, (or unto some or one of them, sixteen
pence of lawfull mony of England, towards the charges by them dis­bursed
towards the keeping of the Bastard-Child aforesaid,) meaning between the end
of the said six days, and the time that he shall attain unto his said age of
ten years.)

We do farther order, That the said Bastard-Child shall be kept and nourished
by his said Mother untill he shall attain unto the age afore­said; and that
she (so far as she shall be able) shall during the said time so keep and
nourish the same.

We do lastly order, That both the said Mo­ther and reputed Father shall (for
ever from and after such time as the said Bastard-Child shall attain unto his
said age of ten years) joynt­ly and severally discharge the said Parish of and
from all charges whatsoever, for, touching or concerning the keeping or
relieving of the same.

In Witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names the day and year
first above written.

W. B. R. K.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=24)

### 4.7. A Warrant to be written under the Order aforesaid, for giving notice
thereof to the Mother and reputed Father.

To the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. The same Justices. in the
County aforesaid, and to every of them.

THese are (in His Majestie's name) to com­mand you and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do (with all convenient speed) give or cause to be given
notice of our Order, (a Copy whereof is herewith delivered unto you) both unto
the Mother and reputed Father therein mentioned; to the end that they and
every of them may the better observe and perform the same: And what you shall
doe in execution of this our Precept, you, some or one of you, do certifie
unto us, or one of us, (with all convenient speed next after the Execution of
the same) to the end that farther proceedings may be thereupon had as the Case
shall require, and to Justice doth appertain. Given under our hands and seals
at, &c. aforesaid the, &c.

### 4.8. A Warrant for the Punishment of the Mother and reputed Father of a
Bastard-Child.

To the Constable and Borsholders of, &c.

Kent ss. WHereas A. G. of Hawkh. in18 Eliz. cap. 3. 2 Iustices, 1 of the
Quorum. the said County, Single wo­man, was lately delivered within the said
[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=24) Parish of
a male Bastard-Child (begotten and born out of lawfull Matrimony) yet living,
and chargeable to the Parish aforesaid, and so likely to continue chargeable,
to the great burthen of the same Parish, and the defraud­ing of the Relief of
the impotent and aged true Poor of the Parish aforesaid, and to the evil
example and encouragement of lewd life; And whereas, upon our Examination of
the Cause and Circumstance, (according to the form of the Statute in that case
made and pro­vided) we have (in and by an Order by us this present day made,
and subscribed under our hands, touching the Bastard-Child afore­said)
adjudged W. B. the elder, late of Hawkh. aforesaid, Broad-weaver, the reputed
Father of the said Bastard-Child; And for Punish­ment of the said Mother and
reputed Father▪ (according to the form of the Statute afore­said) we have
thereby ordered, That the said Mother shall by you, some or one of you, (upon
some day, between the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the common
High-way, at or near the Watch-house at Highgate in the Parish aforesaid) be
stripped naked from the middle upwards, and then and there shall be tied to
the tail of a Cart or Dung-court, and being so stripped and tied, shall be
there openly whipped untill her body be bloudy; and that the said reputed
Father shall by you, some or one of you, (upon some day, between the hours of
nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the common High-way in the Parish
aforesaid, over against the house of I. B. there,) be stripped naked from the
middle upwards, and then and there shall be tied to the tail of a Cart or
Dungcourt, and being so stripped and tied, shall be from thence [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=25) drawn to the
Watch-house aforesaid, and on the way well whipped in such manner as is in
such cases accustomed; And that the said Mo­ther shall, within three days next
after notice of that our Order, render her body to you, some or one of you,
ready to nndergo her Pu­nishment before ordered: And that the said reputed
Father shall, within six days next after notice of our said Order, render his
body to you, some or one of you, ready to undergo his Punishment before
ordered: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to com­mand you and
every of you, that in case the said Mother and reputed Father, or either of
them, shall so render her, his, or their body or bodies to you, or any of you,
as aforesaid, that then you, they or he (to whom the same shall be so rendred)
do (with all convenient speed afterwards) proceed with effect to exe­cute
your, their or his office according to the faid purport of the Order
aforesaid, and do execute the same accordingly; And that what is done in the
premisses, you, or one of you, do (with all convenient speed, after the
afore­said, &c. day of, &c.) make known unto us, or one of us, to the end that
in case of failer by him or her of rendring his or her body to you or one of
you, (according to the said Or­der) such farther proceedings may be there­upon
had as to Justice doth appertain. Here­of fail not at your perils. Given under
our hands and seals at Hawkh. aforesaid the first day of May, 1672.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=25)

### 4.9. A Warrant and Mittimus against the reputed Father for not obeying the
Justices Order.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to the Keeper of the
common Gaol for the said County at Maidstone in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas by an Order by us18 Eliz. cap. 3. It is not expresly said
what Iustices shall com­mit: But I conceive it fit to be the 2 Iustices that
made the Order. But like­wise con­ceive that other Iusti­ces may so doe,
(muta­tis mutan­dis.) But I also con­ceive it fit that then it should be done
by 2 Iustices, whereof one of the Quo­rum. made, and subscribed under our
hands the first day of May last past, touch­ing a male Bastard-Child lately
born in the Parish of Hawkh. in the said County of the body of Anne Gardiner
of Hawkh. aforesaid, Single woman, (chargeable to the Parish afore­said) we
have adjudged Will. Bowman the el­der late of Hawkh. aforesaid, Broad-weaver,
the reputed Father of the said Bastard-Child; And for Punishment of the said
reputed Fa­ther, (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided, among other things in the said Order contained) have or­dered, That
he shonld by you the said Con­stable and Borsholders, or by some or one of
you, (upon some day, between the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in
the com­mon High-way in the Parish of Hawkh. afore­said, over against the
house of I. B. there) be stripped from the middle upwards, and then and there
should be tied to the tail of a Cart or Dungcourt, and (being so stripped and
tied) should be from thence drawn to the Watch-house at Highgate in the Parish
afore­said, and on the way well whipped, in such manner as is in such cases
accustomed; and [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=26) that he should
within six days next after no­tice of our said Order render his body to you
the said Constable and Borsholders, or some or one of you, ready to undergo
his punishment before ordered; And whereas it hath been duly proved before us,
that after the making of the said Order, and by the space of six days and
upwards before the day of the date hereof, the said Will. Bowman (so as
aforesaid the re­puted Father of the said Bastard-Child) had notice of the
said Order, and yet notwithstand­ing hath not hitherto rendred his body to you
the said Constable and Borsholders, or any of you, according to the purport of
the same, and so hath not for his part observed and per­formed the Order
aforesaid. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to com­mand you the
said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of
you, do attach the body of the said Will. Bow­man, and him deliver to the
aforesaid Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to be by him kept in the same without
Bail or Mainprise, (except he shall put in sufficient Surety to perform the
said Order, or also personally to appear at the next general Sessions of the
Peace to be holden in the said County;) And also to add such Order as the
Justices of the Peace of the County afore­said, or the more part of them, then
and there shall take in that behalf, (if they then and there shall take any;)
And that if at the said Sessions the said Justices shall take no other Order,
then to abide and perform the Order before made as is abovesaid. Commanding
also you, the said Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to receive then the said
Will. Bowman into the same, and him there safely to keep, according to the
purport and tenour of this Precept. [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=26) Given under our
hands and seals at Hawkh. aforesaid, the second day of Iune, Anno Dom. 1673\.
Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi 25.

### 4.10. An Order for Relief of the Parish in case of a Bastard out of the
Estate of the reputed Father.

To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of, &c. in the
County of, &c. and to every of them.

Kent ss. FO [...]asmuch as (upon your Com­plaint14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 2
Iustices, 1 of the Quorum. to us) it appeareth, That A. B. the reputed Father,
or Mother, of a Bastard-Child born in the Parish aforesaid, hath lately ran
away out of the said Parish, and left the said Bastard-Child upon the charge
of the Parish aforesaid, although A. B. hath Estate sufficient to discharge
the said Parish: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require and
authorize you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do seize and
take so much of the Goods and Chattels, and receive so much of the annual
Rents and Profits of the Lands of the said A. B. as will amount unto the summe
of, &c. which we doThis Order must be con­firmed at the Sessions. 18 Eliz.
cap. 3. 3 Car. c. 4. (according to the form of the Statute in that case lately
made) order you to take and re­ceive for or towards the discharge of the said
Parish, for the bringing up and providing for the aforesaid Bastard-Child.
Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=27)

### 4.11. A Warrant for Punishment of the re­puted Father of a Bastard-Child,
for not keeping the Child, and obeying the Order.

To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundreds of C. and B. and to every of
them, and to the Keeper of the common Gaol for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas upon our Examina­tion of the Cause and Cir­cumstance, and due
Consideration thereof by us had, touching a male Bastard-Child late born in
the Parish of C. in the said County, of the body of I. A. of C. aforesaid,
Single woman, (the keeping of which said Bastard-Child was at the time of
making of the said Order charge­able to the said Parish, and hath ever since
continued chargeable) we did by an Order by us made, and subscribed under our
hands the 19th. day of April last past, (according to the form of the Statute
in such case made and pro­vided) adjudge W. S. of H. in the said Coun­ty,
Tayler the reputed Father of the said Bastard-Child; and for the Punishment of
the said reputed Father, and the better Relief of the said Parish, we did
thereby order, That the said reputed Father should by the said Con­stable, or
by the Borsholder of the Town-Bur­rough, (within the Hundred aforesaid) upon
some day of the Market to be holden in the Town of C. in the said County,
(within the Hundred aforesaid) between notice given of that our Order given
unto him, and the 12. day of this instant A. (and now lately past) at the
[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=27) Market-
Cross in the Town aforesaid, (between the hours of three and five in the
afternoon of the same day) be stripped naked from the middle upwards, and tied
to one of the Posts of the Market-Cross aforesaid, (most visible to the said
Market) and then and there openly whipped untill his body be bloudy; and that
he should in such convenient time after notice of that our Order to him given
render his body to the said Constable and Borsholder, or one of them, (ready
to undergo his Punishment so ordered) as that the said Punishment might be
executed accordingly; And that the said reputed Father should pay to the
Overseers of the Poor, or one of them 20 s. by them dis­bursed hefore the said
notice given, for or towards the charge of keeping the said Child from the
time of its Birth; And that upon every Friday which (after notice to him given
of that our Order) should be during such time as the said Bastard-Child should
be chargeable to the said Parish of C. pay unto the Overseers of the Poor of
the Parish aforesaid for the time being, or to some or one of them, sixteen
pence of lawfull money of England, towards the charges by them disbursed for
relief of the Bastard-Child aforesaid; and that the reputed Father should for
ever after such time as the said Bastard-Child shall first cease to be
charge­able to the said Parish, discharge the Parish aforesaid of and from all
future charges what­soever, for, touching or concerning the keep­ing or
reliving of the same; And whereas (after the making of the said Order, and by
the space of six days and upwards before the day of the date hereof) the said
W. S. had notice of the said Order, and yet hath not ob­served or performed
any part thereof on his [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=28) part to be
observed and performed: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
command you the said Constable and Bors­holders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do attach the body of the said W. S. and him to deliver to
the aforesaid Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to be by him kept in the same
without Bail or Mainprise, (except he shall put in sufficient Surety to
perform the said Order, or else personally to appear at the next general
Sessions of the Peace to be holden in the said County) and also to abide such
Order as the Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid, or the more part
of them then and there shall take in that behalf, (if they then and there
shall take any;) and that if at the said Sessions the said Justices shall take
no other Order, then to abide and perform the Order before made as is
abovesaid. Commanding also you the said Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to
receive then the said W. S. in the same, and him there safely to keep,
according to the purport and tenour of this Precept. Given under our hands,
&c.

### 4.12. A Warrant for sending a Bastard-Child (found wandring) to the place
of its Birth.

To the Constable and Borsholders of, &c.

K. ss. WHereas upon our examination we find, That A. B. being the Bastard-
Child of C. D. and about the age of five years, hath been found wandring and
going up and down the Parish of H. and other places thereabouts, and was, as
we are credibly in­formed, [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=28) born in the
Parish of I. as appeareth by the Book of the said Parish: These are therefore
(in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, That (according to the
General usage, custome, and common acceptance of the Law in case of a lost
Child) you do con­vey the same Child to the said Parish of I. and that you the
Church-wardens and Over­seers of the Poor of that Parish, do take due care,
that the said Child may be there provi­ded for. Hereof fail not at your
perils. G [...] ­ven under our hands and seals the, &c.

### 4.13. A Warrant for apprehending a Wo­man on suspicion of having
mur­thered her Bastard-Child.

To the Constable, &c.

K. ss. WHereas I am informed that A. B. hath had a Child lately born alive of
her Body, and is suspected to have murthered or made away the said Child,
since the birth thereof: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
charge and com­mand you, that immediately upon sight hereof you do apprehend
and bring the body of the said A. B. before me or some other Justice of the
Peace of the said County to answer to all such matters and things as on the
behalf of His Majesty shall be objected against her touch­ing the premisses.
Likewise you are to make diligent search, by all lawfull means, to find out
the truth of the premisses, and to bring before me or some other Justice of
the Peace of the said County, all such persons as can give any information on
the behalf of His Majesty [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=29) touching the
premisses.. And hereof fail not, as you will answer the contrary at your
perils. Given under my hand, &c.

### 4.14. A Condition of a Recognizance for the Appearance of the reputed
Father of a Bastard-Child.

THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas the Overseers of the
Poor of the Parish of H. within mentioned did on the day of the date within
written com­plain to the Justice within named, that M. H. of the Parish
aforesaid, Single woman, was then with Child of a Child, which when born is
likely to be a Bastard, and chargeable to the said Parish; And whereas the
said M. H. upon her Examination (the day aforesaid) before the said Justice
did confess the same to be true, and charged the within bound I. N. to have
be­gotten her with Child of the Child aforesaid: If therefore the said I. N.
do answer unto such matters as shall be objected against him by the said M. H.
touching the said Bastard-Child, then this Recognizance to be void, or else,
&c.

### 4.15. The Condition of a Recognizance, of one charged to be the Father of
a Ba­stard-Child, before its Birth, to ap­pear at Sessions.

THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas upon Examination of
A. B. in the said County of K. Single woman, lately taken before the within
named Justice of the Peace, it appeareth that she was then [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=29) with Child,
which (when it shall be born) is likely to be chargeable to the Parish where
it shall happen to be so born; And whereas the said A. B. upon her said
Examination did charge the within bound C. D. with the beget­ting her with
Child of the Child aforesaid: If therefore the said C. D. do personally appear
before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in the County
aforesaid, at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said
County at, &c. in the County afore­said, to doe and receive as by the said
Court shall be enjoyned, (and shall in the mean time be of good Behaviour, as
well towards His said Majesty, as also towards all His liege people;) That
then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force.

### 4.16. A Condition to discharge Church-war­dens and Parishioners of a Child
born in the Parish.

K. ss. THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas M. H. hath of
late been delivered of a Man-child within the Parish of, &c. within written,
to the which Child the within bound E. G. by his own vo­luntary Confession
doth acknowledge himself to be the Father: If therefore the said E. G. his
Heirs, Executours or Assigns, or every or any of them, do from time to time,
and at all times hereafter, fully and clearly acquit, discharge and save
harmless as▪ well the within named I. B. and H. T▪ Church-wardens of the
Parish-Church of, &c. aforesaid, and their Suc­cessours for the time being,
and every of them, as also all the Inhabitants and Parishoners of [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=30) the said Parish,
which now are or hereafter shall be for the time being, and every of them, of
and from all and all manner of Costs, Char­ges and Expenses whatsoever, which
shall or may in any manner of wise at any time here­after arise, happen, come,
grow, impose or be imposed upon them or any of them, for or by reason or means
of the birth, education, nouri­shing and bringing up of the said Child, and of
and from all other Actions, Suits, Charges, Troubles Impeachments and Demands
what­soever touching and concerning the same; That then, &c

## 5\. Good Behaviour.

### 5.1. A Warrant and Mittimus for Good behaviour.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at C. in the
County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. &c. These 2 or 3 Iu­stices Lam. 119. First
Assig­navimus in the Com­mission of the Peace. are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Bolsholders, that you,
some or one of you, do cause the said A. B. to come before me, or some other
of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, to find sufficient
Se­curity, [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=30) as well for his
Appearance at the next2 or 3 Wit­nesses. 34 E. 3. c. 1. general Session of the
Peace to be holden for the said County at T. aforesaid, then and there to doe
and receive as by the said Court shall be injoyned; as also that he shall in
the mean time be of Good behaviour, as well towards His said Majesty, as
towards all His liege peo­ple: Which if he shall refuse to doe, that then
(without expecting any farther or other War­rant)Dalt. 290. to 297. you, some
or one of you, do safely con­vey him to the Gaol aforesaid, and him there
deliver to the said Keeper of the same, (to­gether with this Precept.)
Commanding al­so you, the aforesaid Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol,
and him there safely to keep untill he shall find such sufficient Securi­ty as
aforesad. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

### 5.2. Causes for the Good behaviour.

Threaten to hurt any in the body, of ill name and First Assig­navimus in the
Com­mission of the Peace. 34 E. 3. c. 1. Dalt. 290. to p. 297. Either of these
are sufficient. fame, and of very lewd life and conversations, or common
Barterer, or common Rioter, or common breaker of the Peace, or common
Alehouse-haunter, or common Drunkard, or common Swearer, or common
Woodstealer, or do keep a common Stew or Bawdy­house, or common Hedge-breaker,
or common Tale­bearer, or common Slanderer, or common Libeller, or common
Whoremonger, or common Whores, or com­mon sowers of Discord, a maker of strife
amongst his Neighbours, or common Night-walker, common Cheater, or common
Companions of Thieves, or common Messenger for Thieves, or common Pilfe­rers,
or commonly suspected to be Thieves, or do commonly practice Poysoning, or
common Eve-drop­pers, or are commonly suspected of Incontinency, [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=31) or common
harberers and entertainers of Whores, Rogues, or Thieves, or common Robbers of
Or­chards, or have sold Ale or Beer without Licence, and contrary to the
Command of the Iustice of the Peace, or are Idle persons, wandring up and
down, fare well and spend much in Alehouses, and have no known and visible
Estate to maintain it, or that A. B. hath begotten a Bastard Child on the Body
of C. and is like to be chargeable to the Parish, or hath a hand in sending
away the re­puted Father of a Bastard Child then left to the Charge of the
Parish, &c.

### 5.3. Another Warrant for Good behaviour.

To the Constable and Borsholder of A. &c.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as we have been credi­bly informed that A. B. of your Town of
C. &c. is a man of Evil behaviour, and one that dayly moveth discord between
his Neighbours, and a common disturber of His Majestie's Peace. These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you and every of you,
that immediately upon the sight hereof you bring before me (or some other of
His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) the Body of the said
A. B. to answer such matters as on His Majestie's be­half shall be objected
against him by C. D. and also that you require him to bring sureties for his
Good behaviour untill the next Sessions. And hereof fail not. Given under, &c.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=31)

### 5.4. A Mittimus to the Gaol for one that refuses to find Sureties for his
Good behaviour.

To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County
aforesaid, or to his lawfull Deputy thereof.

Kent ss. I Send herewithall the Body of A. B. Lamb. 120. 1 Iustice. of, &c.
for that he refuseth to find sufficient Sureties to be of Good behavi­our
towards His Majesty and all His liege▪ peo­ple, and to appear at the next
general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County at M. aforesaid,
straightly charging and comman­ding you in the name of our said sovereign Lord
the King to receive him the said A. B. into safe custody, and him safely to
keep in the said Gaol untill he shall find sufficient Sureties as aforesaid.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under, &c.

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=32)

### 5.5. A Supersedeas for the Good behaviour.

R. R. one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace within the said County of
Kent, To the She­riffs, Bayliffs, Constables, Tythen-men and all other His
said Majestie's Officers and Ministers within the said County, and to every of
them Greeting.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. in theCrompt. 237. County of K. aforesaid,
Yeoman, hath personally come before me, and hath found sufficient Sureties,
That is to say, C. D. of F. in the said County, Yeoman, and E. F. of G. in the
County aforesaid, Gent. either of the which hath undertaken for the aforesaid
A. B. under the pain of 10 l. and the said A. B. hath undertaken for himself
under the pain of 20 l. that he shall well, uprightly and honest­ly behave
himself as well towards His said Ma­jesty as towards all his liege people, and
espe­cially towards C. D. of K. in the said County, Yeoman, And that he will
personally appear at the next Quarter Sessions to be holden in the said County
of K. These are therefore to command you (in His Majestie's name) that you
utterly surcease to molest, arrest, trouble, or imprison the said A. B. for
the said occasi­on, And that if you have for the said occasion, (and for no
other) taken and imprisoned him, That then you do cause him to be delivered
and set at liberty without farther delay. Here­of fail not at your perils.
Given under my hand and seal, &c.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=32)

### 5.6. A Recognizance thereupon.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod primo die5 E. 6. c. 25. Two Justi­ces, one of the
Quo­rum. Observe to bind the Principal in 20. li. and each of the Sureties in
10 li. Octobris, Anno Regni Domi­ni Caroli Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Regis, Fi­dei Defensoris, &c. vicesimo nono,
apud C. in Com' praedict' A. B. de, &c. D. E. de, &c. & F. G. de, &c.
personaliter venerunt co­ram nobis H. J. & K. L. Iustic▪ dicti Do­mini Regis
ad pacem in Com' praedicto con­servand' assignat', & recognoverunt se de­bere
dicto Domino Regi modo & forma se­quen', viz. praedict' A. B. viginti libras
le­galis monetae Angliae, & uterque praedicto­rum D. E. & F. G. decem libras
consimi­lis monetae, separalit' levand' de separalibus bonis & catallis,
terris & tenementis suis, ad opus & usum dicti Domini Regis, haered' &
successorum suorum, si defalt' fieret in performatione Conditionis sequen'.

### 5.7. A Condition of a Recognizance for the same.

THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do
personally appear before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in
the within named County of K. at the If at the Assizes, then say, at the next
Assizes and general Gaol-deli­very to be holden for the said County, to doe
and re­ceive, &c. next general Assizes of the Peace to be holden for the said
County at T. in the County aforesaid, to doe and re­ceive what by the Court
there shall be then and there enjoyned; and shall in the mean time be of Good
behaviour towards our Sovereign [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=33) Lord the King
and all His liege people; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else
it shall stand in full sorce.

### 5.8. Another Condition.

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do
personally appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace of K. and M. in
the County aforesaid, then and there to doe and receive as by the said Court
shall be enjoyned; and do in the mean time keep His Majestie's Peace towards
His Majesty and all His liege people, and especially to T. A. of C. within
written; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else to stand in full
force.

### 5.9. Another Condition.

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do
per­sonally appear before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace
in the within na­med County of K. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to
be holden for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid, to doe and
re­ceive what by the Court there shall be then and there enjoyned; and shall
in the mean time be of Good behaviour towards our So­vereign Lord the King and
all His liege peo­ple; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it
shall stand in full force.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=33)

## 6\. Bridges.

### 6.1. A Warrant to a Hundred for As­sessing a proportionable Rate of a Tax
(appointed by the Body of the County) towards repair of the Coun­ty Bridges.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to C. D. E. F. &c.
Inhabitants of the said Hundred in the County aforesaid and to every of them.

Kent. ss. WHereas several common Bridges of the said Coun­ty were much out of
repair, The charges of Reparations whereof was estimated to amount to 750 li.
which were ordered to be repaired by the Body of the County aforesaid, The
pro­portionable part whereof to be born by the Hundred aforesaid do amount
unto 20 li. These are therefore (by virtue of His Majestie's Com­mission of
Oyer and Terminer) to us and others (on that behalf) directed (under the great
Seal of England) To command you (the said Constable and Borsholders) sorthwith
equally to assess and tax the said Hundred by a pound rate upon all Lands,
Tenements, Goods and Chattels (both real and personal) within the Limits,
Circuits and Bounds of the Hundred aforesaid (as hath usually been done within
the said Hundred (for publick Taxes,) And that you do collect and gather the
same so that you may have the same ready in the hands of you [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=34) the aforesaid
Constables within one and twen­ty days next after your receit of this Precept
(to be paid and disposed of) for and towards the purpose aforesaid as we some
or one of us shall (for that purpose) direct; And in case of refusal or
neglect of any person or persons to pay his, her or their proportion or
proportions of the said money (so by you assessed and taxed) within one week
next after demand thereof, that then you some or one of you do cause the said
per­son or persons (so refusing or neglecting) to come before us some or one
of us to be bound over (according to an Order by the said Commissioners in
that behalf made) to appear at the next general Assizes or Quarter-Sessions
for this Western Division of the said County which shall next happen after
such refusal or neglect to answer the same: and you are hereby further
required to make known unto us some or one of us (with all convenient speed
next after the end of the aforesaid one and twenty days) what you have done in
execution of this Precept. Given under our hands and seals the second day of
May, 1681.

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=34)

### 6.2. A Warrant to make a Tax for County Bridges repaired.

To the Constable of the Hundred of A. and to B. C. &c. Inhabitants of the said
Hundred, and to every of them.

Kent. ss. WHereas the usual BridgesIn allusion to the Sta­tute of 22 Hen. 8.
cap. 5. I conceive it fit to have 4. Iu­stices, whereof 1 of the Quor. of, &c.
within the said County were lately in great decay and unre­paired, and by an
Order made at C. &c. the said Decays and Irreparations were ordered to be
mended at the Charges of the said County, and have lately been amended
accordingly, the proportionable part of which said Charge thought fit to be
imposed upon this Division doth amount unto, &c. of lawfull money of England,
and the proportionable part of the same thought fit to be imposed upon the
said Hundred doth amount unto, &c. of like mo­ney: These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and Inhabitants, that you,
or any three of you at the least, (whereof you the said Constable to be one)
do forthwith (after publick no­tice before given, as is usual in other
Taxa­tions) make a Taxation of all and every the Inhabitants of the said
Hundred as in such cases.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=35)

### 6.3. A Warrant to collect a Tax for re­pairing County Bridges.

To A. B. and C. D. Inhabitants of the Hun­dred of E. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie'sIn allusion to the Sta­tute of 22 H. 8.
cap. 5. I conceive it fit to have 4 Iu­stices whereof one of the Quo­rum.
name) to command you, That you do forthwith collect and gather the several
summs of money (specified in the Taxation herewithall delivered unto you) of
the several persons therein mentioned to be taxed upon them for the purpose in
the said Taxation spe­cified, and that you do pay the same unto R. T. (whom we
have appointed general Receiver of the moneys raised for the purpose aforesaid
within this Division of the several Hundreds) on or before the second day of
May, (deduc­ting out of the same onely 5 s.) as by us al­lowed unto you for
and towards your pains in collecting and paying in of the same, and in case of
refusal or neglect of payment of any of the said parties so taxed of the
moneys tax­ed upon them as aforesaid (after demand made thereof by you or
either of you) that then you do certify unto us, or some or one of us, the
names of the said persons so refusing or neglec­ting,When mo­neys recei­ved as
much as you can get. with all convenient speed, to the end that such farther
proceeding may be had thereupon as to Justice doth appertain. Given under our
hands and seals at, &c.

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=35)

### 6.4. A Warrant for not paying the same.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint hath been made unto us by R. T. &c. (by us
appointed collectors and gatherers of the moneys imposed upon the said Hundred
for and towards the reparations of the several Bridges of D. in the said
County) that the se­veral persons (whose names are here under written) have
refused to pay unto them the several summs of money adjoyned to their se­veral
names (being taxed upon them for the purpose aforesaid) although the same have
been duly demanded of them: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said several persons
to come before us, or one of us, or some other Justice of the Peace of the
said County to answer the premisses, and far­ther to doe and receive as to
Justice doth ap­pertain, unless they shall forthwith pay the said moneys unto
you, some or one of you, which if they shall so doe, that then you (so
recei­ving the same) do forthwith pay the said mo­neys so received unto the
said R. T. &c. or one of them, to the end that the same may be byAs
afore­said. them paid over to the general Receiver of the moneys raised for
the purpose aforesaid by us formerly appointed. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

A. B. C. D. E. F. &c.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=36)

## 7\. Carriages for the King.

### 7.1. A Warrant to provide Carriages.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. WHereas we have (by War­rant13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Iustices. from the
Green-cloath) received notice to provide Carts and Carriages from the places
adjacent for the present service of His Majesty, (according to the form of the
Statute in that case made and provided:) These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or
one of you, do cause four suffi­cient Carriages within the said Hundred (each
Carriage to consist of four able Horses, or six Oxen, or four Oxen and two
Horses) to be and attend for the service aforesaid at B. in the said County
upon the first of April next ensuing at eight of the clock in the forenoon of
the same day. Hereof fail not at your pe­rils. Given under our hands and seals
the, &c.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=36)

### 7.2. Another Warrant for providing of Carriages for the King's use.

To the Constable and Borsholders of, &c.

Kent ss WHereas we have received13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Iustices. notice in
writing by War­rant under the hands and seals ofLord High Ad­miral of England,
or 2 more of the princi­pal Officers or Commis­sioners of His Maje­stie's
Navy, or Master of His Majestie's Ordnance, or Lieutenants of His Majestie's
Ordnance for providing of Carriages for the service of His MajestyService of
the Navy or Ordnance. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require
you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do cause to be sent to A.
ten Carriages on the second day of May next furnished with Horses or Oxen
sufficient for the said service. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under
our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=37)

### 7.3. A Warrant to levy the Penalty for not appearing with Carriages for
the King upon notice.

To the Constable and Borsholders of, &c.

Kent ss. FOr as much as it hath been duly13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Iustices, by
oath of the Officer or two cre­dible Wit­nesses. proved before us, That B. C.
of C. &c. having had reasonable notice to bring one Carriage to T. upon the
first day of May last for the service of his Majestie's Ordnance, (according
to the form of the Statute in that behalf lately made) hath Refuse or wilfully
neglect. wilfully neglec­ted so to doe, by which he hath forfeited for­ty
shillings (to the King's Majestie's use:) These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of
you, do demand of the said B. C. (to His Majestie's use) the aforesaid forty
shillings; and in default of payment up­on demand, that then you, some or one
of you, do forthwith levy the aforesaid forty shil­lings (to the use
aforesaid) by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said B. C.
rendring to him the overplus upon such Sale, (if there shall be any, the
charge of Di­straining being first deducted.) Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=37)

### 7.4. A Mittimus for one that doth im­press or take away any Cart or other
thing from the Owner, under pre­tence of power from the Green­cloath for
Carriage of His Maje­stie's Provisions, without lawfull Authority.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol at C. in the County aforesaid.12 Car. 2.
cap. 24. Settled the 13. of the same King cap. 8. Provision for His Majesty,
or the Queen, or any of the Chil­dren of the King or Queen. Or impress or take
any Cart, Car­riage, or other thing, without the consent of the Owner. 2
Iustices.

K. ss. FOr as much as it hath been made appear unto me, upon (the com­plaint
of A. B. of, &c. in the County afore­said) That C. D. of E. hath impressed a
Cart for Carriage of His Majestie's Provisions with­out consent of the Owner,
on pretence or co­lour of a Warrant from the Green-cloath, (con­trary to the
intent of the Statute in that case made and provided:) These are therefore (in
His Majestie's name) at the request of the said A. B. to will and require you
the said Consta­ble and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one
of you, do take the said C. D. and him deliver to the said Keeper of the Gaol
aforesaid, (together with this Precept.) Re­quiring and commanding also you,
the said Keeper, to receive the said C. D. into the Gaol aforesaid, and him
there safely to keep untill the next Sessions. And thereof neither you nor any
of you are to fail at your perils. Gi­ven under my hand and seal the second
day of May in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sove­reign Lord Charles the
Second, &c.

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=38)

## 8\. Certificates.

### 8.1. A Certificate from the Minister and chief Inhabitants of the Parish
of a man's Honesty.

K. ss. WE I.  [...]. Minister of the Word of God in the Parish of S. in the
said County of Kent, I. B. of S. aforesaid Constable of the Hundred of S.
wherein the said Parish standeth, I. B. and G. C. Church­wardens of the said
Parish, W. V. T. L. T. W. A. W. T. I. and E. H. &c. of the said Parish, and
most of us Freeholders within the same, Do hereby certify to all to whom it
shall concern, That A. B. one of the Inhabitants of the said Parish of S. is,
and by the space of five years last past, hath been a House­holder within the
said Parish, and by all that time hath behaved himself and lived in good sort,
and reputed a man of honest Conversa­tion, and hath paid according to his
degree all manner of Scots and Assesments as other the Inhabitants of the said
Parish have done. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands the ninth
day of May, 1681.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=38)

### 8.2. A Certificate for continuing of an Alehouse-keeper.

To the right Worshipfull His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace within the Lower
Division of L. in the County of Kent.

WE whose names are hereunto subscri­bed, Inhabitants of the Parish of H.
within the Division and County aforesaid, do humbly certify, That the now
Dwelling-house of A. B. Victualler is conveniently situated there for a
Victualling-house, and that he is of good name and fame, and the said House is
well accommodated for entertainment of Travellers, and that he keepeth good
Rule therein; And therefore we humbly desire your Worships that his Licence
for keeping the said Victualling­house there may be continued.

### 8.3. A Certificate for the time of the Birth of a Child.

THese are to certify your Worships, That A. B. Son of E. B. Widow, was born in
the month of August, in the year of our Lord God 1679. in the Parish of R. in
the County of B. about the latter end of the month. In witness whereof we, the
Neighbours and God­mother of the said Child, who were present at the birth of
the said Child, are ready to testify the same when your Worships shall please
to require it, and have hereunto set our hands this 30th day of November, Anno
Dom. 1679.

A. B. C. D. &c.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=39)

### 8.4. A Certificate for one that hath not been touched of the Evil.

WE the Rector and Ancient Inhabitants of the Parish of A. in the County of B.
whose names are hereunto subscribed, do up­on good Information certify, that
C. D. the Son or Daughter. of E. F. of the Parish aforesaid hath not as yet
been touched for the Distemper com­monly called the Evil. Given under our
hands, and seals this 10th day of March, Anno (que) Dom. 1680.

## 9\. Chimney-money.

### 9.1. A Mittimus for disturbing a Collectour.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majestie's common Gaol for the said County at M. in
the County aforesaid.16 Car. 2. cap. 3 1 Iustice dwelling near the place.
Proof upon Oath.

K. ss. FOr as much as it hath been duly pro­ved before me, That A. B. an
Of­ficer duly appointed to receive, collect and answer the Duty arising by
Fire-hearths and Stoves in this County, (according to an Act of Parliament,
intituled An Act for collecting the Duty arising by Hearth-money by Officers
to be ap­pointed [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=39) by his Majesty)
hath been vio­lently oppo­sed or inju­red. (in the due Execution of the said
Act) by C. D. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and
command you the said Constable and Bor­sholders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to His
Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same,
(together with this Precept.) Com­manding also you, the said Keeper, to
receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep by the space of
for any time (not ex­ceeding a month.) next after such deli­very of him unto
you. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, &c.

## 10\. Church.

### 10.1. For not coming to Church.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent. ss. FOr as much as I have received1 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Iac. c. 2. 14 Car. 2.
cap. 4. 1 Iustice of that Divi­sion. 1 Witness within a month after default
made. Information, That B. C. of D. in the County aforesaid, &c. did not upon
any of the, &c. Sundays last past resort or repair to any Church, or Chapel,
or other usual place ap­pointed for Common Prayer, and there hear Divine
Service, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made:) These are
there­fore (in His Majestie's name) to will and re­quire you, that you, some
or one of you, do cause the said B. C. to come before me, to an­swer the
premisses. Hereof fail not at your pe­rils. G [...]ven under my hand and seal
the, &c.

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=40)

### 10.2. To levy the Forfeiture for not com­ing to Church.

To the Church-wardens of the Parsh of A. in the said County, and to every of
them.

Kent. ss. FOr as much as B. C. of D. afore­said,1 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Iac. c. 4. 14
Car. 2. cap. 4. 1 Iustice of that Di­vision, &c. &c. did not upon Sunday the
second day of May, nor upon Sunday then next following, nor upon Sunday then
next following, resort or repair to any Church, Chapel, or other usual place
appointed for Common Prayer, and there hear Divine Ser­vice, (according to the
form of the Statute in that behalf made) and being called before me, did not
make sufficient excuse of his said de­faults to my satisfaction: These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, that you, or one
of you, do levy by Dis­tress and Sale of the Goods of the said B. C. three
shillings for his defaults aforesaid, to be1 s. per Sunday. imployed to and
for the use of the Poor of the said Parish, (rendring to him the overplus of
the money raised of the Goods aforesaid so to be sold;) and in default of such
Distress, that you do certify me thereof with all convenient speed, to the end
I may further proceed there­in as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof, fail not
at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, &c.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=40)

### 10.3. A Mittimus to the Gaol of one not repairing to Church (for want of
Distress.)

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol at B. in the County
aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas (by Warrant under1 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Iac. c. 4. 14 Car. 2. cap.
4. 1 Iustice of that Divi­sion. my hand and seal) the Church-wardens of the
Parish of A. in the said County were lately by me commanded to levy three
shillings by Distress and Sale of the Goods of B. C. of the Parish of A. in
the said Coun­ty, (to be imployed to and for the use of the Poor of that
Parish) for that he did not upon Sunday the second day of May, nor upon
Sun­day then next following, nor upon Sunday then next following, resort or
repair to any Church, Chapel, or other usual place appoin­ted for Common
Prayer, and there hear Di­vine Service, (according to the form of the Statute
in that behalf made;) and the Church­wardens aforesaid have returned to me,
that the said B. C. hath no Goods or Chattels suffi­cient for the levying of
the moneys aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and
require you, that you, some or one of you, do take the aforesaid B. C. and him
safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and him there deliver to the
Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Comman­ding also you, the
said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep,
untill payment shall be made of the moneys [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=41) aforesaid.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Gi­ven under my hand and seal the, &c.

### 10.4. To Distrain for a Church-Tax.

To the Church-wardens of the Parish of H. in the said County, and to either of
them.

Kent ss. FOr as much as complaint hath been by you made unto us, That the
several persons hereunder named have re­fused or neglected to pay unto you the
summs of money adjoyning to their several names, be­ing assessed upon them for
and towards the re­paration and maintenance of the Parish-Church of H.
aforesaid and other Church-duties, and for doing and performing such things as
by an Ordinance of Parliament (made the 9th day of Febr. in the year of our
Lord one thousand six hundred forty seven) are appointed to be done at the
charge of the said Parish: These are therefore (in His Majesties name) to
com­mand you, that you, some or one of you, do levy the said several and
respective summs of money by Distress and Sale of the several and respective
Goods of the said several and respec­tive Offenders, and likewise the summ of
2 s. more of every of them, for and towards the charge and expence in levying
of the same, ren­dring to the said several and respective parties the overplus
(if any be;) And in default of such Distress, that then you, or one of you, do
certify the same unto us, to the end that there may be such farther and other
proceedings touching the premisses as to Justice doth apper­tain. Given under
our hands and seals at H. aforesaid the 17th day of May, Anno Domini 1679\.
Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi 31.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=41)

### 10.5. Against a Minister for not reading Prayers, &c. once in a month.

To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. in the
said County.

Kent▪ ss. FOr as much as it hath been duly13 & 14 Car. 2. c. 4. 2 Iustices.
Confession, or 2 Wit­nesses. proved before us, That A. B, the proper Incumbent
of thePar­sonage, Vi­carage, or Benefice with Cure. The Ordi­nary may allow an
Impedi­ment. in the County aforesaid, doth reside on his Living and keep a
Curate, and hath not himself in person with­in one month now last past openly
and pub­lickly read the Common Prayers in and by the Book prescribed (by the
Statute made in the thirteenth year of His now Majestie's Reign, intituled An
Act for the Uniformity of Publick Prayers and Administration of Sacraments,
and other Rites and Ceremonies, and for establishing the Form of making,
ordaining and consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons in the Church of
England) in the Parish-Church of C. to the said Parishioners in such order,
manner and form as in and by the said Book is appointed, whereby he hath (by
virtue of the Statute aforesaid) forfeited five pounds to the use of the Poor
of the Parish aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will
and require you, and every of you, that you, or some of you, do demand of the
said A. B. the aforesaid five pounds to the use of the Poor aforesaid; and in
default of payment thereof within ten days after such demand, that you, or
some of you, do levy the same by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels
of the said A. B. rendring to him the surplusage. Hereof [...]ail not [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=42) at your perils.
Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

The like Warrant (mutatis mutandis) if he do not (if there be occasion)
administer each of the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, once in
every month.

### 10.6. A Mittimus for Preaching whilst Disabled.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County
at M. in the County aforesaid.

K. ss. FOr as much as we have received a13 & 14 Car. 2. c. 4. 2 Iustices.
Certificate from the Ordinary with­in whose Jurisdiction the Parish of T. in
the said County is situate, That A. B. being (by virtue of the Statute in that
behalf made) dis­abledSermon or Lecture. to preach any Sermon, did, during the
time that he did continue and remain so dis­abled, preach a Sermon in the
Parish-Church of T. aforesaid, (against the form of the Sta­tute: These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you the said Con­stable
and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the
said A. B. and him convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the
said Keeper thereof, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the
said Keeper, to receive him into the Gaol aforesaid, and him there safely to
keep by the space of three months, (without Bail or Mainprise.) Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under our hands, &c.

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=42)

## 11\. Coals.

### 11.1. Upon Complaint touching Coals.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.

Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's16 & 17 Car. 2. c. 2. 2 Iustices. name)
to require you to cause A. B. of, &c. to come before us at the house of, &c.
to answer such Complaint against him for Offences against an Act of Parliament
lately made (intituled, An Act for the regulating the measures and prices of
Coals) as hath lately been made unto us, and farther to doe and re­ceive as to
Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands
and seals the, &c.

### 11.2. For delivering a Moiety of such Coals as are sold contrary to the
Statute to the Informer.

To the Constable and Borsholders of, &c.

Kent ss. FOr as much as A. B. of, &c. is16 & 17 Car. 2\. c. 2\. 2 Iustices.
Sea-coals brought into the Thames must be sold by the Chauldro [...]
containing 36 bushels heaped up, according to the Bushel sealed at Guild-hall,
London: And Scotch­coals and other Coals (sold by weight) after the proportion
of 112 li. to the hun­dred (of Avoirdupois weight) without fallacy or deceit.
duly convicted before us, (ac­cording to the form of the Statute in that
be­half made, intituled, An Act for regulating the measures and prices of
Coals) That hesold or exposed to Sale. Half to the person prosecuting or
complaining. Parish where the Offence committed, or any other adjoyning Parish
or Parishes. did lately expose to sale forty Chauldron of Coals of the value
of, &c. (contrary to the form of the Statute aforesaid:) These are therefore
(in His Majestie's name) to will and require you [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=43) to seize the
Coals aforesaid, and the double value thereof; and that you do deliver the one
half of the Coals and value aforesaid unto C. D. (being the person prosecuting
in this behalf) to his use, and likewise that you do imploy and dispose the
other half of the same to and for the use of the Poor, or Repairing of the
High-ways of the Parish of M. where the said Offence was committed. Hereof
fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

### 11.3. Touching Prices of Coals.

To the Constable, &c.

Kent ss. FOr as much as (according to an16 & 17 Car. 2. c. 2. 3 Iustices of
the Quo­rum. Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act for regulating
the measures and prices of Coals) we did appoint and judge reasonable, that
Coals coming into the River of Thames within this County, and sold by re­tail,
should be sold at the rate and price of, &c. by the Chauldron; And forasmuch
as A. B. anIngros­ser or Re­tailer. of such Coals doth refuse to sell as a
[...]ore­said: We do therefore (according to the said Act) appoint and impower
C. D. and E. F. joyntly or severally, to enter into the saidWharf or place
where the Coals are stored up. where the said Coals are stored up, (and in
case of refusal to take a Constable to force entrance; which Constable is
hereby required [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=43) to act
accordingly.) And you the said C. D. and E. F. joyntly and severally, are
hereby farther appointed and impowered the said Coals to sell, or cause to be
sold, at the rate aforesaid, (rendring to the said A. B. the mo­ney for which
the said Coals shall be sold, ne­cessary charges being deducted.) For all
which this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given under our hands and seals
the, &c.

## 12\. Constables Charges.

### 12.1. A Warrant for making of Constables.

THese are (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you to make your2
Iustices. repair unto us, or to some other Justice of Peace of this County, to
take the Oath of a Constable to serve His Majesty within the Town of A. (If
not cho­sen at the Leet this Clause is to be omitted. according to the Choice
made of you by the Jury at the last Leet holden in your Town) And hereof fail
not. Dated, &c.

### 12.2. Or thus,

To A. B. C. D. and E. F. &c. Inhabitants of C. &c.

WHere [...]s A. B. of your Town of C. the now Constable thereof, is by rea­son
of his Age and Impotency very unable and insufficient to execute the said
Place: These are (in His Majestie's name) to charge and [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=44) command you,
whose names are hereabove written, to come and appear before me at my house at
H. to morrow being Thursday by eight a Clock in the morning, that I may make
Choice of one of you to be sworn to undertake the said Office. And hereof fail
not, &c.

### 12.3. A Warrant for a Tax for the Consta­ble's Charges in the Execution of
his Office.

Kent ss. FOr as much as we are informedI conceive that it is fit to have 2
Iustices, and one of them of the Quorum. Dalt. 165. by A. B. Constable of the
Hun­dred of D. in the County aforesaid, That he hath necessarily disbursed
(for and on the be­half of the Inhabitants of the said Hundred, in the
Execution of his said Office in and about the Service of His Majesty) several
summs of money, and (for his Reimbursement of the same) hath craved from us
such assistance as hath been in such cases accustomed: These are therefore (in
His Majestie's name) to require and authorize you the Inhabitants of the
Hundred aforesaid, whose names are here­under written, or the greater number
of you, to take and examine the Accompt of the said Constable touching the
premisses; and for his Reimbursement of such money (as you or the greater
number of you shall find upon the said Accompt to have been by him so
necessarily disbursed as aforesaid,) that you or the greater number of you do
forthwith make a Tax or Assessment of and upon all and every the In­habitants
of the said Hundred, in such manner as hath formerly in such cases been
accustomed within the same; and to authorize you, the [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=44) said Constable,
to demand, collect, and gather the said money so taxed and assessed; and in
case of refusal of payment thereof unto you, that then you do return unto us,
(or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) the
names of the persons so refu­sing, to the end that they may be farther
pro­ceeded against for the same as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not,
&c. Given un­der our hands and seals at, &c. the, &c.

> To A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. and N. O.

### 12.4. To appear and shew cause for their not paying the said Charges.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. These are (in His Majestie's name)I think 2 Iustices best, Quo­rum 1.
to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the several per­sons
whose names are hereunder written to come before some or one of us at the
house of T. N. Inn-holder at the George Inn, &c. in the  [...]aid County the
fifth day of Iune next ensuing, at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the
same day, to shew cause why they did not pay unto A. B. late Constable of the
said Hundred, the several summs of money hereunder mentioned, added to their
several names, and severally as­sessed upon them, for and towards his
Reim­bursement of moneys by him necessarily laid out, (for and upon the behalf
of the Inhabitants of the said Hundred in the Execution of his said Office in
and about the Service of His Majesty) [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=45) and farther to
doe and receive as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not at your pe­rils.
Given under our hands and seals at H. the first day of Iune 1679, &c.

A. B. xij. d. C. D. vi. d.

### 12.5. For refusing to appear to shew Cause for not paying the said
Charges.

To the Constable and Borsholders of, &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as the several personsBest 2 Iu­stices, Quo­rum unus. here-
under named were (by vir­tue of a Warrant to you directed under the hands and
seals of us A. B. &c. His Majestie's Ju­stices of the Peace of the County
aforesaid) war­ned to come before us, or some of us, this pre­sent day, &c. in
the said County, to shew cause why they did not pay unto A. B. late Constable
of the said Hundred, the several summs of money hereunder mentioned, (added to
their several names, and severally assessed upon them, towards his
Reimbursment for his necessary Disbursements for and on the behalf of the
Inhabitants of the said Hundred, in the Exe­cution of his said Office in and
about the Ser­vice of His Majesty) yet the aforesaid persons have refused so
to come, or to pay the moneys aforesaid: These are therefore (in His
Ma­jestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do bring the
aforesaid persons before us, or one of us, and other His Majestie's Justices
of the Peace of the said Coun­ty, at the house of, &c. in, &c. upon Monday the
fifth day of May, at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same, to shew
cause why [[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=45)
they do not pay they said moneys, and farther to doe and receive as to Justice
doth appertain, (unless they shall pay the moneys aforesaid.) Hereof fail not
at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

### 12.6. To levy the Charges upon their re­fusing to pay the same.

To the Constable of the Hundred of A. in the said County.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Com­plaint)14 Car. 2. 2 Iustices. it
appeareth unto us, That the several persons hereunder named have refused to
pay unto you the several summs hereunder specified, and severally added to
their several names, assessed on them (accord­ing to the form of the Statute
lately made) towards your Reimbursement of such moneys as you have disbursed
in and about the Execu­tion of your said Office, (according to the Sta­tute
aforesaid:) These are therefore to re­quire and authorize you, to levey the
said se­veral and respective summs so assessed upon the said respective
persons so refusing to pay the same, (rendring the overplus to the owners, if
any shall be.) Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

  * A. B. 11 s.
  * C. D. 13 s. &c.

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=46)

### 12.7. A Condition of a Recognizance to appear and answer the not paying
the same at next Sessions.

THe Condition of this Recognizance isSee Title Recogni­zances. such, That
whereas the within bound C. D. hath refused to pay to A. B. late Consta­ble of
the Hundred of D. in the within named County of K. assessed upon him the said
C. D. (for and towards the Reimbursement of the said late Constable of moneys
by him necessarily laid out for and on the behalf of the Inhabitants of the
said Hundred, in Execution of his said Office in and about the Service of His
Majesty:) If therefore the said C. D. do personally ap­pear before his
Majestie's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in the said County at the next
general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County at T. in the
County aforesaid, to doe and receive what by the said Court shall be enjoyned
touching the premisses; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it
shall stand in full force.

### 12.8. A Warrant for levying 3 s. 4 d. upon a Constable for neglect of his
Du­ty, in giving an account of Rogues, Vagabonds, &c.

To the chief Constables of A. and to the under Constables of H. and to their
Deputies greeting.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as at our Assembly at7 Iac. c. 4. A. the second day of Iune
last, [[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=46) for
the adjusting the accounts of the under Constable, according to a Statute made
in the reign of King Iames touching Rogues and Wanderers, A. B. of H.
aforesaid, was fined at 3 s. 4 d. for being negligent in his Office, and
refusing to make such account as by the said Statute is appointed: These are
there­fore (in His Majestie's name) to will and re­quire you, that some or one
of you, do forthwith upon the receipt hereof demand of the said T. C. the said
Fine, and if he shall re­fuse or neglect to pay the same unto you with­in
three days, that then you do immediately levy the said 3 s. 4\. d. by Distress
and Sale of his Goods and Chattels, rendring unto him the overplus thereof, if
any such shall remain. And lastly, that one of you the chief Constables do pay
the same unto the now Treasurer of the Marshalsey, at or before the next
Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden at B. for these parts, and this
shall be your sufficient Warrant in that behalf. Given under our hands, &c.

### 12.9. A Warrant to sell the Goods of an Offender that refuseth to bear his
own Charges to the Gaol.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath3 Iac. 10\. 1 Iustice. He that committed
him. For any of­fence or misdemea­nour. Must bear the charges of himself and
of those appointed to guard him thither; or that shall so guard him thither.
If the Of­fender be unable to bear his Charges the Parish­oners must do it.
been made unto me by the Pa­rishioners of C. in the said County, That whereas
A. B. being apprehended in the said Parish upon suspicion of Felony, and by my
Warrant for that cause sent from thence to His [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=47) Majestie's Gaol
for the said County at Maid­stone in the County aforesaid, the charges of the
said Parishioners in conveying and guard­ing him to the said Gaol did amount
to ten shillings, and the said A. B. hath refused to bear the same; And
forasmuch as I am credi­bly informed that the said A. B. hath Goods and
Chattels within the Parish of D. in the County aforesaid sufficient to defray
the said Charges: These are therefore (in His Ma­jestie's name) to command
you, and every of you, to seize so much of the said Goods and Chattels as
shall be sufficient to defray the Charges aforesaid, and to cause Apprisement
to be made thereof by four of the honest Inhabi­tants of the said Parish of D.
where the Goods are; And that you do after the said Apprise­ment sell the said
Goods, and that out of the moneys arising of the said Sale you do pay over
unto the Parishioners of A. aforesaid the aforesaid ten shillings, delivering
unto the said A. B. the overplus arising of the said Sale. Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=47)

### 12.10. A Warrant to make a Tax for con­veying a Felon to the Gaol.

To the Church-wardens and other substantial In­habitants of the Parish of A.
within the Hun­dred of B. in the said County Greeting.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. Constable of the Hundred aforesaid hath made
Complaint unto us that you refuse to make a Tax or Scot in the said Parish,
for conveying of C. D. of, &c. lately attached for Felony in the said Parish
to the Gaol, not having of his own to bear his Charges thither: These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and command you forthwith to make a
Tax or Scot for the discharge of such moneys as the said Complainant hath been
at in the pre­misses, or to come before us or some of us, at the house of, &c.
(sale die.) And then and there to shew cause why you do not so do. Hereof fail
not &c.

## 13\. Conventicles.

### 13.1. A Condition of a Recognizance in caseSee Title Recogni­zances. of an
Appeal made touching Conventicles.

THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas R. G. of R. in the
within named County of Kent, Gentleman, [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=48) was lately
convicted by the within named Ju­stices of taking upon him to teach in an
As­sembly lately held in the Parish-Church of Sandherst within written, (under
pretence of exercise of Religion in other manner then ac­cording to the
Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, against the form of the Statute
lately made to prevent and suppress Se­ditious Conventicles) and had therefore
(ac­cording to the Statute aforesaid) forfeited the summe of twenty pounds;
And for that (in the judgments of the said Justices) they did think the said
R. G. unable to pay the said summe of twenty pounds, they did therefore (by
their discretions) adjudge five pounds thereof to be levied by Distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the within bound W. W. who was also
(according to the said Statute) convicted of being present at the said
Assembly, (contrary to the Statute aforesaid:) And whereas the said W. W. was
also by the said Justices convicted, for that he at the time of the said
Assembly was one of the Church­wardens of the said Parish, and knowing the
said Assembly to be holden within the same, did not give information thereof
to any Ju­stice of the Peace, nor endeavour the Convic­tion of the parties
which were at the said As­sembly, nor of any of them, (according to the duty
of his said Office) but wittingly and wil­lingly did omit the performance of
his Office aforesaid in the execution of the said Statute, (against the form
of the same) by which he forfeited the summe of five pounds: And the said two
several summs of five pounds have (by Warrant of the said Justices) been
le­vied of the Goods and Chattels of the said W. W. and he hath the day and
year within writ­ten [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=48) appealed from
the Justices aforesaid to the judgment of the Justices of the Peace of the
said County in their next Quarter-Sessions: If therefore the said W. W. do
prosecute the said Appeal (with effect,) that then this Recogni­zance shall be
void, or else it shall stand in full force.

And forasmuch also as the aforesaid Wife ofWhere Of­fender is a Feme-Co­vert,
levy upon her Husband. the said S. B. is a Feme-Covert cohabiting with the
said S. B. (her Husband;) These are therefore, &c. (prout, &c.) forthwith to
levy the aforesaid five shillings (so imposed upon her as aforesaid) by
Distress, &c. (prout, &c.)

And forasmuch as a man unknown did thenWhere Tea­cher is a man un­known. and
there take upon him to preach or teach, (prout the Record) you may levy twenty
pound upon any the Offenders as in your judgment shall seem fit.

### 13.2. A Record of a Conventicle.

¶ This Record must be written in Parchment, and would be better in Latin,
according to the Precedent ensuing.

K. st. MEmorandum, That upon the tenth22 Car. 2\. Regis, c. 1\. 2 Iustices. By
Conses­sion of the party, or Oath of witness, or notorious e­vidence of the
fact. Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting. day of Iune in the 31. year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, (by the grace of God) of
England; Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c. it was
(according to the form of an Act of Parliament in that behalf lately made,
intituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) duly proved
to [[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=49) us,
That A. B. being of the age of sixteen years and upwards, and a Subject of
this Realm, was (upon the first day of Iune now last past, in the Parish of,
&c.) present at T. in the said County, under under colour or pretence of
exercise, &c. of exercise of Religion, in other manner than is allowed by the
other then is allowed by the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England.
Where five persons are present more than those of the same houshold. of the
Church of England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid.) Of all which we have the
day and year first above written made this Record under our hands and seals.

### 13.3. A Record concerning Conventicles where several persons are
con­victed.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod J. S. de Sundrich in Com' praedict' Yeoman, Ed. W.
de W. in Com' praed' Gene­rosus, Maria uxor G. J. de parochia de E. in Com'
praed' Husbandman, Eliz. Williard de Edenbridge praed' in Com' praed' vidua,
J. B. de, &c. (cum multis aliis, in toto se attingen' ad numerum duodecim
personarum,) & quilibet eorum, die Solis vicesimo sexto die Junii, Anno Regni
Domini Regis nunc vicesimo secundo, ultra  [...]tatem sexdecim annor' &
subditi dicti Dom' Re­gis nun [...] existen', praed' 26. die Junii, Anno
vi­cesimo secundo supradicto, insimul assemblaver' & praesentes fuer', &
quilibet eor' praesens fuit, in domo mansionali ipsius Annae Pelham, viduae,
in praed' parochia de Edenbridge in Com' praed' ad Conventiculum, sub colore
exercitationis (An­glice [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=49) exercise)
Religionis in alio modo quam se­cund' Liturgiam & practicationem (Anglice
practice) Ecclesiae Angliae (ad tunc & ibidem tent') contra formam Statuti
praevenire & sup­primere seditiosa Conventicula nuper edit' & provis.

Memorandum etiam, Quod (tempore & loco supradictis) praed' Johannes Stiles
assumpsit su­per se docere in Conventiculo praed', & in eodem (adtun [...] &
ibidem) docuit, contra formam Sta­tuti praed'; Quódque praed' Anna Pelham
vidua tempore supradicto scienter (Anglicè wittingly) & voluntarie permisit
Conventiculum praedictum fore tenend' in domo mansionali sua praed', (etiam
contra formam ejusdem Statuti.)

Record' quarum quidem separalium offensarumQuaere, if there must not be two
Justices. Ego Willielmus Leche miles, (unus Iustic' dicti Domini Regis ad
pacem suam in Com' suo pr [...]d' conservand' assign') cui (secundum formam &
effectum Statuti praed') separales offens. praed' sic (ut praefertur) fore
commiss. sufficient' apparuit, per praesentes sub manu & sigillo meo undecimo
die Julii, Anno vicesimo secundo supradicto, apud Westerham praed' in Com'
praed' feci. Praedictique Johannes Stiles, Edwardus Whitaker, praedict' Maria,
uxor praed' Georgii Johnson, Eliz. Williard, Josephus Browne junior, Josephus
Browne senior, Johannes Fletcher, Robertus Pelham, Anna Pelham vidua A. B. &
Dorothea Pelham Spinster, de separalibus offensis suis (in Record' praedict'
superius mentionat') per Recor­dum illud (virtute Statut' praed') plene &
per­fecte convicti sunt, & quilibet eorum inde separa­lit' plene & perfecte
convict' est. Et ego praefat' Iusticiar' superinde (virtute Statut' praed')
die, Anno & loco ultim' mentionat' Finem quinque solidor' super quemlibet
offensor' (Anglicè Offen­ders) praed' sic (ut prefertur) ad Conventicu­lum
[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=50) praed'
praesent' existen' (pro separali offensa sua praed') imposui. Praedictaque
Anna Pelham vidua pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipsa (ut prae­fertur)
permisit Conventiculum praed' fore tenend' in domo mansionali sua praedicta,
forisfecit sum­mam viginti librar' (virtute Statuti praed'.) Praedictúsque
Johannes Stiles pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) assumpsit
su­per se docere in Conventiculo praedicto, & in eo­dem (ut praedictum est)
docuit, forisfecit sum­mam viginti librarum (virtute Statuti praed'.)

### 13.4. A Record of the Conviction of cer­tain persons taken at a
Conven­ticle.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod S. B. de par. de C. &c. prout, &c. & quidam alius
homo ignotus, (in toto se attingen. ad numerum octo personarum) & quilibet
eorum, 3. die, &c. Anno, &c. ultra aetatem, &c. & subdit', &c. quorumque ad
numerum quinque per­sonarum non adtunc fuerunt de familia Roberti Kite de
praedicta par' &c. in Com' praed' Mer­cer, (in praed' par' de Stapl.) eodem 3.
die, &c. Anno, &c. insimul assemblaverunt & presentes fuerunt, & quilibet
eorum praesens fuit, in domo mansionali ipsius Roberti Kite in praed' par' de
Stapl. in Com' praed' (ad Assembl. sub colore, &c. prout, &c. & adtunc & adhuc
in pleno robore existen'.)

Memorandum etiam, Quod praed. homo igno­tus ad tunc & ibidem assumpsit super
se docere in Ass. praed. & (ad tunc & ibidem) docuit, (etiam contra formam
ejusdem Statut.)

Memorandum etiam, Quod praed. Robert. Kite tempore supradicto scienter (Angl.
wittingly) [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=50) & voluntarie
permisit Ass. praed. fore tenend. in domo mansionali sua praed. (etiam contra
for­mam Statuti praed.)

Record. quarum quidem separalium offensa­rum Nos J. H. Miles, W. C. S. B. & R.
K. Arm. (Iustic. dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com. sua praed. cons.
ass.) quibus (se­cundum formam & effectum Sta [...]uti praed.) se­parales
offens. praed. sic (ut praefertur) fore commiss. sufficient. apparuit, per
praesent. sub ma­nibus & sigillis nostris 17. die Apr. Anno 27. supradicto
apud C. praed. in Com. praed. fecimus. Praedictique Sam. Bates & praed. uxor
ejus, Henr. Start, &c. Robert. Kite, & praed. homo ignot', de separalibus
offens. suis in Recordo praed. superius spec. per Record. illud (virtute Stat.
praed.) plene & perfecte convict. sunt, & quilibet eorum inde separalit. plene
& per­fecte convict. est. Et nos praefat. Iustificiarii superinde (virtute
Stat praed.) die, anno & loco ultim. mentionat. super quemlibet offensorum
(Anglice Offenders) praed. (sic ut praefertur ad Assembl. praed. praesent.
existen.) pro separali offensa sua praed. Finem quinque solidorum im­posuimus.
Praedictúsque homo ignot. pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipse (ut praefertur)
assumpsit super se docere in Assembl. praed. & (adtunc & ibidem) docuit,
forisfecit summam viginti libra­rum, (virtute Stat. praed'.) Praed. Robert.
Kite pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) permisit. Ass.
praed. fore tenend. in domo mansionali sua praed', forisfecit summam viginti
librarum, (virtute Stat. illius.) Et quia (in judiciis nostris) putamus praed.
H. Start fore pauperem & inhabilem solvere praed. finem quinque solid. super
ipsum pro offensa sua praed. (eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) praesens fuit ad
Ass. praed'. ut praefertur) impositum; Et eo [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=51) quod praed.
finis quinque sol. super praed. homi­nem ignot. (eo quod ipse (ut praefertur)
prae­sens fuit ad Ass. praed', ut praefertur) impo­sit' de bonis & catallis
suis levari non potest: Ideo (ex discretionibus nostris) praed. duos
se­parales fines 5 sol. ult. mentionat. de bonis & catallis praed. C. B. qui
(ut praefertur) ad Ass. praed. praesens fuit, nos praefat. Iusticiarii (apud
Cr. praed. in Com. praed. eodem 17. die Apr. Anno 27. supradicto) levari
adjudicavi­mus. Et quia praedictus homo qui (ut prae­fertur) assumpsit super
se docere in Ass. praed', & adtunc & ibidem docuit, est extraneus, (Angl. a
stranger) & nomen & habitatio sua incognit. exist'; Ideo (ex discr. nostris)
praed. summam 20 li. per ipsum pro offens. sua prae­dicta (ut praefertur)
forisfact', nos (praesat. Iusticiarii, die, anno & loco ult. mentionat.) de
bonis & catallis separalium personarum hic postea mentionat. levari
adjudicavimus modo & forma sequen'; videlicet de bonis & catallis praed. J. B.
qui, &c. (prout, &c.) 9 li. & 10 s. inde, & de bonis & catallis praed. C. B.
qui etiam, &c. (prout, &c.) 40 s. inde, & de bonis, &c. praed. R. C. qui
etiam, &c. (prout, &c.) 100 s. (inde resid',) &c. ut in Recordo.

In quarum omnium rerum test. nos praefat. Iustic. (die, anno & loco ult.
mentionat.) man. & sigill [...] nostr. praesentibus opposuimus.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=51)

### 13.5. Memorial of a Record of a Con­venticle.

Kent ss. A Memorial of the Account of the Moneys mentioned in the Record
certified at the Quarter-Sessions of the Peace holden for the said County at
Maidstone in the County aforesaid, (on Tuesday next after the Close of Easter,
1679.) by Sir I. H. Knight, W. C. S. B. and R. K. Esquires, (four of His
Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) forfeited (as in the said
Record is mentioned) in an Assembly holden (in the dwelling-house of R. K. in
the Parish of Sta­pleherst in the County aforesaid) under colour of exercise
of Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy of the Church of
En­gland, upon the thirtieth day of March, 1675.

His Majestie's third part of the said Forfeitures by the said Justices tendred
into the Court of the general Sessions of the Peace holden for the said County
at M. aforesaid on Tuesday next after the Close of Easter, 1679\. and by
appointment of the same by the said Justices paid to Sir I. C. Knight and
Baronett, (She­riff of the said County) to His Majestie's use. Viz.

For R. C. 20 d. 20 d. and 39 s. 4 d. All which was levi­ed and paid to the
said Ju­stices since the last general Sessions of the Peace holden for the
said County at M. aforesaid, viz. 02 02 08

Summa patet.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=52)And as
concerning the moneys in the said Record mentioned to be payable by the
several persons  [...]ere under named, His Majestie's third part whereof
cometh to as followeth, viz.

S. B. 20 d. 20 d. and 3 l. 3 s. 4 d. In all———

03

06

08

C. B. 20 d. 20 d. 20 d. and 13 s. 4\. d. In all——

00

18

04

I. B. 20▪ d. and 23 s. 4 d. In all——

01

05

00

R. K.—

06

13

09

In all—

12

03

09

The said Justices do say, that they did up­on the seventeenth▪ day of April
1678\. (be­ing the day of the Conviction of the persons aforesaid for their
Offences in the said Record mentioned) make out their Warrants for le­vying
thereof, but they have not as yet re­ceived▪ the same, or any part thereof;
nor is the same, or any part thereof, (as yet) levi­ed (that they know of,)
though they have di­ligently enquired after the same.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=52)

### 13.6. A Mittimus thereupon, upon the first Offence.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at B. in the
County aforesaid.

K. ss. Forasmuch as C. D. was this present22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices. day
(according to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act
to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles▪) convicted by Record (by us
made) of being present in the Parish of C. in the said County at an As­sembly,
Con­venticle, or Meeting. under colour or pretence. of exercise of Religion in
other manner then is allowed by the Liturgy or practice. of the Church of
England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid;) And whereas we did upon the said
Conviction fine the said C. D. not ex­ceeding 5  [...]i. for his said Offence,
and he did not pay down the said Fine unto us: These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Borsholders,
and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and him
safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the
Keeper of the same, (to­gether with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the
said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep
(without Bail or Mainprise) by the space of no [...]x exceeding 3 months. next
after such delivery of him unto [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=53) you. Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under our, &c.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the
Iustices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do, if
the Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5 li. per annum Free­hold
or Copy-hold, or 50 li. in Goods.

### 13.7. A Mittimus upon the second Offence.

To the Constable, &c. (as in the precedent Warrant.)

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. was this pre­sent22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices.
day (according to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An
Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Con­venticles) convicted (by Record by
us made) of being present in the Parish of T. in the said County at an
As­sembly, Con­venticle, or Meeting. under colour or pretence. of exercise of
Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or practice. of the
Church of England, (con­trary to the Act aforesaid;) And whereas we did upon
the said Conviction fine the said C. D. not exceeding 10 li. for his said
Offence, and he did not pay down the said Fine unto us; And for­asmuch as the
said C. D. hath been once before that time convicted of the like Offence,
(con­trary to the Act asoresaid:) These are there­fore (in His Majestie's
name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Bors­holders, [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=53) and every of
you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and him safely
convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper
of the same, (together with this Precept.) Com­manding also you, the said
Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep (without
Bail or Mainprise) by the space of not ex­ceeding six months. next after such
delivery of him unto you. Hereof fail not, &c.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the
Iustices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do; if
they be satisfied that the Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5
li. per annum Freehold or Copyhold, or 50 li. in Goods.

### 13.8. A Mittimus upon the third Con­viction.

To the Constable and Borsholders, &c. (as in the precedent Warrant.)

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. was this22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices. present day
(according to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, in­tituled, An Act
to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) convicted (by Record by us
made) of being present in the Parish of T. in the said County at an As­sembly,
Con­venticle, or Meeting. under colour or pretence. of exer­cise of Religion
in other manner than is al­lowed by the Liturgy or practice. of the Church of
England, [[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=54)
(contrary to the Act aforesaid;) And foras­much as the said C. D. hath been
twice be­fore that time convicted of the like Offence, (contrary to the said
Act:) These are there­fore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you
the said Constable and Bors­holders, and every of you, that you, some or one
of you, do take the said C. D. and him safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol
aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with
this Precept.) Command­ing also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the
said Gaol, and him there safely keep (without Bail or Mainprise) untill the
next general Quarter-Sessions for the West-Division of this County, the next
Assizes, Gaol-delivery, Great Sessions, or Sitting of Oyer and Ter­miner, in
the County aforesaid, (which shall first happen;) And that you then and there
have him, to be farther proceeded against as by the said Act is directed.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the
Iustices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do, if
they be satisfied that the Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5
li. per annum Free-hold or Copy-hold, or be worth 50 li. in Goods.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=54)

### 13.9. A Record against one that suffereth a Conventicle, &c. to be kept in
his house.

¶ I conceive it fit that this Record be written in Parchment. And Quaere if
not fit to be in Latin.

Kent ss. MEmorandum, That upon the22 Car. 2. Regis, c. 1. 2 Iustices. By
Confes­sion of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious Evidence of the fact.
second day of Iune in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles
the Second, (by the grace of God) of Eng­land, Scotland, France and Ireland
King, De­fender of the Faith, &c. it was (according to the form of an Act of
Parliament in that be­half lately made, intituled, An Act to prevent and
suppress Seditious Conventicles) duly proved to us, That R. T. of, &c. did
wittingly and willingly suffer Assemb. Conventicle or Meeting. under under
colour or pretence of exercise of, &c. other than, &c. of exercise of
Religion, in other manner than is allowed by the by the Liturgy or practice
of, &c. of the Church of England, to be held in his in House, Out-house, Barn
or Room, Yard or Back-side, Woods or Grounds. in the Parish of T. in the said
County on, &c. day now last past, (contrary to the Act aforesaid.) Of all
which we have the day and year first above written made this Record under our
hands and seals.

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=55)

### 13.10. A Mittimus thereupon, upon the first Conviction.22 Car. 2. cap. 1.
2 Iustices. By Confes­sion of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious
Evidence of the fact.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at C. in the
County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as D. E. was this pre­sent day (according to the form of an
Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act to prevent and suppress
Seditious Conven­ticles) convicted (by Record by us made) of wittingly and
willingly suffering Assem­bly, Conven­ticle, or Meeting. under under colour or
pretence of exercise of Religion o­ther than,  [...]. by the of exercise of
Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or practice  [...]f,
&c. of the Church of Eng­land, to be held in his in House, Out­house, Barn or
Room, Yard or Back-side, Woods or Grounds in the Parish of T. in the said
County upon the second day of Iune now last past, (contrary to the Act
aforesaid;) And whereas we did upon the said Conviction fine the said D. E.
not ex­ceeding 5 li. for his said Offence, and he did not pay down the said
Fine unto us: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and
command you the said Con­stable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do take the said D. E. and him safely convey to His
Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same,
(together with this Pre­cept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to
receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep (without Bail or
Mainprise) [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=55) by the space of
not ex­ceeding 3 months. next after such delivery of him unto you. Hereof fail
not at your pe­rils, &c.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the
Iustices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do, if
the Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5 li. per annum Freehold or
Copy-hold, or 50 li. in Goods.

### 13.11. A Mittimus thereupon, upon the se­cond Conviction.

To the Constable, &c. (as in the precedent War­rant.)

K. ss. FOrasmuch as, &c. (as in the pre­cedent 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. as in the
precedent Warrant. Not exceed­ing 10 li. not exceed­ing 6 mon. Warrant, till
you come to these words) And he did not pay down the said Fine unto us; (go on
thus) And forasmuch as the said D. E. hath been once before that time
convicted of the like Offence, (contrary to the Act aforesaid: These are
therefore, &c. (as aforesaid.)

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) &c. as aforesaid.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=56)

### 13.12. A Mittimus thereupon, upon the third Conviction.

To, &c. (as in fol. 102.)

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as, &c. (as in fol. 102.22 Car. 2. cap. 1. till you come to
these words) And forasmuch as the said D. E. hath been twice before that time
convicted of the like Offence, (contrary to the said Act:) These are
there­fore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said
Constable and Borshol­ders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do
take the said D. E. and him safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid,
and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this
Precept.) Com­manding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said
Gaol, and him there safely keep (without Bail or Mainprise) untill the next
general Quarter-Sessions, (for the West Division of this County) the next
Assizes, Gaol-delivery, Great Sessions, or Sitting of any Commission of Oyer
and Terminer, (in the County aforesaid) which shall first hap­pen; And that
you then and there have him to be farther proceeded against, as by the said
Act is directed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and
seals the, &c.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis, &c.) as aforesaid.

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=56)

### 13.13. A Warrant to levy the Penalty of the Statute upon the Teacher in a
Conventicle.

To the Constable, Borsholders, Headboroughs and Tithingmen of the Hundred of
M. & C. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Church-wardens
and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, and to
every of them▪ and to all and every other Officers within the said County,
whom the exe­cution hereof may concern.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I did (this presentThis is by way of Cer­tificate, where
the Offender lives in another County, (made to a Iustice of Peace.) day)
receive a Certificate (to me directed) under the hand and seal of W. E. of S.
in the County of Sussex, Esquire, (one of His Majestie's Justices assigned to
keep His Peace in the said County of Sussex) That G. H. of C. aforesaid,
Tailour, was (upon the first day of this instant August) by him con­victed (by
proof to him made according to an Act of Parliament, intituled, An Act to
pre­vent and suppress Seditious Conventicles, lately made and provided) of
being present in the Barn of R. W. of W. in the said County of Sussex,
Husbandman, and there did take up­on him to preach or teach at a Conventicle,
(the five and twentieth day of Iuly last past) under pretence of exercise of
Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy and practice of the
Church of England, and contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid; [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=57) and that
therefore, being thereof convicted as aforesaid, the said G. H. did forfeit
for the said first Offence twenty pounds and that he (the said Justice) had
(by virtue of the said Act) imposed on him (so convict as aforesaid) for his
said Offence the said summ of twenty pounds, (as being thought by him able to
pay the same, as by the said Certificate appear­eth:) These are therefore (by
virtue of the Act aforesaid) in His Majestie's name, to com­mand you, that
you, some or one of you, do forthwith levy the said twenty pounds, (by
Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said G. H;) And that when
you or any of you have so levied the said twenty pounds, (or any part thereof)
that then you, they or he that hath so levied the same, do forthwith deliver
the moneys so levied to the aforesaid W. E. (to be by him distributed
according to the Act aforesaid.) Hereof neither you nor any of you are to fail
at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at A. in the said County of Kent
10\. Aug. 1679\. Annoque Reg­ni Regis Caroli Secundi 31.

### 13.14. A Warrant pro testes to prove the Conventicle.

To the Constable, (as in the precedent War­rant.)

Kent ss. WHereas we have (this day) received information, That several persons
(upon the 19. day of Iune last [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=57) past) were
present in the Parish of S. in the said County at a Conventicle then and there
held, under colour of exercise of Religion in other manner than according to
the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, (con­trary to the form of
an Act of Parliament late­ly made and provided to prevent and suppress
Seditious Conventicles;) And whereas we are also informed, That the several
persons here under named can testify the particulars and truth of the
premisses: These are therefore (in his Majestie's name) to command you and
every of you, that you do give notice to the several persons, that they and
every of them are by us commanded to appear before us at the house of R. K.
Esq in H. in the County aforesaid on Wednesday the first day of this instant
August at 8 of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, then and there to
testify their several knowledges touching the premisses. Whereof neither they
nor any of them are to fail at their perils. And you are farther hereby
commanded to appear (at the time and place aforesaid,) to make appear un­to us
what you have done in the execution hereof. Hereof also you are not to fail
at1 Iustice enough. your perils. Given under our hands and seals at H. in the
said County the, &c. day of, &c. 1670\. 22 Car. &c.

A. B. of, &c. &c. as many as be▪

C. D. of, &c. &c. as many as be▪

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=58)

### 13.15. A Warrant to levy the money upon the Offenders.

To the Constable, (as in page 105.)

K. ss. FOrasmuch as R. L. of the said Pa­rishNote, You must make your War­rant
into the several Hundreds and Liber­ties where the Offen­ders inha­bit▪ and
use their addi­tion, prout the Record. of S. Mercer, was (this pre­sent day,
according to an Act of Parliament to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles lately made and provided) by us convicted of his wittingly and
willingly suffering an Assem­bly to be holden in his dwelling-house in the
said Parish of S. upon the 30. day of March now last past, (under colour of
exercise of Re­ligion in other manner than according to the Liturgy and
practice of the Church of England, contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid)
by which he hath (according to the said Act) for­feited the summe of twenty
pounds for his said Offence: These are therefore (in His Maje­stie's name) to
command you and every of you, forthwith to levy▪ (by Distress and Sale of the
Goods and Chattels of the said Robert Kite) the aforesaid summe of twenty
pounds; And you and every of you are (in his Majestie's name) hereby farther
commanded, that when you or any of you have (as aforesaid) levied the summe
aforesaid, that then they or he ha­ving so levied the same do forthwith
deliver the same to us or one of us, to be distributed accor­ding to the said
Act. Hereof neither you nor any of you are to fail at your perils. Given
un­der our hands and seals at C. &c. prout supra.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=58)

### 13.16. A Warrant to levy the money upon the Offenders.

To the Constable, &c. (prout precedent War­rant.)

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as W. W. of the afore­said Parish of S. Gent. (one of the
Church-wardens of the said Parish) I. H. of the Parish aforesaid, Yeoman, (the
other Church-warden of the said Parish) T. N. of the Parish aforesaid,
Chandler, (one of the Over­seers of the Poor of the said Parish) I. W. the
elder of the Parish aforesaid, Yeoman, G. P. &c. (many others) W. H. of the
Parish aforesaid, Yeoman, (Headborough of the North Borough in the said
Parish) &c. (prout) were every of them this present day by us convicted,
(ac­cording to an Act of Parliament to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles lately made and provided) of being present (in the Parish-Church
of Sandherst aforesaid in the County aforesaid) upon Sunday the nineteenth day
of Iune last past (between the hours of nine and twelve before noon the same
day) at an As­sembly then and there held, (under pretence of exercise of
Religion in other manner than ac­cording to the Liturgy and practice of the
Church of England, contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid;) and we have (by
virtue of the said Act) imposed upon every of the said Offenders (so convicted
as aforesaid) a Fine of five shillings for that his respective offence: These
are therefore (in His Majestie's name) [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=59) to command you
and every of you, forthwith to levy upon every of the said Offenders
(re­spectively)▪ by Distress and Sale of his respective Goods and Chattels the
aforesaid Fine of five shillings. And forasmuch as R. Giles of Rol. in the
said County, Gent. did then and there take upon him to teach (in the Assembly
afore­said,) and did then and there teach, (against the form of the Act
aforesaid) and was this present day by us (according to the said Act)
convicted of his said Offence, and he hath (for the same) forfeited the summe
of twenty pounds; and for that (in our judgments) we do think the said R. G.
unable to pay the said summe so forfeited as aforesaid: We have there­fore (by
our discretions) adjudged the same to be levied of the Goods and Chattels of
the aforesaid W. W. I. H. Da. Pet. and I. C. who (as aforesaid) were all of
them present at the Assembly, and are thereof (as aforesaid) con­victed; and
the same summe of twenty pounds to be levied in manner following. That is to
say, one hundred shillings thereof of the Goods and Chattels of the said W. W.
other one hun­dred shillings thereof of the Goods and Chat­tels of the said I.
H. other one hundred shil­lings thereof of the Goods and Chattels of the said
D. P. and the other one hundred shillings thereof (residue) of the Goods and
Chattels of the said I. C. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
command you and every of you, forthwith to levy one hundred shillings (parcel
of the said summe of twenty pounds) by Distress and Sale of the Goods and
Chat­tels of the said W. W. and to levy other one hundred shillings (other
parcel of the said summe of twenty pounds) by Distress and Sale of the Goods
and Chattels of the said I. H. [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=59) and to levy
other one hundred shillings (other parcel of the said summe of twenty pounds)
by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said D. P. and to levy
the other one hun­dred shillings (residue of the said summe of twenty pounds)
by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said I. C. And
for­asmuch as Thomas Hur of the aforesaid Parish of Sand. Labourer, was (this
present day by us convicted (according to the Act aforesaid) of being present
at the Assembly aforesaid, (contrary to the said Act) and we have also (by
virtue of the Act aforesaid) imposed upon him a Fine of five shillings (for
that his Of­fence;) and for that we do (in our judg­ments) think the said
Thomas Hur poor, and unable to pay the said summe of five shillings (upon him
for his said Offence imposed, as aforesaid:) We have therefore (by our
discre­tions) adjudged the same to be levied of the Goods and Chattels of the
said I. W. who (as aforesaid) is convicted of the like Offence at the same
Assembly. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you and
every of you, forthwith to levy the said Fine of five shillings by Distress
and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said I. W. And forasmuch as T. H. of
B. in the County aforesaid, Malster, was (this present day) by us convicted
(according to the Act aforesaid) of being present at the Assembly aforesaid,
(contrary to the said Act) and for that the said T. H. heretofore committed
the like Offence, and (according to the form of the Act aforesaid) was thereof
convicted, therefore he (for his said Offence of being present at the Assembly
herein before mentioned) hath in­curred the penalty of ten shillings: These
are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=60) you and every
of you, forthwith to levy the said ten shillings by Distress and Sale of the
Goods and Chattels of the said T. H. And for­asmuch as Mary (the Wife of the
said Iohn Wats) and Elizabeth (the Wife of the said Iohn Cogger) were both of
them (this present day) by us convicted (according to the Act aforesaid) of
being present at the Assembly aforesaid, (contrary to the said Act) and we
have (by virtue of the Act aforesaid) imposed upon the said Mary a Fine of
five shillings for that her said respective Offence; and we have also (by
virtue of the said Act) imposed upon the said Elizabeth a Fine of five
shillings for her said respective Offence; and for that the said Mary is a
Feme-Covert, (cohabiting with the said Iohn Wats her Husband) and the said
Eli­zabeth is also a Feme-Covert, (cohabiting with the said Iohn Cogger her
Husband;) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you and
every of you, forthwith to levy the aforesaid Fine of five shillings so
impo­sed upon the said Mary (as aforesaid) by Di­stress and Sale of the Goods
and Chattels of the said Iohn Wats; and to levy the aforesaid Fine of five
shillings so imposed upon the said Elizabeth (as aforesaid) by Distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said Iohn Cog­ger. And forasmuch as the
aforesaid W. W. (at the time of the said Assembly) was, and still is one of
the Church-wardens of the Parish of Sand. aforesaid, and the aforesaid Iohn H.
then also was, and still is the other Church­warden of the aforesaid Parish,
and the afore­said Tho. Nurley then was, and still is one of the Overseers of
the Poor of the said Parish, and the said Will. Hammon then was, and still is
Headborough of the North Borough in the Pa­rish [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=60) aforesaid; and
every of them was (this present day) by us (according to the said Act)
convicted, for that he knowing the Assembly aforesaid (in form aforesaid) to
be holden within his aforesaid Parish, did not give infor­mation thereof to
any Justice of the Peace, nor endeavour the Conviction of the parties
afore­said, or any of them, but wittingly and wil­lingly did omit the
performance of his duty, in execution of the Act aforesaid, (against the form
of the said Act) for which Offence every of them respectively▪ hath forfeited
the summe of five pounds: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
command you and every of you to levy the summe of five pounds (by the said
William Ward so forfeited as is last be­fore mentioned) by Distress and Sale
of his Goods and Chattels; and to levy the summe of five pounds (by the said
W. H. so forfeited as is last before mentioned) by Distress and Sale of his
Goods and Chattels; and to levy upon the other Church-warden, (prout.) And you
and every of you are hereby (in His Ma­jestie's name) farther commanded, that
when you, or any of you, have (as aforesaid) le­vied the several Fines and
Forfeitures aforesaid, (or any of them) that then they or he so ha­ving levied
the same do forthwith deliver the same to us, (or one of us) to be distributed
(according to the said Act.) Hereof neither you nor any of you, &c. (prout
common form.)

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=61)

### 13.17. To levy money upon a Gaoler, &c. for suffering one committed (up­on
this Act) to go at large.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
&c.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly pro­ved22 Car. 2. cap. 4. compared with
41. 2 Iustices. Confession of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious
E­vidence of the fact. before me, That A. B. Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol at
C. in the County afore­said did upon the 10th day of Iune last past per­mit D.
E. to go at large, contrary to the War­rant of his Commitment made by virtue
of an Act of Parliament lately made, (intituled, An Act to prevent and
suppress Seditious Conventi­cles) and contrary to the Act aforesaid: These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said
A. B. ten pounds by him forfeited for his said Offence; and that you do pay
the moneys so levied to the Church­wardens of the Parish of T. in the said
County, (for the relief of the Poor of the said Parish.) Given under our hands
and seals the, &c.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) if the Keeper of the House of Correction
suffer the Of­fender to go at large.

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=61)

### 13.18. The like for suffering one at large to joyn with the Offender in
custody in the exercise of Religion, &c.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
&c.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly pro­ved22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices.
Confession of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious E­vidence of the fact.
before us, That A. B. Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol at C. in the County
afore­said did upon the 10th day of Iune last past per­mit E. F. being then a
person at large, to joyn with D. E. (a person committed to his custody by
virtue of an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act to prevent and
suppress Sedi­tious Conventicles) in the exercise of Religion differing from
the Rights of the Church of En­gland, (contrary to the Act aforesaid:) These
are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you and every of
you, that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the
said A. B. ten pounds by him forfeited for his said Offence; and that you do
pay the moneys so levied to the Church­wardens of the Parish of T. the Parish
where the Offender did last inhabit, in the said County, (for the relief of
the Poor of the said Parish.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our
hands and seals the, &c.

The like (mutatis mutandis) against the Keeper of the House of Correction, if
he offend in the like case.

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=62)

### 13.19. Against a Peer of the Realm for be­ing at a Conventicle, the first
Conviction.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
&c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices of the
place or division where the Peer dwels, one of the Quorum. of this Realm) was
this present day (according to the form of an Act of Par­liament lately made,
intituled, An Act to pre­vent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) convic­ted
(by Record by us made) of being present in the parsh of V. in the said County
at an As­sembly, Con­venticle, or Meeting under colour or pretence of exercise
of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or prac­tice of the
Church of England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid:) These are therefore (in
His Majestie's name) to charge and command you and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said T. Lord C.
ten pounds, (for the Of­fence aforesaid;) and that you do pay the moneys so
levied to the Church-wardens of the aforesaid Parish of V. (for relief of the
Poor of the said Parish.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our
hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=62)

### 13.20. Upon the second Conviction.

To the Constable, &c. (as in the precedent Warrant.)

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer22 Car. 2. cap. 1. of, &c. as in the
precedent War­rant, till you come to these words, contrary to the Act
aforesaid; go on thus,) And forasmuch as the said T. Lord C. hath been once
before that time convicted of the like Offence, (con­trary to the said Act:
These are therefore, &c. to levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said T.
Lord C. twenty pounds, &c.

### 13.21. Against a Peer for suffering a Con­venticle, &c. to be kept in his
House, &c. the first Conviction.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.22
Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices of the place or division where the Peer dwels. 1 of
the Quorum.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer of this Realm) was this present day
(according to the form of an Act of Par­liament lately made, intituled, An Act
to pre­vent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) con­victed (by Record by us
made) of wittingly [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=63) and willingly
suffering an As­sembly, Con­venticle, or Meeting. under colour or pretence. of
exer­cise of Religion in other manner than is allow­ed by the Liturgy or
practice. of the Church of England to be held in his in House, Out­houses,
Burns or Rooms, Yard or Back-side, Woods or Grounds. in the Parish of V. in
the said County upon the 12. day of Iune now last past, (contrary to the Act
aforesaid:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command
you and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and
Chattels of the said T. Lord C. ten pounds, (for the Offence aforesaid;) and
that you pay the moneys so levied to the Church-wardens of the aforesaid
Parish of V. (for relief of the Poor of the said Parish.) Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

### 13.22. Upon the second Conviction.

To the Constables, &c. (as in the precedent Warrant.)

K. ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices, &c. (as
in the prece­dent War­rant.) of this Realm, &c. as in the pre­cedent Warrant)
And forasmuch as the said T. Lord C. hath been once before that time
con­victed of the like Offence, (contrary to the said Act:) These are
therefore, &c.

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=63)

### 13.23. A Mittimus for a Nonconformist, &c.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at, &c.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices. proved
before us, That A. B. Parson, Vicar, Cu­rate, Lec­turer, or other per­son. (in
Holy Orders,) Stipendary, or other person who hath been possessed of any
Eccle­siastical or Spiritual promotion, who hath not declared assent to the
Com­mon Prayer, (prout the Act of 14\. of this King, cap. 4.) or Preacher in
Conventicle upon the 12. day of, &c. or, &c. was within five miles of not be
within five miles of a City, Town-Corporate, or Borough that sends Burgesses
to Par­liament, or of any Parish-town or place wherein he or they have since
the Act of Oblivion been Parson, Vicar, Curate, Stipendary, or Lecturer, or
taken upon them to preach in a Conventicle. Nor shall any teach School, take
Boarders (to be taught) till he take and subscribe the Oath in this Act
(pro­ut, &c.) and frequent Divine Service. (contrary to the form of the
Statute in that case made and provided, intituled, An Act for restraining
Nonconformists from inhabiting in Corporations:) These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to will and require you to take the said A. B. and him convey
to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deli­ver him to the Keeper of the same,
(together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive
him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep for six months, (without
Bail or Mainprise.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and
seals the, &c.

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=64)

### 13.24. A Certificate to the Militia, &c. for Aid, in Case of a
Conventicle.

To the Lieutenant, any Deputy-lieutenant, or any Commissioned Officer of the
Militia, or any other His Majestie's Forces, the Sheriffs, Iustices, or other
Magistrates and Ministers of Iustice, joyntly or severally.

Kent ss. THese are to certifie you, That I22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 1 Iustice, upon
his in­formation or know­ledge. A. B. (one of His Majestie's Ju­stices of the
Peace, &c.) have received In­formation of an unlawfull an un­lawfull Meeting
or Conventicle held or to be held. under under colour or pretence of the
exerci­sing Reli­gion, &c. or prevent. of exercise of Religion in other manner
than is allowed by the Liturgy or practice, &c. of the Church of England,
(contrary to an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act to prevent
and suppress Seditious Conventicles) at T. in the Parish of C. in the County
aforesaid; And that I (with such as­sistance as I can get together) am not
able to dissolve, dissipate, suppress or dissolve the same. All which I do
certifie unto you, to the end that you may repair unto the said place
aforesaid, and doe therein as by the said Act is required and enjoyned. Given
under my hand and seal the, &c.

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=64)

### 13.25. A Certificate made by a Iustice, where the Offenders live in a
Corporation.

Kent ss. S. B. and R. K. Esquires, (two of His Majestie's Justices assigned to
keep the Peace in His County aforesaid) To the chief Magistrate of the
Corporation of Tenterden in the said County Greeting. Where­as W. S. of Tent.
aforesaid in the County afore­said, Yeoman, was (this present day before us)
convicted (according to an Act of Par­liament to prevent and suppress
Seditious Con­venticles lately made and provided) of beingThis will serve to a
particular Iustice in another County, (mutatis mutandis.) present in the
dwelling-house of I. B. in the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid upon the
sixth day of this instant Iuly at a Conventicle then and there held, (under
colour of exercise of Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy
and practice of the Church of England, contrary to the form of the Act
afore­said;) and we have (by virtue of the said Act) imposed upon him a Fine
of five shil­lings (for that his Offence;) And whereas also the said I. B. was
this present day (before us) also (according to the said Act) convicted of his
wittingly and willingly suffering the Con­venticle aforesaid to be held in his
aforesaid dwelling-house, (contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid) for
which his Offence he hath forfeited the summe of twenty pounds; And for that
we do (in our judgments) think the said I. B. poor, and unable to pay the said
summe of twenty pounds (by him as aforesaid forfeited:) We have therefore (by
our discre­tions) adjudged one hundred shillings thereof to be levied of the
Goods and Chattels of the [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=65) aforesaid W. S.
(who, as aforesaid, was pre­sent at the same Conventicle.) And foras­much as
the said W. S. is an Inhabitant in the Corporation aforesaid, we do therefore
hereby certifie you of the premisses, to the end you may proceed thereupon as
by the said Act is required. Given under our hands and seals at C. in the said
County the one and twentieth day of Nov. An. Dom. 1679\. 31, &c.

### 13.26. A Certificate for the taking the Oath, according to the said Act.

Kent ss. I A. B. (one of His Majestie's Ju­stices15 Car. 2. cap. 1. of the
Peace of the County of K.) do humbly certifie, That D. E. did this present day
before me take the Oath men­tioned in an Act of Parliament lately made,
(in­tituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) in these
words, I do swear that I do not hold the taking of an Oath to be unlawfull,
nor refuse to take an Oath on that account. In testimony whereof I the said A.
B. have here­unto set my hand and seal the, &c.

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=65)

## 14\. Corporations.

### 14.1. A Certificate upon taking the Oaths, and subscribing the
Declarations mentioned in the Act for Regulating Corporations.

Kent ss. MEmorandum, That A. B. of C. 13 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Iustices. did upon
the 21. day of May last past, before us whose names are hereunto subscribed,
(His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) take the Oaths of
Alle­geance and Supremacy, and the Oath appoin­ted to be taken by the Statute
made in the 13. year of His now Majestie's Reign, (intituled, An Act for the
well Governing and Regulating of Corporations) and did likewise before us
sub­scribe the Declaration in the said Statute men­tioned. In testimony
whereof we have here­unto set our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=66)

## 15\. Court-Leet and Court-Baron.

### 15.1. A Precept directed to the Bailiff of the Mannor by the Steward of
the Court-Baron to warn the Court.

To the Bailiff of the said Mannor.

Kent ss. THese are to require you to warn all the tenants of the said Mannor
(whose names are here under written) and all other the tenants of the same,
personally to ap­pear at the Court-Baron to be holden for the Mannor aforesaid
(at the place accustomed) upon Thursday the tenth day of this instant Month of
August, at eight of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, then and there
to doe and perform their several Suits and Ser­vices, (according to the custom
of the said Mannor) and have you there the names of such persons as you have
so warned, and this Precept. Given under my hand and seal the first day of
August, 1676\. 28. Regni Regis Caroli Secundi.

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=66)

### 15.2. A Precept to warn a Jury▪ for a Court-Leet.

To the Constable, &c.

Kent ss. THese are to will and require you to give publick notice within the
said Hundred, That His Majestie's Court-Leet and view of Franck-pledge for the
same, shall be holden at the house called the Red Lion in B. upon Thursday the
seventeenth day of this instant October, at ten of the Clock in the Forenoon
of the same day: And that you warn all persons that do owe any Suit or
Ser­vice to the said Court, That they and every of them personally be and
appear at the time and place aforesaid, then and there to do and per­form the
same; And that more especially you warn four and twenty honest and lawfull men
of the said Hundred, to appear at the time and place aforesaid, to enquire for
our Sove­reign Lord the King of those things which to the said Court do
appertain. And that you your selves be then and there also personally present,
and have you there the names of such persons as you have so warned, and this
Precept. Gi­ven under my hand and seal the second day of Octob. 1680\. 32
Regni Regis Caroli Secundi.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=67)

### 15.3. A Precept for a Borsholder, or other Officer, to take upon him the
said Office, and to repair to a Justice of Peace to take his Oath for his
faithfull execution of the same.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of F. and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as at His Majestie's Court-Leet holden this present day for
the said Hundred of F. you are elected [name the Office. Borsholder] for the
year to come: These are therefore to will and require you, upon receipt
hereof, to take upon you the said Office; And forthwith to repair to one of
His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the County of K. before him to take
your Oath for your faithfull execution of your said Office. Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under my hand and seal the second day of March, Anno Dom.
1680\. Regni Regis Caroli Secundi tricesimo secundo.

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=67)

### 15.4. A Precept to bring in a Scould to be tried at a Court-Leet.

K. ss. RIchard Kilburne, Esquire, Steward of His Majestie's Court-Leet,
hol­den this present day for the said Hundred, to the Constable of the Hundred
aforesaid, and Officer of the said Court greeting. Forasmuch as E. P. of the
Parish of C. in the said County, Spinster, otherwise called E. the Wife of R.
T. of the aforesaid Parish of C. in the County a­foresaid, Labourer; was at
His Majestie's said Court, holden before me this present day, by the Oaths of
twelve honest and lawfull men of the Hundred aforesaid, presented for her
being a common Scould at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, within
the Jurisdiction of the said Court, as well with her Neighbours as with other
the Liege people of the King, whereby they are much molested, disquieted and
grieved (against the Peace of the said King, his Crown and Dignity,) to the
great disturbance and disquiet of His Majestie's Liege people, and against his
Peace, These are therefore to command you to cause the said E. P. to come
before me, or my sufficient De­puty, at the next Court-Leet of our Sovereign
Lord the King, to be holden at C. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, (within
the Juris­diction of the said Court) upon Saturday the second day of Octob.
next ensuing, to answer the premisses. And further to do and receive as the
said Court of the said King shall con­sider of her in that behalf. And have
you [[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=68)
there this Precept. Given under my seal at C. aforesaid, the tenth day of
April in the seven and twentieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
Charles the Second, by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c.

### 15.5. The manner of making up of Court-Roles.

#### 15.5.1.

Cur' Baron' Thomae Bristow Arm' ibidem tent' The Title of a Court-Baron. die
Lunae quarto decimo die Octobris Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi (Dei
gratia) Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hi­berniae Regis, Fidei Defensor. &c.
vicesi­mo quarto anno (que) Dom. millessimo sexcentesimo septuagesimo secundo
coram Richardo Kil­burne Armig' Senescallo ibidem.

Esson' Carolus Cox, de malo lecti.

Iur'

  * Johannes Hover,
  * Franciscus Jervas,
  * Johannes Shosmith, amp;
  * Johannes Cat.

#### 15.5.2.

Kanc. ss. QUi jurati super sacrm' suum adAd inquir' jur'. Ammerc' in ipsos qui
fecer' defalt'. inquirend' & praesentand' ea quae ad Cur' praed' pertinent.

Super sacrm' suum praed' dicam & praesentant. quod Thomas Sampson, Johannes
Bowles, Jacobus Hawes, gener', &c. Tenentes hujus Manerii, debent sectam ad
hanc Cur', & ad hunc diem sec' defalt' Ideo quilibet eorum in mia' [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=68) & amerceamentum
cujus [...]ibet eorum inde per ho­magium praed' afferat' ad ij d.

Praesentant etiam quod Johannes Banks, quiAlienatio pro qua solvit Do­mino
rele­vium. de Domino hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praed' tenuit quatuor
pecias terrae vocat', &c. Continen' per aestimationem, &c. cum pertin' in
Breede per annualem reddit' duodecim denariorum & alia servicia (secundum
consuetudinem, ejusdem Ma­nerii) alienavit praemissa praed' cum pertin' S.
Petter viduae & haered' suis, unde accidit Dom' relevium (videl. xij d.)
Quodque praed' S. Pet­ter Al' alie­natio pro qua, &c. Et quod cepit in virum &
alienaver' &c. Solv. Dom. rel. &c. Praecept' Ball' distr'. postea alienavit
praemis. praed' cum pertin' Elizabethae Sloman & haered' suis, unde etiam
accidit Dom' relevium (videl' xij d.) Et quod Elizabetha Sloman cepit in virum
Georgium Boraston Clericum, Quodque praed' Georgius & Elizabetha alienaverunt
praemissa praed' cum pertin' Carolo Cox & haered' suis, unde etiam accidit
Dom' relevium (videl' xij d.)

Ideo praeceptum est Ball' Manerii praed' quod distring' praed' Carolum. Ita
quod sit hic ad prox' Cur' Baronis Manerii illius hic tenend' ad solvend' Dom'
separalia relevia praed' & ad faciend' ei fidelitatem pro praemissis.

Praesent. etiam quod Edwardus Barton, QuiRel. super alienation' de Dom' hujus
Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praed' tenuit unum mesuagium, & quatuor acr' terrae
(per aestimationem) cum pertin' in Breede prope quendam parcum ibid' (vocat'
Breede pound) per annualem reddit' quatuor denariorum, Et alia servicia
(secundum consuetudinem ejus­dem Manerii) alienavit praemissa praed' cum
pert'Cui sic alienat ignorant & petunt diem ad inquiren­dum. unde accidit Dom'
relevium (videl' iiij d.) sed cui vel quibus, praed' Edwardus sic alienavit
praemissa praed' cum pertin' Iuratores praed' penitus ignorant, Et petunt diem
ad inquirend' inde us­que in prox' Cur' Baronis Manerii illius hic tenend' &
eis concedit.

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=69)Et
praeceptum est Ball' Manerii illius quod di­stringatPraecep' distr. Alienatio.
pro relevio praed'.

Praesent' etiam quod Richardus Edwardus gen. qui de Dom' hujus Manerii (ut de
Manerio suo praed') tenuit certas terras (vocat' le, &c.) cum pertin' in
Breede per annualem reddit' trium solidorum septem denariorum unius oboli &
uniusSed cui ignorant. quadrantis, Et alia servicia (secundum consue­tudinem
ejusdem Manerii) alienavit praemissa praed' cum pertin', unde accidit Dom'
relevium (videl' iij s. vij d. ob. q.) Sed cui, vel quibus, praemissa praed'
sic alienat' fuer. Iuratores praed'Petunt di­em. penitus ignorant, Et petunt
diem ad inquirend' inde usque in prox' Cur' Baronis Manerii praed' hic
tenend', & eis conceditur.

Et praeceptum est Ball' Manerii illius distringerePraecept. distring. Jure ux.
pro relevio praed'.

Cúmque etiam Will. Foster & Elizabetha uxor ejus (jure ipsius Elizabethae)
nuper tenue­runt de Dom' hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praed') quasdam
terras (vocat' Totty) cum pertin' nuper terrarum (vocat' S.) In Paro­chia
omnium Sanct' in Hasting parcel' per an­nualem reddit' quinque denariorum Et
alia ser­vicia (secundum consuetudinem ejusdem Manerii) Modo Iuratores
praedict' (super sacr. suum praed') dicunt & praesentant quod praed'
Eliza­betha Obiit seis. unde acci­dit rel. &c. Haeres in­de. accidit Dom. &c.
obiit inde seisita unde accidit Domino rele­vium (videlicet v d.) quodque
(Fillus ipsius Elizabethae suit ejus haeres inde & quod praed' (Filius) postea
alienavit praemiss. praed' cum pertin. Johanni Austen & haered. suis unde
etiam accidit Domino relevium (vide­licet v d.)

Ideo praeceptum est Ball. Manerii praed' quodPraecept. distr. sepa­ralia
rele­via. Et fa­ciend. si­delitatem. Relevium super Alie­nation. distringat
praedictum Johannem Austen, Ita quod sit hic ad prox. Cur. Baronis Manerii
illius ad solvend. Domino separalia relevia [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=69) praedicta, Et
ad faciend. ei fidelitatem pro praemissis.

Praesent. etiam quod Thomas Marten & Anna uxor ejus qui (jure ipsius Annae)
tenuerunt de Domino hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo prae­dicto) unum
messuagium, & dimidium unius acr. terrae cum pertin. in Breede per annualem
reddit. quatuor denariorum Et alia servicia (se­cundum consuetudinem ejusdem
Manerii) aliena­verunt praemissa praed. cum pertin. in Breede, Samueli Horne
Clerico & haered. suis, unde ac­cidit Dom. relevium (videlicet iiij d.)

Ideo praeceptum est Ball. Manerii praedictiPraecept. distr. quod distring.
praed' Sam. Horne, Ita quod sit hic, ad prox. Cur. Baronis Manerii illius ad
solvend. Dom. relevium praed. & ad faciend. ei fidelitatem pro praemissis.
Cúmque Jacobus Par­ker Praecept. quod tene­ment. na­tivum, di­rut. existit.
nuper tenuit de Dom. hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo) quoddam tenementum
nativum (vi­delicet unum messuagium & certas terras cum pertin. in Breede
(prope parcum ibidem) per annualem reddit. duorum denariorum & alia servicia
(secundum consuetudinem ejusdem Ma­nerii) Modo juratores praed. (super sacr.
su­umEt quis ten. toftum & terras pet. diem ad inquir. praed.) Dicunt &
praesentant quod messuagi­um praed. dirutum existit & quis modo tenet tof­tum
inde & terras praed. Iuratores praed. penitus ignorant, Et petunt diem ad
inquirend. inde us­que in prox. Cur. Baronis Manerii illius hic te­nend. & eis
conceditur.

Et modo hic ad hanc Cur. prima proclamatioPrim. Proc. facta ad clam.
te­nement. praed. sec. etiam ad prox. cur. Obiit seif. facta suit quod si
aliquis legitime clamare potuit tenementum praed. cum pertin. quod veniret &
audiretur. Et nullus venit, Ideo siat super inde secund. proclamatio ad praed.
prox. Cur.

Praesentant etiam quod Johannes Cogger qui de Dom. hujus Manerii (ut de
Manerio suo praed.) tenuit quoddam tenementum nativum (nuper [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=70) Johannis
Tompson) cum pertin. in Breede perEt quis haeres ig­norant. Pet. diem ad
inquir. annualem reddit. duorum denariorum & alia ser­vicia (secundum
consuetudinem ejusdem Manerii) obiit de tenemento praed. cum pertin. seisit.
sed quis est ejus haeres inde Iuratores praed. penitus ignorant Et petunt diem
ad inquirend. inde usque in prox. Cur. Baronis Manerii illius hic tenend. &
eis conceditur.

Et modo hic ad hanc Cur. prima proclamatioPrima pro­clamatio ad clam.
tenement. illud, &c. Petunt ul­teriorem diem ad inquirend. quis est haeres,
&c. Concedit. Ad ulti­mam Cur. Bar. Jur. impanell. petierunt, &c. quo­modo,
&c. tenuit, &c. Ven. & protulit in Cur. quod­dam scrip­tum sub manum & sigill.
Dom. Manerii. Per quod satis liquet facta fuit quod si aliquis legitime
clamare poterit tenementum praed. cum pertin. quod veniret & audiretur &
nullus veni, ideo fiat superinde secunda proclamatio ad praed. prox. Cur.

Et ulterius Iuratores praed. petunt ulteriorem diem usque in praed. prox. Cur.
ad inquirend. & praesentand. quis est haeres Josephi▪ Hunt Defuncti duarum
peciarum terrae (Iacen. ad orientalem partem messuagii, in quo Johannes Hunt
pater ipsius Josephi nuper habitabat, cum pertin. (per praed. Josephum nuper
tent.) Nec non quarum­dam terrarum (vocat. Hamster Marst) contin. per
aestimationem sex acr. cum pertin. nuper etiam per praed. Josephum tent. & eis
conceditur.

Cúmque ad ultimam Cur. Baronis hujus Man. hic tent. die Lunae sexto decimo die
Octobris Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc vicesimo tertio Iuratores ad Cur. illam
inpanellati petierunt ul­teriorem diem usque in hanc Cur. ad inquirend. &
praesentand. quomodo Will. Ivy (Filius & haeres Johannis Ivy defuncti) tunc
tenuit de Dom. hujus Manerii quoddam messuagium (vocat. le Hundred house) Et
dimidium unius acr. terrae cum pertin. & eis adtunc concedebatur modo hic ad
hanc Cur. venit praed. Will. (in propria persona sua) & protulit hic in Cur.
quoddam scriptum manu & sigillo Henrici En­glish Arm. (nuper Domini hujus
Manerii) signat. per quod satis liquet Curiae hic quod praed. Hen­ricus [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=70) dimisit cuidam
Willielmo Butler praemissaCur. &c. quod di­mis. &c. est pro 90. annorum
legitime devenit. per volunt. legavit term. suum adhuc ventur. Sup. tert.
Procl. &c. ad cla­mand. &c. Ven. & clam. pre­script. di­mis. per Dom. Man.
concess. praed. cum pertin. pro termino nonaginta anno­rum extunc prox'
sequen. (unde maxima pars adtunc ventur. existit) Modo etiam apparet Cur. hic
quod terminus ipsius Willielmi Butler de & in praemissis praed. cum pertin.
postea eidem Johanni Jvy legitime devenit quodque praedictus Johannes postea
per ultimam voluntatem suam in Scriptis legavit tantum termini praedicti de &
in praemissis praedictis ad tunc ventur. quantum esset durante vita ipsius
Willielmi & resid. ter­mini inde post mortem ipsius Willielmi ventur. Johanni
Ivy (Filio ipsius Willielmi.)

Ad hanc Cur' super tertiam Proclamationem in ea parte factam, Quod si aliquis
legitime clamare poterit quoddam tenementum (vocat. Hunts) cum pertin' in
Breede per Johannem Ivy defunct' (tempore mortis suae) tent' quod veniret &
audi­retur venit hic in Cur' Willielm. Ivy (Filius Jo­hannis Ivy) in propria
pers. sua & protulit hic in Cur' quoddam Scriptum dimissionis tenementi
praedicti cum pertin' per Thomam Lord Cleri­cum, & Willielmum English
Generosum (nuper Dominos hujus Manerii) cuidam Willielmo Gram fact' pro
termino diversorum annorum ad tunc ventur' & ulterius constat Curiae hic Quod
terminus ipsius Williel. Gram, de & in tene­mento praedicto cum pertin' postea
ad praedictum Johannem legitime devenit, & quod praedictus Johannes postea per
ult' voluntat' suam in scriptis legavit Annae Uxori ejus tantum residui
termini praedicti quantum esset in vita ipsius Annae & residuum termini
praedicti dicto Willielmo (Fi­lio suo.)

Ad hanc Cur' venit Richardus Cox in propriaProtulit in Cur' In­dentur. &c.
persona sua & protulit hic in cur' quandam In­denturam sub manu & sigillo
Jacobi Payton, ge­ren' dat' decimo die Julii, Anno Dom' millessi­mo [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=71) sexcentesimo
quinquagesimo sexto Recitando Recitan­do, &c. quod Willielmus Steede miles,
Thomas Culpep­per Arm' & Johannes Culpepper Arm' (nuper Dom' Manerii praedicti
per Indenturam suam ge­ren'Quod Dom. hu­jus Maner. dimis. &c. dat' primo die
Aprilis, Anno Regni Domini Jacobi nuper Regis Angliae sextodecimo dimi­sisset
Richardo Fuller executoribus & assignat' suis pro termino Mille annorum à
Festo annuncia­tionis beatae Mariae Virginis, ult' praeterit' ante dat'
Indenturae praedictae computan' (absque Im­petitione alicujus vasti) pro & sub
annuali reddit. duorum solidorum proinde reservat' ad Festa Sancti Michaelis
Arch' & annunciatio­nis beatae Mariae Virginis (per aequales portiones
solvend') unum Cotagium & parcel' terrae continen' per aestimationem tria
quarteria unius a [...]r' ter­rae (majus sive minus) cum pertin' in Breede
jacen' inter W. & S. ibidem (existen' parcel' Manerii praedicti & aliquando
concess. per copiam rotulorum cur' cuidam B. postea Ric. Hunt & postea Thomae
Jenner defunct' & haered' suis, qui quidem Thomas Jenner sursum reddidit
eademSursum reddit. ad usum Dom' Ric. Fuller, & haered' suorum ac etiam
recitando quod praedictus Ric. Fuller per Indenturam geren' dat' vicesimo
octavo diePer al. In­dent. Dimissit Martii, Anno regni Domini nostri Caroli
primi nuper Regis Angliae quarto decimo dimisisset Ja­cobo Payton executoribus
administ' & assign' suis pro termino noningentor' & octoginta annorum à
vicesimo quinto die Martii tunc ult' praeterit' ante dat' indenturae praed.
computan' praed. messuagium sive cotagium (una cum pomario, gardino, clausulo,
& pecia terrae ad tunc inde spectan. continen. per aestimationem quarterium
unius acre (majus sive minus parcel. praemissorum) per Indenturam praedictam
sub manu & sigillo ipsius Jacobi Pay­ton testan. quod praedict. Jacobus Payton
(inin consid. Maritagii. consideratione Maritagii, inter ipsum & quan­dam
[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=71)
Elizabetham Clerke ad tunc solemnizand.) assignasset cuidam Ric. Barnet
praemissa praedicta cum pertin. una cum toto residuo dicti termini mille
annorum in eisdem ad tunc ventur' sub fidu­ciaUsus Mari­tagii. quod de & post
Maritagium praed. solemniz. Tunc ad beneficium dictorum Jacobi Payton &
Elizabethae durant' vitis suis naturalibus & vi­ta diutius eorum viventis, &
post decess. dicto­rum Jacobi & Elizabethae & diutius eorum vi­ventis tunc ad
beneficium exit. corporis Dict' Ja­cobi super corpus dict' Elizab. legitime
procrean. & pro defectu talis exit. tunc ad beneficium exe­cutorum,
administratorum & assignatorum dictae Elizabethae ( & ad & pro nullo alio usu,
in­tentione, & proposito quibuscunque,) prout per In­denturam praedictam
apparet. Et inde Ric. Cox ulter' dicit quod Maritagium praedictum postea
so­lemnizat. fuit praedictusque Jac. Payton postea obiit & praedicta
Elizabetha ipsum super vixit & postea obiit (sine exitu super corpus suum
perObiit sine exit in­testat. praedict' Jacobum procreat') intestat. &
ulterius idem Richardus protulit hic in Cur' quandam In­denturam manu &
sigillo Richardi Edwards (Administratoris bonorum & catallorum quae fue­runt
praefatae Elizabethae (tempore mortis suae) signat. geren. dat. sexto die
Martii, Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc vicesimo, per quam satis liquet Cur' hic
quod praedictus Richardus per Indentu­ram illam assignavit eidem Richardo Cox
exe­cutoribus administratoribus▪ & assign. suis praemissa praedicta cum
pertin. & totum residuum termini praedicti de & in eisdem ad tunc ventur'

Ad hanc Cur' secunda Proclamatio facta fuitSecunda Procl. fact. ad cla­mand.
se­paral. te­nementa. quod si aliquis legitime clamare potuit separalia tenem.
hic postea mentionat' videlicet. Quoddam te­nementum nativum (videlicet unum
cotagium & unam peciam terrae cum pertin. in Breede (prope Parochiam de
Udimer) & ad terras mo­do [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=72) vel nuper
Danielis White Arm. adjungen. per Nicolaum Summons nuper tent.

Quoddam tenementum nativum (videlicet u­num mesuagium & dimidium unius acr'
terrae cum pertin. in Breede (ad vel prope quendam locum vocat. Stonelepe) per
Johannem Jervas defunct. nuper tent.

Quoddam tenementum nativum (videlicet u­num cotagium & unam peciam terrae, cum
per­tin. in Udimer (ad quendam locum ibidem vocat. Cotham Greene) per Johannem
nuper tent.

Et quoddam tenementum nativum (videlicet unum Toftum cum pertin. nuper per
Richardum Lindfield tent.

Sive eorum aliquae vel aliquod, quod veniret, & Si aliqui venirent
audiren­tur. audiretur, & nullus venit Ideo fiat super inde tertia Proclamatio
ad prox' Cur. Baronis ejusdem Manerii hic tenend.

### 15.6. The manner of making up of Estreates.

The Estreates of the Fines, Forfeitures and Amerceaments, at the several
Courts-Leet, holden for the said Hundred on the several days, and in the
several years herein after men­tioned.

That is to say,

Monday 12 Octob. 1668\. XX. Regni Regis Caroli Secundi.

  * [[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=72)Iohn B. (of the Borough of Combwell) for that he did not appear at this Court, to enquire for our Sovereign Lord the King, of those things which to the said Court do appertain, (though summoned so to do)—12 d.
  * T. H. (of the Borough of C.) for the like——————12 d.
  * N. F. (of the same Borough) for the like——————12 d.
  * (&c. as many as be)——
  * In all—&c.

Monday 18 Octob. &c. prout

  * N. F. for that he did not amend his six Rods of Ditch (in the Borough of C.) Adjoyning to the High-way between Struecrouch and Tiseherst within the time at the last Court limitted—3 s.
  * (&c. as before) In all—&c.

Thursday &c. prout)

  * [[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=73)C. I. (Borsholder of the Borough of B.) for that he did not appear at this Court to doe those things, which to his said Office do appertain.—5 s.
  * ( &c. prout) In all—&c.
  * Sum. total.—&c.
  * R. K. Arm. Senesc. ibidem.

To make up a Rentall.

  * A Rentall of the Mannor of Stone for one Year, ended at the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel, in the Year of our Lord one thousand six hundred seventy six, as followeth. viz.

Katherine A. Widow.

  * For one Mess. and Lands in Cran. near upper Wilsley late of Richard A. (her Husband deceased)———7 s.

Robert H. Gent.

  * [[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=73)For one Mess. &c. in Cr. &c. late of, &c.—3 s.
  * And for one Mess. &c. late also, &c▪—10 d.
  * In all—3 s. 10 d.
  * The Owners of one Mess. &c.—2 s.
  * (&c. as many as be in such form)
  * In all—39 s. 41 hens, 2 capons, and 2 cocks.

In case where several Mannors, then say at the top, A Rentall of the several
Mannors, hereafter mentioned, for one year, &c. and begin one first, and go
through with it, then another, &c.

In case where custom for Lord to have draught of Fish yearly, or such like,
you must mention it in the Rentall, both when you come to the Tenant, and in
Sum. total. And where several Mannors at the end of them se­verally you must
say, In all, &c. prout. and when they are all done at the end you must say,

R. K. Arm. Senescallus ibidem.

So these Rentals come to as followeth. viz.

  * Stone—00—11—01 q. 1 hen, &c.
  * Sislingherst—&c.
  * Copton—&c.
  * In all, &c. (and here you must mention the custom for Fish.

[[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=74)

## 16\. Customs.

### 16.1. A Warrant against those who abuse an Officer of the Customs, in the
due execution of his Office.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County
at M. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been made14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Iustice. appear
unto me, That A. B. and C. D. Persons appointed by His Ma­jesty for managing
the Cu­stoms, Offi­cers of the Customs, or their De­puties. have lately been
forceably hin­dred, af­fronte [...] a­bused,  [...]a­ten or woun­ded, to the
hazard of their lives. in the due execution of Offices in the said place by E.
F. G. H. armed with armed with Clubs or any manner of weapon, either on board
any Ship or Vessel, or upon the land or water. And such as act in their aid
and assistacce. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to re­quire you
the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of
you, do take the said E. F. G. H. and them convey to His Majestie's Gaol
aforesaid, and them there deliver to the aforesaid Keeper of the same,
(together with this Precept.) Re­quiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive
them into the said Gaol, and them there safely to keep till the next Quarter-
Sessions, there to be dealt withall as by the Statute in that behalf lately
made is appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and
seal the, &c.

[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=74)

### 16.2. Against carrying away Goods with­out paying Custom, &c.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Iustice. 2
Witnesses. been made unto me, That A. B. Car­man, Por­ter, Water­man, or
o­ther person. hath assisted in the taking taking up, landing, shipping off,
or carrying away of of Goods goods, wares or merchandizes prohibited, or
whereof the Custom, Subsidy, or other Duty are due and payable to the King at
E. in the County aforesaid without without the presence of any of the Officers
of His Maje­stie's Customs thereunto appointed, at hours or at hours and times
not appointed by Law. Or goods passing by Certificates, Waste, Coquet, or
otherwise, without the presence of, or notice given to one of His Majestie's
Officers. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require
you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do apprehend the said A.
B. and him bring before me, to answer the premisses, and farther to doe and
receive as by the Statute in that behalf lately made is appointed. Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, &c.

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=75)

### 16.3. A Mittimus upon the precedent War­rant, for the first Offence.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County
at C. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Iustice. 2
Witnesses▪ for the first Offence. Be commit­ted to Gaol, till he find Sureties
for Good be­haviour. proved before me, That B. C. hath assisted in the, &c.
(as in the last War­rant.) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do convey the said B. C. to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid,
and him there deli­ver to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (to­gether with
this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the
said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, untill he shall find sufficient
surety to be of Good be­haviour for so long time untill he be thereof
discharged by the Lord Treasurer, Chan­cellour, Under-Treasurer, or Barons of
the Exchequer. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal
the, &c.

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=75)

### 16.4. Upon the second like Offence.

To the Constable and Borsholders of, &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Iustice. 2
Witnesses for the se­cond Of­fence. pay 5 li. proved before me, That C. D.
hath assisted in the, &c. [as in the Warrant last but one] And forasmuch as
the said C. D. hath once before offended in the like kind: These are therefore
(in His Majestie's name) to require you the said Constable and Borshol­ders,
and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do convey the said C. D. to
his Ma­jestie's Gaol aforesaid, and him there deliver to the aforesaid Keeper
of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said
Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep for
the space of two months, (without Bail or Mainprise) or untill he shall pay
the Sheriff of this County the summ of five pounds, (for the use of His
Majesty) or untill he shall by the Lord Trea­surer, Chancellour, or Under-
Treasurer, or Court of Exchequer, be thence discharged. Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under my hand and seal, &c.

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=76)

## 17\. Deer.

### 17.1. A Warrant for stealing Deer.

To the Constables, &c. of T. and to every of them.

Kent ss. WHereas information hath been given to me that A. B. of H. within
your said Parish of T. hath lately with­in the space of six months last past
coursed, killed, or taken forth of a Park situate in this County certain Deer
contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided; These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) straightly to charge and command you, and
every of you, that immediately upon sight hereof you bring before me or some
other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for this County, the Body of the
said A. B. to an­swer the aforesaid premisses, and be procee­ded against
according to Law. And hereof fail not at your perils, &c.

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=76)

### 17.2. A Warrant to levy 20 li. for stealing Deer.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly13 Car. 2. cap. 10. 1 Iustice. By
Confessi­on, or one Witness, within six months. proved before me, That A. B.
of C. hath unlawfully un­lawfully coursed, killed, hun­ted, or ta­ken away any
Red or Fallow Deer Deer in in a­ny Forrest, Chase, Purlieu, Paddock, Wood,
Park, or other Ground where Deer are or have been usually kept. Or shall be
aiding or assisting therein. of E. F. against the form of the Statute in that
case made and provided: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will
and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy by
way of Distress upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. the summ of 20
li. by him forfeited for the Offence afore­said; the one moiety thereof to the
use of C. D. (who informeth of the said Offence) and the other moiety to the
use of the said E. F. Owner of the Deer aforesaid: And in case of want of
sufficient Distress, that you certify me thereof forthwith. Given under my
hand and seal this second day of May, Anno Dom. 1679\. Annoque Regni Regis
Caroli Se­cundi, &c. 31.

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=77)

### 17.3. A Mittimus to the House of Correc­tion for want of Distress.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said
County at B. in the County aforesaid.

Kent. ss. WHereas by my Warrant you13 Car. 2\. cap. 10\. 1 Iustice, 1 or more
Witnesses, 6 months hard La­bour, or 12 months Imprison­ment and Sureties for
Good beha­viour for a year then following. the said Constable and Bors­holders
were lately required to levy by way of Distress of the Goods and Chattels of
A. B. of C. the summ of twenty pounds by him forfeited for an Offence by him
lately committed against the form of the Statute made in the thirteenth year
of His now Majestie's Reign, (intituled, An Act to prevent the unlawfull
coursing, hunting, or killing of Deer;) And you the said Consta­ble have
returned unto me thereupon, that the said A. B. hath not sufficient Distress
to be ta­ken for the moneys aforesaid: These are there­fore (in His Majestie's
name) to will and require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of
you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely
convey to the aforesaid House of Correction, and de­liver him to the aforesaid
Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said
Keeper, to receive him into the said House, and there detain and put him to
hard labour for six months. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my
hand and seal the, &c.

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=77)

### 17.4. Another Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County
at M. in the County aforesaid.

K. ss. WHereas by my Warrant you the13 Car. 2. cap. 10. 1 Iustice. said
Constable and Borsholders were lately required to levy by way of Distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of A. B. of, &c. the summ of twenty pounds, by
him forfeited for an Offence by him lately commit­ted against the form of the
Statute made in the thirteenth year of His now Majestie's Reign, (intituled,
An Act to prevent the unlawfull cour­sing, hunting, or killing of Deer;) And
you the said Constable have returned unto me thereup­on, that the said A. B.
hath not sufficient Distress to be taken for the moneys aforesaid: These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you the said Constable
and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the
said A. B. and him safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and deliver him to the
afore­said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also
you, the said Keep­er, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely
to keep for the space of one whole year, (without Bail or Mainprise) and
farther, untill he hath given sufficient Security for his Good behaviour for
one whole year next ensu­ing after his inlargement. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under my hand and seal the, &c.

[[Page 148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=78)

### 17.5. A Warrant for a Buck.

To the Keeper, &c.

UPon sight hereof you are to kill and deliver to I. B. Esq one fat Buck of
this Season, for which this shall be your War­rant.

A. B.

## 18\. Drunkenness.

### 18.1. A Warrant for Drunkenness, the first Conviction.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to the Church­wardens of the Parish of, &c. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath this present4 Iac. c. 5. 21 Iac. c. 7. 1
Iustice. View. Confession. 1 Witness within six months. Upon Con­viction pay 5
s. to the Poor. day been duly proved before me, That A. B. of the Parish of C.
was on the fifth of May last drunk in the Parish (contrary to the form of the
Statute in that case made and provided: These are therefore (in His
Maje­stie's [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=78) name) to
command you, that you the faid Constable or Church-wardens do require the said
A. B. to pay (for the said Offence) to the hands of you the said Church-
wardens (to be by you accounted for to the use of the Poor of the same Parish)
five shillings of lawfull mo­ney of England within one week now next en­suing,
and if the said A. B. shall refuse or ne­glect to pay the same as aforesaid,
that then you the said Constable or Church-wardens do levy (to the use
aforesaid) the said 5 s. of the Goods of the said A. B. by Distress and Sale
of the same (rendring unto him the overplus of the moneys remaining of the
said Sale,) and if the said A. B. be not able to pay the said summ of 5 s.
that then you the said Constable do set him in the Stocks, there to remain by
the space of six hours. Hereof fail not at your perils. Gi­ven under my hand
and seal at, &c.

  * Convicted upon my view.
  * Convicted by his Confession before me.

### 18.2. The second Conviction.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County
at B. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been this4 Iac. c. 5. 21 Iac. c. 7. 1 Iustice.
View. Confession. present day duly proved before me, That A. B. of the Parish
of C. was upon the fifth of May last drunk in the Parish (con­trary to the
form of the Statute in that case [[Page
150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=79) made and
provided) And forasmuch as the1 Witness within six months. said A. B. hath
been once before lawfully con­victed of the said offence of Drunkenness: These
are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and
Bors­holders, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said A. B. to come
before me, or some other Justice of the Peace of the said County, to be bound
with two Sureties to His said Majesty in one Recognizance or Obliga­tion of
ten pound, with condition to be from thenceforth of good behaviour (according
to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) which if he shall
refuse to doe, that then you do him safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and
deliver him there to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this
Pre­cept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him into the said
Gaol, and him there safely to keep untill he shall be so bound with two
Sureties as aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and
seal at, &c.

  * Convicted upon my view.
  * Convicted by his own Confession before me.

## 19\. Excise.

Note NOne shall meddle with any Office relating to the Excise till they have
taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy before 2 Iustices of the Peace of
the County where such Office is, or one Ba­ron of the Exchequer, and the Oath
men­tionedVide Title Oaths. in 12 Car. 2\. cap. 23.

[[Page 151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=79)

### 19.1. A Certificate upon taking the Oath about Excise.

Kent ss. WE whose names are hereunto12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2
Iustices. subscribed (His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the County
aforesaid) do certify, That A. B. of C. in the said Coun­ty hath before us
(this present day) taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Oath
mentioned in the Statute made in the twelfth year of His now Majestie's Reign,
(intituled, A Grant of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquours,
for the increase of His Majestie's Revenue during His life.) Gi­ven under our
hands and seals the 2. day of May in the 31. year of the Reign of our
Sove­reign Lord King Charles the Second.

None shall meddle with any Office relating to the Excise till they have taken
the Oaths of Alle­giance and Supremacy before two Iustices of the Peace of the
County where such Office is, or one Baron of the Exchequer. And the Oath of an
Excise man. Vide Title Oaths.

This Oath is by the Justices to be certified to the next Quarter-Sessions,
there to be Recorded.

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=80)

### 19.2. A Warrant to summon those who refuse to pay the Excise.

To the Constable, &c.

Kanc. ss. WHereas Complaint hath been made unto us this present day by A. B.
of C. sworn Officer to the Com­missioners of Excise of Ale and Beer of the
said County, That E. F. of G. in the said Coun­ty, Victualler, hath Brewed and
put to sale cer­tain Barrels of strong Beer since the second day of May last
past, without paying the duty of Excise in compounding with the Commissio­ners
for this division contrary to an Act of Par­liament in that behalf made: These
are there­fore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one
of you, do cause the said E. F. to be and appear before us at T. in the County
aforesaid upon the tenth day of Iune, at nine of the Clock in the forenoon of
the same day to shew cause why the said E. F. should not pay the duty of
Excise as afore­said. Hereos fail not, &c. Given under, &c.

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=80)

### 19.3. A Warrant for Distress on Alehouse­keepers, for not paying Excise.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath been12 Car. 2\. cap. 23\. Confirmed cap.
24\. 2 Iustices. Innkeeper, Alehouse­keeper, Vic­tualler, and Retailer of
Beer, Ale, Cyder, Per­ry, Methe­glin, Strong­water, brewing, making, or
retailing the same. Every month make par­ticular En­tries there­of at the
Office of Excise within their  [...] [...]. made unto us whose names are
hereunto subscribed (His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the County
aforesaid) That A. B. of C. in the said County of K. Alehousekeeper hath not
paid or cleared off his Duty of Excise unto such person as by the Statute in
that be­half made is appointed, according to the En­try of the said A. B. in
that behalf made, as by the Statute aforesaid is directed; and upon
ex­amination of the Complaint aforesaid we do find the same to be true: These
are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of
you, that you, some or one of you, do levy the summ of, &c. upon the Goods and
Chattels of the said A. B. being the double value of the Duty so not paid or
cleared off, and by him forfeited, according to the form of the said Statute,
and to sell the said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be redeemed within
fourteen days;) and that you pay the moneys so levied to such person or
persons as by the said Statute is directed, rendring to the said A. B. the
overplus, (if any be;) And for want of sufficient Distress, that you do
forth­with certify us thereof, to the end we may far­ther proceed touching the
same as by Law is appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Gi­ven under our
hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=81)

### 19.4. A Mittimus where not sufficient to pay Excise.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas by Warrant under our12 Car. 2. cap. 24. Confirmed cap. 24. 2
Iustices. hands you the said Consta­ble and Borsholders were required to levy
of the Goods and Chattels of A. B. of C. in the said County, &c. by him
forfeited, (according to the form of the Statute, intituled, A Grant of
certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquours, for the increase of
his Majestie's Re­venue during His life,) and you the said Con­stable have
this day certified us, that the said A. B. hath not sufficient Distress
whereby the said, &c. can be levied: These are therefore (in His Majestie's
name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you,
do take the said A. B. and him convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver
him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.)
Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and
him there imprison, till satisfaction be made of the aforesaid, &c. Hereof
fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=81)

### 19.5. To levy the Forfeiture for not ma­king a due Entry.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath been12 Car. 2\. cap. 23\. Confirmed cap.
24\. 2 Iustices. Common Brewer for­feits 10 li. Innkeeper forfeits 5 li.
Alehouse­keeper, Vic­tualler, Retailer of made unto us whose names are
hereunto subscribed, (His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the County
aforesaid) That A. B. of C. in the said County of D, &c. hath not made such
due and particular Entry of Beer, Ale, Cyder, Perry, Me­theglin, or
Strongwa­ter, forfeits 20 s. 15 Car. 2. 11, 12. as by the said Statute is
required; and upon examination of the Complaint aforesaid we do find the same
to be true: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require
you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy the summ of, &c.
up­on the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. (being the double value of the
Duty so not paid or cleared off, and by him forfeited, ac­cording to the form
of the Statute aforesaid) and do sell the said Goods and Chattels, (if they
shall not be redeemed within fourteen days) and that you pay the moneys so
levied to such person or persons as by the said Statute is directed, (rendring
to the aforesaid A. B. the overplus, if any be;) And for want of suf­ficient
Distress, that you do forthwith certify us thereof, to the end we may farther
proceed touching the same as by Law is oppointed. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=82)

### 19.6. A Warrant to levy the double value of the Excise on a Brewer for not
paying according to Entry made.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath been12 Car. 2. cap. 23. cap. 24. 2
Iustices. made unto us whose names are hereunto subscribed, (His Majestie's
Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid) That A. B. of C. in the County
aforesaid, common Brewer, hath not paid nor cleared off his Du­ty of Excise
unto such person as by the Statute in that behalf made is appointed, according
to the Entry of the said A. B. in that behalf made, as by the Statute
aforesaid is directed; Com­mon Brew­ers forfeit (for omit­ting such Entries)
for every default 10 li. Inn­keeper 5 li. Alehouse­keeper, Vic­tualler, or
Retailer of Beer, Ale, Cyder, Per­ry, Metheg­lin, strong­water, brewing,
making, or retailing the same forfeit for every de­fault 20 s. Brewer for not
paying off within a week after En­try pay double the Duty. Innkeeper,
Alehousekeeper, Victular, or other Retailer not paying off within a month
after Entry pay double the Duty. and upon examination of the Complaint
aforesaid we find the same to be true: These are there­fore (in His Majestie's
name) to will and re­quire you, and every of you, that you, some or one of
you, do levy the summ of, &c. upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B.
(be­ing the double value of the Duty so not paid or cleared off, and by him
forfeited, according to the form of the Statute aforesaid) and to sell the
said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be redeemed within fourteen days)
and that you pay the moneys so levied to such person or persons as by the said
Statute is directed, ren­dring to the aforesaid A. B. the overplus, (if any
be;) And for want of sufficient Distress, that you do forthwith certify us
thereof, to the [[Page
157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=82) end that we may
proceed touching the same as by Law is appointed. Hereof fail not, &c.

### 19.7. Loss of Allowance for making false Entries.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as by the Statute in12 Car. 2\. cap. 23\. Confirmed cap.
24\. 2 Iustices. Allowance 3 in 23 Barrels of Beer, and 2 in 22 Bar­rels of
Ale. that behalf made it is enacted, That all common Brewers and makers of
Beer or Ale, (not selling the same by retail) for and in consideration of
waste by fillings and breakage of their Beer and Ale, shall have and be
allowed out of the returns made by the Ga­gers, upon every three and twenty
Barrels of Beer (whether strong or small) returned by the said Gagers, three
Barrels; and upon every two and twenty Barrels of Ale, (whether strong or
small) returned by the Gagers, two Barrels; And forasmuch as A. B. of C. in
the said Coun­ty, common Brewer, hath this present day been duly convicted
before us, that he hath wittingly and willingly made a faulse Entry of [as in
Mar­gent] Ale, Beer, &c. by him lately brewed, contrary to the form of the
Statute aforesaid: We do there­fore adjudge, that the said A. B. shall forfeit
and lose (for his Offence aforesaid,) over and besides the Penalties in the
said Act mentio­ned, the said Allowance so to be made, for six months now next
ensuing. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=83)

### 19.8. Upon Complaint of false Entry to appear.

To A. B. of C. in the said County.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2
Iustices. This upon complaint of false En­tries of Li­quours. been made unto
us, That you A. B. of C. &c. [as above] contrary to the Statute in that case
made and provided: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to re­quire
you to appear before us at the house of D. in E. in the County aforesaid upon
the 22. day of May, to answer the premisses. Hereof fail not at your peril.
Given under our hands the 18. day of May, &c.

### 19.9. Not suffering to gage the Vessels.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2
Iustices. been made unto us whose names are hereunto subscribed, (His
Maje­stie's Justices of the Peace of the said Coun­ty) That A. B. of C. in the
County aforesaid Brew­er, Inn­keeper, Vic­tualler, or Retailer of Beer,
Di­steller of Strongwa­ter, or Re­tailer of hath refused to permit C. D. (a
Gager appointed according to the Statute aforesaid) to enter into his &c. to
gage or take account [[Page
159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=83) of his Beer,
Ale, Cyder, Perry, Me­theglin, or Strongwa­ter, over and above the double
value pay 5 s. [Margent] And having been by the said Gager thereupon forbidden
to sell, carry out or deliver to any of his Custo­mers any Ale, &c. [as in the
Margent] yet notwithstanding the said A. B. (after such warning given) hath
sold and retailed, &c. [as in the Margent] not having paid or cleared the Duty
of Excise; And upon ex­amination of the said Complaint we do find the same to
be true: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you,
and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and
Chattels of the said A. B. five pounds for his Offence aforesaid, and sell the
said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be redeemed within fourteen days)
and that you do pay the moneys so levied to such person or per­sons as by the
said Statute is directed, (ren­dring to the aforesaid A. B. the overplus, if
any be;) And for want of sufficient Di­stress that you do forthwith certify us
there­of, to the end we may farther proceed tou­ching the same as by Law is
appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given un­der our hands and seals
the, &c.

[[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=84)

### 19.10. A Warrant against one that procu­reth a false Return to be made in
the Office of Excise.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly pro­ved15 Car. 2. cap. 11. 2 Iustices.
before us, That A. B. of, &c. Brewer did bribe or corrupt, or give any money,
fee, or other re­ward what­soever, to any Gager or other Of­ficer to make a
false Return to make false return or report unto the Office of Excise into the
Office of Excise of of any Beer, Ale, or other Liquours exciseable within his
Charge, Division, or Walk; or to forbear or omit the doing or executing of his
place or imployment. exciseable within his Division in the said County,
against the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, (intituled, An
additional Act for the ordering and collecting the Duty of Excise, and
preventing the Abuses therein) whereby he hath forfeited ten pounds for his
said Offence: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and
command you, and every of you, to le­vy by Distress and Sale of the Goods of
the said A. B. the aforesaid ten pounds, rendring to him the overplus thereof.
Fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=84)

### 19.11. A Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County
at C. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas it was duly proved15 Car. 2. cap. 11. 2 Iustices. before us,
That A. B. of, &c. Brewer, did bribe C. D. Gager, to make a false Return into
the Office of Excise of Beer, &c. exciseable within his Division in the County
against the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, (intituled, An
addi­tional Act for the ordering and collecting the Duty of Excise, and
preventing the Abuses there­in) whereby he forfeited ten pounds for his said
Offence; and we did therefore by War­rant under our hands and seals charge and
command you to levy by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A B. the
aforesaid ten pounds; and you the said Constable have re­turned to us, that
for want of such Distress you could not levy the same: These are there­fore
(in his Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and
Borshol­ders, and every of you, to attach the said A. B. and him convey to His
Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same,
(together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive
him into the said Gaol, and him [[Page
162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=85) there safely
keep by the space of three months, (without Bail or Mainprise.) Here­of fail
not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

The like as in the two former Warrants (mutatis mutandis) against any sworn
Gager or other Officer that shall take and receive any bribe, money, fee,
gift, or other reward of any Brewer or other person, for any cause or matter
relating to the Excise.

### 19.12. A Warrant (against several per­sons) to distrain for the Duties of
Excise, &c.

To Thomas Osborn and John Tiffin, Gent. and to either of them, and such other
person or per­sons as they or either of them shall take to their or either of
their assistance in execution hereof.

K. ss. WHereas Complaints were lately made unto us S. B. and R. K. Esquires,
(two of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) by the
Officers of Excise, That the several persons hereunder na­med had committed
the several and respective Offences herein after mentioned, and severally
added to their several names, against the form of several Statutes made for
payment to His Ma­jesty of the Duties of Excise; And forasmuch as upon hearing
of the said Complaints (this present day) it was duly proved before us, [[Page
163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=85) that the said
Complaints were true, and we have therefore (according to the form of the
Statutes aforesaid) adjudged, that the said se­veral and respective persons
shall, for his, her, and their several and respective Offences, for­feit and
pay the several summs of money here­under added to their several and
respective names, that is to say, Thomas Daniel of Hors­monden in the said
County, Vintner, (a Retailer of Beer,) for forfeiture for neglect of entring
(by the space of twelve months last past) of Beer by him retailed (within the
said time,) twenty and four pounds, and for double the Duty of Excise for
twenty and five Barrels, three Firkins and five Gallons of Beer of above six
shillings the Barrel, and for three Barrels and three Firkins of Beer of six
shillings per may set down for charges of levying. Barrel or under, (he not
having paid the sin­gle Duty, or any of the same) eight pounds, fourteen
shillings, and a half penny;

In all—32 14 00 ob.

Iames Lewes of Horsmonden aforesaid Cord­winder, for forfeiture for neglect to
appear before us this day, to give evidence for disco­veryAnd so all other
Offen­ces (muta­tis mutan­dis.) The date hereof, and locus in quo, must be
up­on the day and at the place of con­demnation. of breaches of the Laws of
Excise, not­withstanding that he was summoned so to doe, (according to the
Statute in that behalf made) forty shillings; Edward Budgen, late of
Brench­ley, in the said County, Labourer, for the like, 40 s. and for
forfeiture, for that he refusing to permit the Gager to gage or take account
of Beer by him brewed, and being thereupon for­bidden by the said Gager to
sell any of the Beer aforesaid, he (after such warning given) did sell the
same, (not having paid or cleared the Duty of Excise) five pounds; and for
costs and charges of the Officer and others imployed [[Page
164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=86) in the service
(touching the premisses) five shillings,

In all——09 05 00

These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to authorise and command you, and
every of you, to levy the aforesaid several and respective summs of money upon
the Goods and Chattels of the said several and respective Offenders, and to
make sale of the said Goods and Chattels, if they shall not be redeemed within
14 days, (rendring to the parties the overplus, if any be;) And for want of
sufficient Distress, to certify us, or one of us, of the same, to the end that
such farther proceedings may be made therein as (by the Laws and Statutes
afore­said) are required. And you are hereby far­ther commanded, to dispose of
all such moneys as you shall (by virtue hereof) levy or receive in such manner
as (by the Laws and Statutes aforesaid) is appointed. Given under our hands
and seals the, &c.

¶ All the before-mentioned Warrants upon the Statute of Excise 12 Car. 2. cap.
24. will also serve (mutatis mutandis) upon the other Statute touching Excise,
made the same Parliament, intituled, An Act for taking away of the Court of
Wards and Liveries.

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=86)

## 20\. Felony.

### 20.1. A Warrant to apprehend a Felon.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I have received In­formation1 Iustice. and Charge
against A. B. of, &c. for felonious taking of, &c. These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do attach the
said A. B. of, &c. and him bring before me, or some other of His Majestie's
Justices of the Peace of the said County, to be Examined touching the
premisses, and to be farther dealt withall according to Law. Hereof fail not
at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

### 20.2. A Mittimus of a Felon.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and H. the Keeper of His
Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid, or his
Deputy, and to every of them.

Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name)2 Justices 1 Quorum. to command
you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do safely [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=87) convey to His
Majestie's Gaol for the said County at Maidstone in the County aforesaid, A.
B. of, &c. and him there safely to deliver to the Keeper of the said Gaol, or
his sufficient Deputy, (according to the tenour of the Pre­cept in that behalf
herewithall declared unto you.) Delivering also to the said Keeper the Precept
aforesaid. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

### 20.3. Another.

To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County
aforesaid.

K. ss. I Send you herewithall the Body of A. B. of, &c. brought before me this
present day, and charged with the Felo­nious taking, &c. commanding you (in
His Majestie's name) to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely
to keep, till he shall be from thence delivered by due Order of Law. Hereof
fail not at your peril. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

[[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=87)

### 20.4. A Warrant to search for a Felon on suspicion.

To the Constable and Borsholders of F.

Kent ss. WHereas complaint hath been made unto me by A. B. of C. that of late
he hath had feloniously taken from him certain Goods, six Cows, &c. (as the
Case is) and that he hath in suspicion di­vers evil disposed persons within
your Parish of F. These are to require you that imme­diately upon sight
hereof, you make diligent search in all and every such suspected houses, and
places within your Parish, as you and the said A. B. shall think convenient.
And if up­on your search you find any of the said Goods in the hands of any
person, or shall have any other just cause of suspicion of any person, that
then you bring such suspected person be­fore me, or some other of His
Majestie's Justi­ces of the Peace for the County of Kent, to answer such
matter as shall be alledged against them. Hereof fail not, &c.

[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=88)

### 20.5. A Warrant for apprehending of one that hath dangerously hurt
another.

To the Constable and Borsholders, &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I am credibly in­formed, That A. B. of your Town,
Ioyner, hath now lately dangerously hurt one C. D. of your said Town,
Bricklayer, by a blow which he hath given the said C. D. on the Head, and
another on the Stomach, so as the said C. D. is in danger of Death thereby.
These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) straitly to charge and command
you, that im­mediately on sight hereof you, or one of you, do bring the said
A. B. before me, or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the
said County, to find sufficient Sureties, as well for his appearance before
the Justices at the next Gaol delivery to be holden for this County, then and
there to answer unto the premisses, and doe and receive therefore what the
Court shall enjoyn on him; As also, that he the said A. B. shall in the mean
time keep the Peace towards our Sovereign Lord the King, and all His Liege
people, but especially towards the said C. D. And hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under my hand and seal at this, &c.

[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=88)

### 20.6. A Liberate to deliver a Prisoner committed for Felony.

To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol in A. &c. Greeting.

K. ss▪ FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. &c. Black­smith, hath before us found
sufficient Mainprise to appear before the Justices of Gaol­delivery at the
next general Gaol-delivery to be holden in the said County, there to answer to
such things as shall be then on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord objected
against him, and namely, to the feloniously taking of two Sheep, (for the
suspicion whereof he was ta­ken and committed to your said Goal.) We command
you on the behalf of our said Sove­reign Lord, that if the said A. B. do
remain in your said Gaol for the said cause, and for none other, then you
forbear to grieve or de­tain him any longer, but that you deliver him thence,
and suffer him to go at large, and that upon the pain will fall thereon. Given
un­der our hands and seals, &c.

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=89)

### 20.7. A Warrant to Bind persons to give in Evidence against a Felon.

To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and every of them.

K. ss. THese are to require you upon sight hereof to warn to be be­fore me, or
some other of His Majestie's Ju­stices of the Peace of this County, within two
days next following, A. B. C. D. E. F. &c. to the end that they may be bound
to make their personal appearance at the next general Gaol-delivery or
Quarter-sessions to be holden for this County, then and there to testifie
their knowledge concerning a Felony supposed to be done by R. H. now a
Prisoner in the Castle of K. and that you do then go with them to the Justice
with this Warrant. Hereof fail not, &c.

### 20.8. Or thus:

To the Constable, &c.

Kent ss. YOU are hereby required forth­with to warn the persons un­dernamed of
your Parish to be before me at my dwelling house in D. &c. upon Thursday next
by eight of the Clock in the morning, to te­stifie their knowledge concerning
certain felo­nious [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=89) acts supposed
to be done by A. B. C. D. of, &c. and that you your self be then there with
this Warrant, to shew how you have executed it. Hereof fail not. Given under,
&c.

### 20.9. A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill, and give Evidence
against Principals and Accessary in case of Felony.

THE Condition of this Recognizance isSee Title Recogni­zance. such, That if
the within bound A. B. do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices of
Gaol-delivery to be holden for the within named County of K. and do then and
there prefer or cause to be preferred a Bill of Indict­ment against A. R. and
I. R. for the felonious taking and stealing one Goose and two Hens from the
aforesaid A. B. wherewith the said A. R. and I. R. are charged before the
within named Justices, and against M. R. Wife of A. R. as Accessary to the
Felony aforesaid, with which she is also charged before the Ju­stices
aforesaid, and do also then and there give such Evidence as he knoweth
concerning the Felony aforesaid, as well to the Jurors that shall enquire
thereof on the behalf of our So­vereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors
that shall pass upon the Trial of the said A. R. I. R. and M. R. or any of
them for the same; That then, &c.

T. G.

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=90)

### 20.10. A Condition of a Recognizance where two Felonies are committed to
give Evidence.

THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound I. W. do
personally appear before His Majestie's Justices of Gaol-delivery at the next
general Gaol-deli­very to be holden for the within named County of K. and do
then and there prefer or cause to be preferred one or more Bill or Bills of
In­dictment against I. B. for the felonious taking and stealing of one Shirt
and one pair of  [...]ustian Drawers from the aforesaid I. W. wherewith the
aforesaid I. B. is charged before the within named Justices; for the felonious
taking and stealing of six Napkins and one Table-cloath from Sir R. B.
Baronet, with suspicion where­of the said I. B. is likewise charged before the
Justices aforesaid; and do also then and there give such Evidence as he
knoweth against the said I. B. touching the several Felonies afore­said, as
well to the Jurors that shall enquire thereof for our Sovereign Lord the King,
as also to the Jurors that shall pass upon the Trials of the said I. B. for
the same; That then, &c.

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=90)

### 20.11. A Condition to give Evidence for Fe­lony, thus.

UPon Condition, That if you A. B. shall pursonally appear, and do then and
there persue, and give such Evidence as you know against C. D. now prisoner in
the Gaol of the Liberty aforesaid, for and concerning his felonious stealing
of an holland Apron of the Goods of one E. F. and do not depart, &c, then, &c.

### 20.12. A Condition of a Recognizance to ap­pear upon Felony.

THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas at the last general
Gaol-delivery holden for the within named County of K. it was ordered, that
the within bound E. R. shall give very good Security in such summes as is
within mentioned before the Justice within named, for his personal Appea­rance
at the then next general Gaol-delivery to be holden for the County aforesaid,
to answer a Felony and Robbery on the High-way, whereof he stands indicted in
the said County, (as by the Record of the said Court reference thereunto being
had may more fully appear) which Security he hath given, (as in the said
Recognizance is mentioned:) If therefore the said E. R. do personally appear
at the afore­said [[Page
174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=91) next general
Gaol-delivery to be holden for the said County, to answer the Felony and
Robbery aforesaid, That then, &c.

### 20.13. A Condition to appear upon suspicion of Felony.

UPon the Condition, That if the said A. B. shall personally appear before His
Majestie's Justices of the Peace at the next general Sessions of the Peace and
Gaol-delivery to be holden at A. and do then and there make answer unto all
such matters which on the part and behalf of His said Majesty shall be
objected against him, for and concerning the suspicion of his felonious
stealing of a Horse [or of the Goods] of one C. D. and do not depart thence
without Licence of the Court. Then your Recognizance to be void, or else to
stand in force.

### 20.14. A Bond.

NOverint universi per praesentes, nos T. G. de C. in Com. K. & N. B. de C. in
Com. praed. Yeoman, teneri & firmiter obligari W. P. de C. praed. Blacksmith,
in quadragint. libris legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eisd. W. P. & H. C.
aut eorum alteri, vel eorum certo Attern. Executoribus vel Administratori­bus
suis: ad quam quidem solutionem bene & fideliter faciend. obligavimus nos, &
utrumque nostrum per se, pro toto & in solid. Haeredes, [[Page
175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=91) Executores &
Administ. nostros, & utriusque no­stri, firmiter per praesentes Sigillis
nostris sigillat. Dat. &c. Anno Dom. &c. Annoque Regni, &c.

### 20.15. A Condition to save one harmless who was bound for the appearance
of a person suspected for Felony.

THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above named W. P.
and H. C. at the special instance and request of the above bound T. G. and N.
B. in and by one Re­cognizance bearing the date above written, ta­ken and
acknowledged before S. B. and R. K. Esquires, (two of His Majestie's Justices
of the Peace of the above named County of K.) do each of them the said W. P.
and H. C. stand bound to His said Majesty in, &c. of lawfull money of England,
with Condition, that if the said T. G. do personally appear before His
Ma­jestie's Justices of general Gaol-delivery at the next general Gaol-
delivery to be holded for the said County, to answer unto His said Majesty, in
and upon such matters as shall be then and there objected against him,
touching the felo­nious taking and stealing of, &c. (with suspi­cion whereof
he standeth charged before one of the Justices aforesaid) and farther to doe
and receive as by the said Court shall be en­joyned, and do not depart the
said Court without licence of the same; That then the said Recognizance to be
void, &c. as by the same and the Condition thereof may more cer­tainly and at
large appear: That if therefore the said T. G. do in all things perform the
said [[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=92)
Condition of the said Recognizance, that then this Obligation shall be void,
or else shall stand in full force and virtue.

If any man be Arrested for Felony, his Goods [...] Ri. 3. c. 3. Coke. 8. 171.
Stamf. 162. Br. forf. 58. shall not be seised until Attainder or Convic­tion,
upon pain to forfeit the double value to the Party grieved; for the Party
grieved may sell them bona fide for his maintenance in Prison before
Conviction.

After Conviction the Town presently standsF. Cor. 3. 66. Stam. 193, 194. 3
[...] Ed. 3. 3. Charged for the Felons Goods (if then in his possession,) and
shall answer the Impair­ing of them, except they shew who detained them, and
that they could not have possession of them.

## 21\. Fire.

### 21.1. A Testimonial for Iustices of the Peace for Poor men that have had
loss by Fire.

Kent ss. TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing or Te­stimonial
shall come to be seen, heard, or read; A. B. C. D. and E. F. Esquires, three
of the Justices of the Peace within the said Coun­ty of K. send greeting.
Whereas it is both Godly, and consonant to Christian Charity, in matters
doubtfull and ambiguous to certifie and [[Page
177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=92) report the
truth; We have thought it our duty, (at the earnest and lamentable Suit and
Petition of our loving Neighbours the Bearers or Bringers hereof, G. H. I. K.
&c.) to pub­lish and declare unto your common knowledge, That on the twentieth
of M. last past, between two and three of the clock in the morning, by
casualty and great mischance by Fire, as well their several dwelling Houses,
to the number of, &c. and all other Edifices and Buildings to every of their
said dwelling Houses belong­ing; and also all their Corn, and most of their
several Goods and Houshold-stuff were consu­med, wasted, and burnt, to the
great danger of the Bodies of them and their Families, and their exceeding
great loss and impoverishment. And forasmuch as it is a Godly and Charitable
deed, to further, help, and relieve such poor, needy, and miserable persons,
(being of honest name, fame, and conversation) as they who have suffered this
great loss; And for that the Bearers hereof in the behalf of themselves and
their Neighbours, are inforced by reason of their Losses to seek for help and
succour for their relief. And we knowing their Estate to be such as is
premised, and moved with com­miseration of their sad Estate and Condition,
Have therefore as much as in us lieth, given License unto them, and every of
them, to make their repair from Parish Church to Pa­rish Church, and to every
Parish Church and Chapel, Town, and Place within the County of K. to ask,
receive, and take Charitable De­votion and Benevolence of all good and well
disposed people towards the recovery of their said great Losses. And our
request further is, That you, and every of you to whom they shall repair, do
extend your lawfull favour [[Page
178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=93) unto them,
permitting them without your de­nial to execute the tenour of this our
Licence. Desiring all Ecclesiastical Persons, to whom these distressed persons
shall make their Address in this behalf, to declare the tenor hereof to their
Parishioners in every of their Parish Churches and Chapels on the Sabbath
days, or other Festival days, exorting them to ex­tend their Charity in this
behalf; and those whom it concerns, to aid and assist them in the collection
thereof. In Witness, &c.

### 21.2. A Charitable Request made by certain Iustices of the Peace to the
Inhabi­tants of a Division for Relief of F. S. who had been therein lately
ruined by Fire.

K. ss. WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, his Majestie's Ju­stices of the
Peace of the County of K. and in­habiting in and neer the division of the said
County, wherein the Parish of B. in the Coun­ty aforesaid is situate, having
received cre­dible information that F. S. of the Parish afore­said Labourer,
upon the second day of April last past (by a sudden Fire hapening in his said
dwelling house in the said Parish) had his Flax (to the value of thirty and
five pounds) suddenly burnt and consumed (to the utter undoing him, his wife
and children) unless he be relieved by the Charity of well disposed people. We
therefore taking the said Loss into consideration, and much commiserating
[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=93) the same
do, upon the humble Petition of the F. S. (so far forth as lawfully we may)
ear­nestly recommend his said sad condition, to the charitable consideration
and benevolence of all well disposed people inhabiting within the division
aforesaid, desiring them to con­tribute (what God shall move their hearts
unto) towards his help and relief, therein de­siring also the Ministers and
Church-wardens of every the Parishes within the division afore­said to promote
the said Charitable work. Given under our hands the, &c. of May, 1681\. &c.

## 22\. Forceable Entry.

### 22.1. A Warrant to return a Iury to inquire15 R. 2. cap. 2. of a Forceable
Entry.

The Party grieved shall bear the Costs that the Iustice of Peace shall sustain
in the execu­tion of the Statute of Forceable Entries. 8 H. 6. c. 9.

Kent ss. R. K. Esq (one of His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep the Peace
in the County aforesaid) To the Sheriff of the said County Greeting. On the
behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King I command you, that you do cause to come
before me at C. in the Parish of G. in the County aforesaid, upon Monday the
tenth day of Iune next ensuing, four and twenty sufficient and indifferent men
of the neighbourhood of L. in the said Coun­ty, whereof every one have lands
and tene­ments of the yearly value of forty shillings by [[Page
180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=94) the year at the
least, (above reprises,) to en­quire upon their Oath for His said Majesty of a
certain Entry by strong hand made into the mesuage of A. B. at L. aforesaid,
against the form of the Statute in that behalf provided, (as it is said:) And
that you do at the said day return twenty shillings issues upon everyThe
second day 40 s. issues. The third 100 s. issues. Every day after dou­ble
issues. of the Jurors by you in this behalf to be im­pannelled. Hereof fail
not upon pain of twen­ty pounds to be by you forfeited to His said Majesty,
and upon such other penalty as (by the Statute in that behalf provided) is
decla­red, (if you shall be slack, and make not due execution hereof.) And
have you there the names of the Jurors, and this Precept. Given under my hand
and seal at, &c. the second day of, &c.

### 22.2. A Record of a Forceable Entry.

K. ss. EGO R. K. Armig. unus Iusticiario­rum Dom. Regis nunc ad pacem in
Comitatu Kanc. praedicto conservandam assignato­rum, Certifico, quod secundo
die Februarii, Anno Regni dicti Dom. Regis nunc tricesimo questus est mihi A.
B. de C. in Comitatu Kanc. praedicto Yeoman, Quod E. F. & aliae personae
ignotae perturbatores pacis dicti Dom. Regis nunc praedicto secundo die
Februarii Anno supradicto in unum messuagium & unum Atrium cum pertin.
ad­tunc, & adhunc, existens liberum tenementum W. I. Gent. ac in possessione
praed. A. B. pro termino decem annorum adhuc venturorum, situa­tum in C.
praedicta, in Com. praedicto pacifice & quiete intraver. & intrationem fecer.
Et postea, viz. praedicto secundo die Februarii, Anno supra [[Page
181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=94) dicto apud C.
praedictam in Com. praedicto, prae­dictum A. B. à praedicto Messuagio, & Atrio
cum pertin. vi, & Armis, &c. illicite, & manu forti expuler. ejecer. & amover.
Et praed. A. B. sic deinde expuls. ejectum, & amotum à Messua­gio, & Atrio,
praedictis, cum pertin. ut praedici­tur vi & Armis, illicite & manu forti
adtunc & ibidem extra tenuer. & detinuer. Ad grave damnum praedicti A. B.
contra pacem dicti Dom. Regis nunc, &c. ac contra formam Statuti in hu­jusmodi
casu editi, & provisi. Et unde praedictus A. B. petiit à me remedium in hac
parte rele­vari. Quâ querela & petitione, praedict. per me auditis existen.
Ego praefatus J. B. immediate personaliter accessi ad Messuagium & Atrium
praedicta cum pertin. Ac in Messuagio praedicto ad­tunc & ibidem inventi
praedictum E. F. praedic­tum Messuagium & Atrium cum pertinentiis, à praedicto
A. B. vi, & armis illicite & manu forti, extra tenentem, & detinentem, contra
for­mam Statuti in hujusmodi casu editi, & provisi, super quo, ego praefatus
J. B. adtunc, & ibidem causavi praedictum E. F. capt. & arrestat. & misi ad
Gaolam de M. in Com. Kanc. praed. ibid. remanere sub salva custodia donec
inveniret co­ram me, sive aliquo alio Iusticiariorum dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem
in Com. praedict. sufficien­tem securitatem pro personali comparentia ipsius
A. B. ad proximam generalem Quarterialem-Ses­sionem pacis dicti Dom. Regis in
Com. praed. te­nent. ad respondendum transgressioni & contemp. praed. Ac quod
interim se bene gereret in cujus rei testimonium ego praefatus J. B.
praedictae Certifi­cationi manum & sigillum meum apposui, vicesi­mo die Maii,
Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, & Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, &c. Trice­simo secundo Annoque
Dom. 1680.

[[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=95)

### 22.3. A Warrant to the Sheriff for Re­stitution.

Kent ss. R. K. Esq (one of His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep the Peace
in the County aforesaid) To the Sheriff of the said County Greeting. Whereas
by a certain Inquisition taken before me at A. in the County aforesaid the
second day of Iune, &c. upon the Oath of A. B. C. D. E. F. &c. according to
the form of the Statute in Case of Forceable Entry made and provided, it was
found that G. H. &c. and others [as in the In­quisition] as by the said
Inquisition of Record doth more fully appear. These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to will and require you, (with the power of the County) if
need re­quire, to go to the said Messuage, &c. and other the premisses, and do
cause the same with their appurtenances to be reseized, and the said C. D. to
be restored in, and-to his full possession thereof, as he was before the same
Entry, according to the form of the aforesaid Statute. And hereof fail not,
&c.

[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=95)

### 22.4. A Mittimus upon view of Forceable Detainour.

Kent ss. R. K. Esq (one of His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep the Peace
in the County aforesaid) To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said
County at Maidstone in the County aforesaid Greeting. Whereas, upon Complaint
unto me by A. B. of L. in the said County, I did this present day go to the
dwelling house of the said A. in L. aforesaid, and there did find C. D. of,
&c. E. F. of, &c. forceably, with strong hand and armed power holding the said
house, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, and against the form
of the Statute in that behalf made and provided; I do therefore herewith­all
send unto you the Bodies of the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. convicted of the
said forceable holding by my own View, Testimony and Re­cord, commanding you
(in His Majestie's name) to receive them into the said Gaol, and them there
safely to keep untill they have made fine and ransome to His said Majesty for
their said trespasses, and shall be thence deli­vered by the order of the Law
of this Land. Hereof fail not, &c.

[[Page 184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=96)

## 23\. Foreign Wares.

### 23.1. A Warrant to search for, and seize Foreign Manufactures prohibi­ted,
&c.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. Forasmuch as I am informed, That14 Car. 2. 1 Iustice. great
quantities of foreign Bone­lace, Cut-work, Imbrodery, Fringe, Band­strings,
Buttons of Thread of Silk, and Needle-work made of Thread or Silk, have been
lately brought into this Kingdom from parts beyond the Seas, (against the form
of the Statute in that behalf lately made:) These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to re­quire and authorize you, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do enter and search for such Manufactures in the Shops
be­ing open, Ware-houses and Dwelling-houses of such person or persons within
the said Hundred as shall be suspected to have any such Imbrodery, foreign
Bone-lace, Cut-work, foreign Band­strings, Buttons, or Needle-work, and to
seize the same. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal
the, &c.

[[Page 185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=96)

## 24\. High-ways.

### 24.1. A Warrant to levy 5 li. on the In­habitants of a Parish for not
chu­sing Surveyors of the High-ways.

To the Surveyors of the High-ways in the Pa­rish of A. in the County
aforesaid, and to every of them.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as the Church-wardens,14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Iustices.
Surveyors to be chosen yearly, the Monday or Tuesday in Easter­week.
Constables, Borsholders and Inha­bitants of the said Parish did not chuse
Sur­veyors of the High-ways aforesaid for this pre­sent year of our Lord, but
made default of such choice, (against the form of the Statute in that behalf
lately made and provided:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy,
collect and gather the summ of five pounds by Distress and Sale of the Goods
of the said Church-wardens, Con­stables, Borsholders and Inhabitants,
(ren­dring to the Parties so distrained the overplus, if any be;) And that you
do imploy and bestow the moneys so levied, collected or ga­thered, in such
manner as by the Statute afore­said is directed and appointed. Hereof fail not
at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=97)

### 24.2. To distrain for High-way Tax.

To the Surveyors of the High-ways in the Pa­rish of A. in the County
aforesaid, and to every of them.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Com­plaint)14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Iustices. it
appeareth unto us, That the several Persons hereunder named have not paid unto
you the several summs hereunder specified, and severally added toNot paying
within 20 days after demand forfeits dou­ble his As­sessment. their several
names, assessed on them for the repairing and amending and enlarging of the
publick and common High-ways in the said Parish, (according to the form of the
Statute in that behalf made and provided:) These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or
one of you, do levy, collect and ga­ther, by Distress and Sale of the
respective Goods of the said respective Persons, double so much money as was
so as aforesaid respectively assessed on them, (rendring to the Parties so
distrained the overplus, if any be;) And that you do imploy and bestow the
moneys so le­vied, collected or gathered, in such manner as by the Statute
aforesaid is directed and appoin­ted. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
un­der our hands and seals the, &c.

  * A. B. of A. aforesaid 2 s.
  * C D. of A. aforesaid 3 s. &c.

[[Page 187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=97)

### 24.3. For not sending in Teams, to work in the High-ways.

To the Surveyors of the High-ways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid,
and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Com­plaint)14 Car. 2\. cap. 6\. 2 Iustices.
Forfeit 10 s. per diem for a Team, La­bourers 18 d. Vide 22 Car. 2\. cap. 12\.
2 next Iu­stices. Proof by 1 Witness. it appeareth unto us, That the several
Persons hereunder named were by you charged to send each of them a Team to
work in the High-ways in the Parish afore­said, (according to the form of the
Statute in that case lately made and provided;) and yet nevertheless they
neglected so to doe by the space of such number of days as are hereunder
mentioned, and severally added to their seve­ral names: These are therefore
(in His Maje­stie's name) to will and require you, and eve­ry of you, that
you, some or one of you, do levy, collect and gather, by Distress and Sale of
the respective Goods of the said respective Persons, the respective summs of
money here­under added to their respective names, (being moneys by them
respectively forfeited for their said neglects, according to the Statute
afore­said)To be im­ployed to­wards mending the High­ways. rendring to the
Parties so distrained the overplus, (if any be;) And that you do em­ploy and
bestow the moneys so levied, collec­ted or gathered, in such manner as by the
Statute aforesaid is directed and appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

  * A. B. of one day 10 s.
  * C. D. of two days 20 s. &c.

[[Page 188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=98)

### 24.4. Against those that refuse or neglect to work in the High-ways.

To the Surveyors of the High-ways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid,
and to every of them.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Com­plaint)14 Car. 2\. cap. 6\. 2 next
Iu­stices. Every La­bourer for­feits 1 s. 6 d. per diem that he neglects to
work. Vide 22 Car. 2\. cap. 12. it appeareth unto us, That the several Persons
hereunder named were by you charged to come to labour in the High-ways in the
Parish aforesaid, (accor­ding to the form of the Statute in that case lately
made and provided;) and yet neverthe­less they neglected so to doe by the
space of such number of days as are hereunder men­tioned, and severally added
to their several names: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will
and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy,
collect and gather, by Distress and Sale of the respective Goods of the said
respective Persons, the respective summs of money hereunder ad­ded to their
respective names, (being moneys by them respectively forfeited for their said
ne­glect, according to the Statute aforesaid) ren­dring to the Parties so
distrained the overplus, (if any be;) And that you do employ and bestow the
moneys so levied, collected or ga­thered, in such manner as by the Statute
afore­said is directed and appointed. Hereof fail not, &c.

  * A. B. of A. aforesaid one day 1 s. 6 d.
  * C. D. of A. aforesaid two days, &c. 3 s. &c.

[[Page 189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=98)

### 24.5. To impower the Surveyors to dig Gra­vel, &c. upon Wasts or Commons
out of the Parish.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (by the informa­tion14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Iustices. of
the Surveyors of the High-ways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid) it
appeareth unto us, that there is not sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Sand, Cinders
and Stones, within the said Parish to repair their common and publick High-
ways: We do therefore (according to the form of the Statut̄e in that case
lately made and provided) hereby allow and approve, that the said Sur­veyors,
or either of them, and such Person and Persons as they or either of them shall
ap­point, shall and may dig, take and carry away Gravel, Chalk, Sand, Cinders
or Stones, out of any Waste or Common of any Parish, Town, Village or Hamlet,
neighbouring to the Parish aforesaid, or upon the Sea-coast, without pay­ing
any thing for the same, (for the repai­ring and amending of the High-ways
afore­said) so as they fill up the place within one month next after their
digging aforesaid, (if required by the owner of the Soil.) Given under our
hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=99)

### 24.6. To appoint what shall be paid by the Sur­veyors for digging Gravel,
&c. in any man's Ground.

Kent ss. WHereas (by the information14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Iustices. of the
Surveyors of the High-ways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid) it
appeareth unto us, that there being not sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Stones,
Cinders and Sand, or other materials, for to amend and repair the aforesaid
High-ways, within the common or waste grounds of the said Parish, they did
(according to the form of the Statute in that case lately made and provided)
enter into the ground of B. C. in the Parish aforesaid, near adjoyning to the
High-ways to be repaired, and did dig, take and carry away materials which
they judged necessary for the said Reparations; and for that difference did
arise between the said Sur­veyors and the said B. C. about the Damages by the
said B. C. suffered by the digging and carriage thereof: We do therefore
(accor­ding to the Statute aforesaid) assess the Da­mages aforesaid at, &c. of
lawfull money of England, which the said Surveyors are to ren­der unto him for
the same. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=99)

### 24.7. Against Surveyors for not ac­counting.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's common Gaol for the said
County at B. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath14 Car. 2. cap. 6. fol. 128. 2 Iustices.
To account in a year after their Surveyor­ship, or to Gaol till they ac­count.
been made unto us, That B. C. and D. E. Surveyors of the High-ways in the
Parish of A. in the said County for the year, &c. have not made such account
touching their said Office as by the Statute in that behalf lately made is
appointed; and upon examination of the business upon Oath, we do find the said
Complaint to be true: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require
you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or
one of you, do take the said B. C. and D. E. and forthwith convey them to His
Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver them to the said Keeper of the
same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring al­so you, the said Keeper, to
receive them into the Gaol aforesaid, and them there safely to keep, untill
they have made such true and per­fect account touching their said Office as by
the said Statute is appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our
hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=100)

### 24.8. Against the Surveyors who have not paid the moneys in their hands to
the next Surveyors.

To the Constable, &c. (as in the precedent Warrant.)

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Iustices. been made
unto us, That B. C. and D. E. Surveyors of the High-ways in the Parish of A.
in the said County for the year, &c. had in their hands (upon their account
made touching their said Office, according to the form of the Statute in that
case made) the summ of, &c. overplus, which they have not returned or paid to
the next Surveyors, or ei­ther of them, (as by the said Statute is
ap­pointed;) and upon examination of the busi­ness upon Oath, we do find the
said Complaint to be true: These are therefore (in His Ma­jestie's name) to
require you the said Consta­ble and Borsholders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do take the said B. C. and D. E. and forthwith convey them
to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, and there deli­ver them to the said Keeper
of the same, (to­gether with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said
Keeper, to receive them into the Gaol aforesaid, and them there safely keep,
untill they have made payment of the said, &c. to the aforesaid next Surveyors
(as by the said Statute is appointed.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=100)

## 25\. House of Correction.

### 25.1. A Warrant and Directions for general privy Search.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it is observed, That2 Iustices. 1 Iac. c. 4. The second
part of the Institutes, pag. 728. (for want of due Execution of the good Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, made and provided for the apprehending and
punishing of Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beg­gars, and other wandring and idle
Persons) the number of them does daily increase within this Division, to the
great prejudice of the In­habitants therein: (For the better prevention
whereof for the future, and of Robberies, Bur­glaries, and other Felonies, and
Misdemea­nours often occasioned thereby) These are (in His Majestie's name) to
command you, and every of you, diligently to observe and per­form our
Directions in the premisses herewith sent unto you, as you, and every one of
you will answer to the contrary at your perils. Gi­ving you farther hereby to
understand, that we shall from time to time require a strict account of your
due observance and execution of the same: and in case of negligence of you or
any of you therein, we shall forthwith (upon know­ledge thereof) proceed with
effect (according to Law) to punish such of you as shall so ne­glect the same.
Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=101)1\. That
you do henceforth take special care to apprehend all Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy
Beggars, and other wandring and idle Persons, and punish and pass them away
according to Law.

2\. That you do in one night within every week, between the date of the
Precept afore­said and our next meeting, make a general search within the said
Hundred in all suspicious places for the finding out and apprehending of all
Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, and other wandring and idle Persons: And
such as in the said search you shall find and apprehend, that you do punish
and pass them away accor­ding to Law.

3\. That you do cause Watches to be duly13 Edw. 1. cap. 4. Watch to be kept in
eve­ry Town, from Mi­chaelmas to Ascen­tion day. kept in fitting places of the
said Hundred by honest and able men of the same every night, from Sun-setting
untill Sun-rising, untill the nine and twentieth day of September next
en­suing; according to the Statute made at Westm. in the thirteenth year of
the Reign of the late King Edward the First.

4\. That you do forthwith bring before us, or some or one of us, or some other
of His Ma­jestie's Justices of the Peace of the said Coun­ty, all such Rogues,
Vagabonds, sturdy Beg­gars, and other wandring and idle Persons as you shall
apprehend by day or night, and con­ceive to be more than ordinarily dangerous,
or to be suspected for any Murther, Robbery, Bur­glary, Felony, or other
Misdemeanour, to the end they may be farther dealt withall as to Ju­stice doth
appertain.

5\. That you do from time to time (and more especially at every of our
Assemblies or Meetings herein after mentioned) present unto us the names of
all such Persons within the said [[Page
195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=101) Hundred as be
masterless, or live out of service or be common Alehouse-haunters, or
expen­ders of their money in riot, (not duly labou­ring for their living, and
not having whereby so to maintain them.)

And the names of all unlicensed Alehouse­keepers within the said Hundred, or
notori­ously suspected so to be.

Together with the names of such licensed Alehouse-keepers within the same as
are of evil behaviour, or do suffer evil Rule, Ga­ming, or other Disorder to
be kept in their said houses.

And the names of such Witnesses as can or will testify the keeping of any such
Alehouse▪ unlicensed, or the evil behaviour of, or suffe­ring evil Rule,
Gaming, or other Disorder by any of the said licensed Alehouse-keepers.

And that you do give notice unto all and every the said Witnesses, that they
and every of them are by us required to appear before us accordingly, to
testify their several knowledges touching the same.

And that you do likewise give notice unto all and every the said Persons so by
you to be returned, all Persons out of service, riotous Spenders, unlicensed
Alehouse-keepers, or dis­orderly licensed Alehouse-keepers; that they, and
every of them, are by us required to ap­pear before us, or some of us, as
aforesaid, to answer the premisses, and farther to doe and receive as to
Justice doth appertain.

6\. That you do from time to time at every of our said Assemblies or Meetings
deliver un­to us, or some of us, in writing an account of what you have done
in pursuance of the di­rections before mentioned.

[[Page 196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=102)7\. That
(taking assistance of sufficient men7 Iac. c. 4. The search to be made twice
in every year at the least. of the said Hundred) you do in the night be­fore
every of our days of Assembly or Meeting hereafter mentioned, that is to say,
(here name the days of meeting of the Iustices) make a ge­neral privy search
within every of the Parishes, Villages and Hamlets within the same, for
fin­ding out and apprehending of all Rogues, Va­gabonds, and wandring and idle
Persons, in and about the said Parishes, Villages and Ham­lets; And that such
Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandring and idle Persons, (as you shall then find and
apprehend in the said search) you do cause to be brought before us, or some of
us, on the day and at the place of our Assembly or Meeting aforesaid, at ten
of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, there to be exami­ned of their
idle and wandring life, and to be farther dealt withall according to Law.

And that you be then and there also ready to give account and reckoning (upon
Oath in writing, and under the hand of the Minister of each respective Parish)
what Rogues, Vaga­bonds, and disorderly Persons you have appre­hended within
the said Search, and also be­tween every such Assembly and Meeting; and how
many have been by you punished, or otherwise sent unto the House of
Correction, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made in the
seventh year of the Reign of the late King Iames;) and upon such Fines, Pains
and Penalties as are in the said Statute contained, (in case you, or any of
you, do neglect to perform what is in this behalf before commanded.)

Lastly, That upon some day (about three or four days before every of our said
Assemblies or Meetings) you the said Constable and Borshol­ders [[Page
197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=102) do meet and
consult together touching the making of your Return to us of what you have
done between every such our Assembly or Mee­ting; and do also then agree how
to divide your selves in your then next Search, and where to meet in the
morning then next fol­lowing, for your more ready giving to us your account of
what you have done in the said Search.

### 25.2. A Mittimus of a Rogue thither, taken in the general Search.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at B. in the
County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto7 Iac. c. 4. me, That A. B. of, &c. is
of lewd life, &c. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you
the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of
you, do take the said A. B. and him or her safely convey, or cause to be
conveyed, to the aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver him or her
to the said Keeper of the same, there to be punished and set on work during
the space of, &c. de­livering also to the said Keeper this Precept. Commanding
likewise you, the said Keeper, to receive A. B. into the said House, and him
or her there to punish and set on work, (ac­cording to the tenour of this
Precept.) Here­of fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at,
&c.

[[Page 198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=103)

### 25.3. Of an idle Person out of Service, &c.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County, &c.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. of, &c. (accor­ding Dalt. 113. 7 Iac. c. 4. to the
Crime as below) a These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you
the said Constable and Bor­sholders, that you, some or one of you, do safely
convey the said C. D. to the aforesaid House of Correction, and him there
deliver to the said Keeper of the same, together with this Precept. Commanding
also you, the said Keep­er, to receive him into the said House, and there set
him to work and labour from time to time by the space of, &c. next after such
his delivery unto you; in the mean time to punish him according to Law. Hereof
fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, &c. Dalt. 113. 2
Iustices 730. 7 Iac. c. 4.

[[Page 199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=103)

### 25.4. A Mittimus to the House of Correc­tion of an idle Person, that would
run away, and will not work to maintain his Family.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been proved7 Iac. c.  [...]. If run aw [...] and
lea [...] his Fai [...] to the Pa­rish, is ad­judged in­corrigible Rogue. 2
Iustices of that Di­vision. 2 Witnesses up [...]n Oath. before us upon Oath,
(accor­ding to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) That A.
B. of the Parish of C. aforesaid (being able to work, and there­by relieve his
Family) hath threatned to run away, and leave his said Family upon the Pa­rish
of C. aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you
the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, (unless he do put in
sufficient Securities for the discharge of the Parish) that you, some or one
of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to the said House of
Correction, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, (together
with this Precept.) Com­manding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into
the said House, and there deal with and detain him as a sturdy and wandring
Rogue, and to be delivered at the next Assem­bly or Meeting within this lower
Division of the Lath of Scray, for the better execution of an Act of
Parliament made in the seventh year [[Page
200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=104) of the Reign
of our late Sovereign Lord King Iames over England, (intituled, An Act for the
due Execution of divers Laws and Statutes heretofore made against Rogues,
Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, and other lewd and idle Persons) or at the
Quarter-Sessions, and not otherwise. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under our hands and seals at, &c.

### 25.5. A Liberate from thence.

To the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at A. in the
County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas C. D. was by War­rant from us sent to the said House of
Correction, and is at present in your Custody there: Now if the said C. D. is
in your Custody for the cause aforesaid, and no others, We do hereby authorize
and com­mand you forthwith (upon receipt hereof) to set C. D. at large from
your said Custody: For which this shall be your sufficient War­rant. Given
under our hands and seals at A. in the said County the, &c.

[[Page 201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=104)

## 26\. Huy and Cry.

### 26.1. The Examination of a Person robbed on the High-way praying an Huy
and Cry.

The Examination of A. B. of C. in the County of D. Gent. taken by E. F. Esq
one of the Iu­stices of the Peace of the County of F. on the second day of
October, Anno Dom. 1679. upon his Oath.

Kent ss. THIS Examinant deposeth and27 Eliz. cap. 13. saith, That as he was
riding on Saturday the first day of April last past from the Town of A. in the
County of B. to C. in the same County, he was assaulted in the com­mon High-
way leading from one of the said Towns to the other, at or near a place there
called K, at about eleven of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, by two
Footmen, who there seised upon him this Examinant, and carrying him into a
certain Wood, robbed him, and bound him. And this Examinant farther saith,
That he is since informed, that the said place and Wood are both in the Parish
of A. aforesaid, and so within the Hundred of A. and D. in the said County.
And this Ex­aminant farther saith and deposeth, That the said Thieves did then
seloniously take from him and rob him of 10 l. 17 s. in money, and one cloath
Saddle with Stirups and Girts, [[Page
202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=105) worth in all
10 s, and two leather Purses, two Knives, &c. in all worth 5 s. And this
Exa­minant farther saith and deposeth, That he then did not, nor yet doth know
the Parties that committed the said Robbery, or either of them.

R. W.

### 26.2. Another.

Kent ss. A. B. of C. in the County of D. 27 Eliz. cap. 13. did upon the
present 10. day of October in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
Charles the Second, &c. per­sonally come before me E. M. Esq (one of His
Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the said County of D. inhabiting in the
Parish of Saint M. C. in the County aforesaid, in the Hundred of R. in the
said County) and upon his cor­poral Oath then taken before me did say, That
upon Friday the 8. day of May last past, at about the hour of seven of the
clock in the afternoon of the same day, in the King's High­way, (at a certain
place called E. F. in the Pa­rish of C. in the aforesaid Hundred of R. in the
said County of D.) he was assaulted by five men, all unknown to him the said
A. B; and they the said five men did then and there felo­niously take and
carry away from him the said A. B. 100 li. in moneys numbred, of the mo­neys
of him the said A. B. and also his Goods and Chattels (that is to say) one
Ring with a deep Table-stone set in the same, one Watch in two gold Cases, &c.
to the value of 30 li. and robbed him the said A. B. of all and every [[Page
203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=105) the Moneys,
Goods and Chattels aforesaid. And the said A. B. was on the day and year first
above mentioned (upon his Oath aforesaid) by me examined, whether he did know
the Parties that committed the said Robbery, or any of them: And he then (upon
his Oath) did say, that he (neither at the time of the said Robbery committed,
nor at any time since) did know, or doth yet know the said Parties that
committed the said Robbery, nor any of them. In testimony whereof I, the
aforesaid Justice, have hereunto set my hand and seal the day and year first
above written.

A. B.

### 26.3. The Examination of a Person rob­bed on the High-way by three
Persons, one of which he knew.

The Examination of A. B. of C, &c. sworn and examined before R. K. one of His
Majestie's Iustices of the Peace of the County of K. on the 2. day of March,
Anno Dom. 1679. deposeth and saith.

Kent ss. THat about three weeks since he3 Ed. 1. was riding from C. aforesaid,
towards Feversham, in the said County of K. and in the High-way within the
Parish of F. in the said County of K. he was set upon by three Persons, and
was by them robbed, and they took from him, &c. And he saith and deposeth that
he doth know one of those Per­sons, [[Page
204]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=106) and saith that
his name is E. F. an Essex man, born in, &c. and of the age as he ad­judgeth
him, of 30 years or thereabouts, and the others he saith he knoweth not.

### 26.4. An Huy and Cry upon the escape of a Prisoner from the Constable.

To the Constable, Borsholders, and other Officers, as well within the said
County as elsewhere, within the Kingdom of England, to whom the Execution
hereof doth or may concern.

Kent ss. WHereas A. B. Constable of3 Ed. 1.  [...] Iustice. the Hundred of M.
within the said County, having yesterday (together with two Precepts)
delivered unto him the Body of C. D. of, &c. before charged with the suspicion
of his felonious taking of one Gelding, to be by him the said Constable and
other Officers conveyed to the Gaol for the said County at M. in the County
aforesaid, hath this day (as the said Constable hath upon his complaint
informed me) made a felonious es­cape from him: These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to require you, and every of you, to make diligent search
within your several Precincts for the said C. D. being a Person about 30 years
of age, of a middle sta­ture, slender body, long black curled hayr, having on
his body a short coloured close Coat, light grey Breeches and Stockings, a
narrow-brim'd Hat; And also that you the said respective Officers do make Huy
and Cry [[Page 205]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=106)
after him from Town to Town, and from County to County, and that as well by
Horsemen as Footmen; And if you shall find him the said C. D. that then you do
convey him before some Justice of the Peace, within the County where he shall
be taken, by him to be dealt withall according to Law. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given, &c.

### 26.5. A Warrant for a Huy and Cry after a Felon.

R. W. Esq (one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace for the said County) To
all Consta­bles, Borsholders, and other His Majestie's Of­ficers within the
said County, or elsewhere within the Realm of England, whom the Ex­ecution
hereof may concern, Greeting.

K. ss. WHereas I have received Infor­mation1 Iustice. 28 Ed. 3. cap. 11. and
Charge against A. B. who is a Person of evil fame, (describe the Person, Age,
and Apparel) who is char­ged before me to have assaulted and taken from the
person of C. D. on the second day of Iune last, at, &c. ten pounds in moneys
numbred, &c. (according to the Information) And he the said A. B. is very much
suspected to have committed several other Felonies; and notwithstanding
several endeavours for apprehension of him, he hath not as yet been
apprehended, but hath withdrawn himself, and is fled: These are therefore (in
His Ma­jestie's name) to command you, and every [[Page
206]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=107) of you, to
make diligent search within your several Precincts for the said A. B. and to
make Huy and Cry after him from Town to Town, and from Country to Country, and
that as well by Horsemen as Footmen, (according to Law:) And if you shall find
the said A. B. that then you do carry him before some one of His Ma­jestie's
Justices of the Peace within the Coun­ty or place where he shall be taken, to
be dealt withall according to Law. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under
my hand and seal at, &c.

### 26.6. A Warrant to search for a Person (who hath committed a Rob­bery,)
and for Goods stoln.

R. W. Esq (one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace of the said County) To
all Constables, Borsholders, and other His Ma­jestie's Officers within the
County aforesaid, or elsewhere within the Realm of England, whom the Execution
hereof may concern, Greeting.

Kent ss. WHereas I have received Information, That a bay Gelding about 15
hands high, with a bald Face, (his Head bigger than ordinary) two wall Eyes, a
short Tail, aged about 7 years, his paces all Trot, being the Gelding of R. G.
of B. in the said County, Gent. was in the night of the 18. day of this
instant [[Page 207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=107)
Iuly stoln out of his Land in B. aforesaid, and that he suspecteth a Person
(whose name he knoweth not) of a middle sta­ture, aged about 22 years, and in
saddish­coloured Cloaths, to have stoln this Gel­ding aforesaid: These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, and eve­ry of you, to make
diligent search (within your several Precincts) for the Gelding and person
aforesaid, and to make Huy and Cry after the said Person from Town to Town,
and from Country to Country, (according to Law:) And if upon your search or
otherwise you shall find the said Person, or the Gelding aforesaid, or other
just cause of suspicion, that then you carry the said Person, or other Persons
suspected, before some one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the
County or place where he or they shall be taken, (to be dealt with ac­cording
to Law.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal this,
&c.

[[Page 208]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=108)

## 27\. Inns of Court.

### 27.1. A Warrant from one of the Judges, a Member of an Inns of Court,
a­gainst one of that Society, for re­fusing to observe the Order of the House.

To all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all other His Majestie's Officers and
Ministers, whom these presents may concern.

Mid. ss. WHereas I Sir R. R. Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of
King's Bench, am informed and fully satisfied, by some of the Masters of the
Bench of the Society of, &c. That F. M. Gent. lately a Member of the said
Society hath for his con­tempt of several Orders of Council made for the
compelling him to pay his Commons, and o­ther Duties amounting to a
considerable Summ, been by order of Council expelled the Society, and his
Chamber and Study seized to the use of the House; notwithstanding which, the
said F. M. without performance of any of the said Or­ders, hath contemptuously
broken off Padlocks, put upon his Chamber door, entred thereinto, and made use
thereof, and both in Words and Deeds reproachfully and contemptuously
sligh­ted and affronted the Governours and Govern­ment of the said Society,
and that he con­tinues [[Page
209]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=108) at this
present actually and obstinately in his contemptuous Carriage, to the
distur­bance of the said Society, in contempt and violation of the Government
thereof, and as a dangerous example to others, if not preven­ted by a speedy
and severe proceeding against him. These are therefore (in His Majestie's
name) straitly to charge and command you, and every of you, that you bring
before us, or some other of the Justices of the Court of King's Bench, the
Body of the said F. M. to answer to such Misdemeanors, Contempts, and
Misbehaviour, as shall be objected against him by the Masters of the Bench, or
others, on the behalf of the said Society, to the end that his Insolences may
be repressed by such proceeding against him as shall be agreeable to Justice.
Given under my hand and seal the 24th. day of Iune, in the 27th. year of the
reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second over England, Annoque Dom.
1675.

R. R.

[[Page 210]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=109)

## 28\. Irish Cattel.

### 28.1. A Warrant to seize certain Cattel, imported from Foreign parts into
England.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.

Kent ss. WHereas I am given to under­stand,18 Car. 2. cap. 2. 32 Car. 2. cap.
that there are lately Imported into England, out of Ireland or some other
Foreign parts, and are now remaining in your Precinct, certain Cattel and
Beasts, prohibited by the late Acts of Parliament to be Imported. These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to give you notice thereof, and to will and
require you, and every of you, forthwith after sight hereof, to use your
utmost diligence and endeavour to enquire, find out, and discover the same
Cattel and Beasts, and the same to seize and take into your Custody, to the
intent the same may be proceeded with as by the said Acts is appointed. Given
un­der my hand and seal this, &c.

[[Page 211]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=109)

### 28.2. A Warrant to deliver to the Owners certain Cattel seized, as
forfeited for being Imported from Foreign parts, upon proof that they were not
so Imported.

To the Constables, &c. ut supra.

Kent ss. WHereas complaint hath beenThe same Acts. made to me, that you, or
some or one of you, have or hath seized and ta­ken into your Custody certain
Cattel belong­ing to, or late in the possession of A. B. viz. 2 Oxen, 3 Kine,
4 Heifers, 5 Yearlings, 100 Sheep, and 6 Swine as forfeited for being Imported
out of Ireland into England, con­trary to the late Acts of Parliament in that
be­half. Now forasmuch as the said A. B. within 48 hours after such seizure
hath made it appear to me, by the Oath of two credible Witnesses, viz.

That the same Cattel were not Imported from Ireland aforesaid, nor any other
place be­yond the Seas contrary to the said Acts. These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to will and require you forthwith upon sight hereof, to
deliver unto the said A. B. the said Cattel, aud every of them, without delay,
according to the said Acts, as you will answer the con­trary. Given under my
hand and seal, &c.

[[Page 212]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=110)

### 28.3. A Warrant to kill the said Cattel.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them. If
not them, To the S [...]izor or Seizors of the Cattel, as the Case is.

Kent ss. WHereas I am given to under­stand,The last Act. That you, or some of
you, having seized within your Precinct certain great Cattel, Sheep, and
Swine, viz. (here name the Sorts and number of each Sort of the Cattel as the
Case is) late belonging to or in the possession of A. B. as forfeited for
being Imported out of Ireland, or some other Fo­reign parts beyond the Seas,
contrary to the late Acts of Parliament in that behalf. And that the Importer
or Importers thereof have been convicted of such Importation and For­feiture
of the said Cattel, yet nevertheless you the said Seizor or Seizors by the
space of six days next after such Conviction and Forfeiture, have delayed and
do still delay, or neglect to cause the same Cattel to be killed, whereby the
distribution thereof according to the said Act is retarded and hindred. These
are there­fore to require you immediately upon sight hereof, to cause the said
Cattel to be killed, to the end the same may be forthwith distri­buted as by
the said Acts is required. And hereof you are not to fail. Given under my hand
and seal, &c.

[[Page 213]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=110)

### 28.4. A Warrant to levy 40 s. upon the Seizor or Church-wardens that shall
fail in killing, or making distribution as aforesaid.

To the Constable and Borsholders of, &c.

Kent ss. WHereas I am given to under­stand,The last Act. That A. B. having
seized within your Precinct certain great Cat­tel, Sheep and Swine, viz. (here
name the Cattel ut supra) lately belonging to or in the possession of C. D. as
forfeited for being Im­ported from Foreign parts beyond the Seas, contrary to
the late Acts of Parliament in that behalf. And that the same are convicted
and forfeited according to the same Acts, yet the said A. B. by the space of
six days next after such Conviction and Forfeiture, have delayed and do still
delay to cause the same Cattel and Beasts to be killed, and distribution to be
made thereof according to the said Acts. Now forasmuch as Oath hath been made
before me of the premisses: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
will and require you forth­with after sight hereof, to levy or cause to be
levied the summe of 40 s. for every one of the said great Cattel, and 10 s.
for every of the said Sheep, and 10 s. for every of the said Swine which
should have been killed and distri­buted as aforesaid, in pursuance of the
said Acts by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B.
rendering the said A. B. the [[Page
214]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=111) over-plus,
(necessary Charges of destreyning being first deducted) and in default of such
Distress, to commit the said A. B. to the com­mon Gaol of the said County,
there to remain for the space of three months without Bail or Mainprise,
according to the Statute in that behalf. Hereof you are not to fail. Given
un­der my hand and seal, &c.

According to these Presidents may like Warrant or Warrants be made for Fish or
other Goods, prohibited by the said Acts, Mutatis mu­tandis.

## 29\. Lent.

### 29.1. A Warrant for the observing of Lent.

To the Constables and Borsholders, &c.

Kent ss. THese are therefore in His Ma­jestie's name, and in pursuance of His
said Majestie's late Proclamation, to will and command you, and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do cause to come and ap­pear before us upon
Thursday the second day of March, (name the place) all Inn-holders, Tavernors,
Alehouse-keepers, Butchers, and all other Victuallers whatsoever within the
said Hundred of, &c. And that you give notice to [[Page
215]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=111) the said
persons, that they bring with them two sufficient Sureties to enter into
several Re­cognizances for His said Majestie's use, for the due observation of
Lent, according to the ef­fects and contents of the said Proclamation, and
according to the Law in that case made and provided. And that you your selves,
or one of you, be then and there present, and make a return in writing of all
such as you shall have warned by virtue of this Warrant. Hereof, &c. Given,
&c.

## 30\. Licences.

### 30.1. A Licence for a Badger of Corn.

Kent ss. AT the general Sessions of the6 Ed. 6\. cap. 14\. 13 Eliz. 25\. made
perpetual. 5 Eliz. 5\. 31 Eliz. 5\. 21 Iac. 22\. 2 Iustices. 1 Quorum. Not for
a­bove a year. Peace holden at M. in the County aforesaid this present day, A.
B. of H. in the County aforesaid is admitted, licen­sed, and appointed by the
Justices of the Peace of the said County, to be a common Badger, Lader,
Kedder, Carrier, Buyer or Transporter of all manner of Corn, or Grain, in any
Mar­ket or Fair within the Realm of England, and the same so bought to convert
to Meal, and the same to carry to the City of L. or the Suburbs of the same,
or to any other Market or Fair, so that he use the same, according to the
tenour and true meaning of the Statute in that case made and provided, against
Fore­stallers, Regrators, and Ingrossers, and not [[Page
216]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=112) otherwise. The
same Licence to have conti­nuance from the day of the date hereof, until the
next general Sessions of the Peace after the Feast of E. next coming, to be
holden at M. aforesaid. In Witness whereof we have here­unto set our hands and
seals this second day of November, 1680.

R. K. R. H. T. B.

A Licence as before may be granted to Drovers of Cattel, to Buy and Sell
again, by the same Statute.

### 30.2. A Licence for a petty Chapman.

To the Bailiffs, Constables, and other of His Majestie's Officers of the same
County, and to every of them Greeting.

Kent ss. KNow ye that we R. K. and G. H. Esquires, two of His Majestie's
Justices of the Peace within the County afore­said, have licensed, and by
these presents do license T. W. of M. in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, to be a
petty Chapman, to wander and go from Town to Town, Village to Vil­lage, and
place to place, to sell Pins, Points, Tapes, Laces, Knives, Gloves, Purses,
&c. and such other kind of small Wares, and also to gather and buy Coney-
skins, and such kind of small Wares within the County aforesaid, and not else-
where. Provided that this our [[Page
217]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=112) Licence shall
continue in effect, only for the term of one whole year coming from the day of
the date hereof, and no longer. In witness whereof, &c.

### 30.3. A Licence or Pasport for a Poor man to his Friends for Relief.

To all Constables, Borsholders, Bailiffs, and other His Majestie's Officers of
the same County, and to every of them.

Kent ss. R. K. and T. B. Esquires, two of39 Eliz. cap. 4. His Majestie's
Justices of the Peace for the same County greeting. Foras­much as A. B. of C.
&c. the Bearer hereof, being reduced to great poverty and necessity, hath
desired a Testimonial or Licence for his safe travel unto the City of D. in
the County of S. where he saith he was born and hath some Friends yet living,
by whose Means and Friendship he hopeth to be fully relieved and holpen. In
consideration whereof, Know ye that we the said R. K. and T. B. (as far as in
us lieth) have licensed the said A. B. to travel and pass the direct way from
C. unto the said City of D. so that his Journey be not for longer or further
continuance than twenty days next after the date hereof, praying you, and
every of you, not to molest or trouble the said poor man in his travel; but to
permit and suffer him to pass, so that he shew himself in no respect offensive
to His Majestie's Laws. In witness whereof, &c.

[[Page 218]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=113)

### 30.4. Another.

K. ss. R. K. and T. B. two of the Ju­stices,It is con­venient that the party
be particular­ly described in this Pas­port, lest others make use thereof. &c.
Whereas the Bearer hereof A. B. of C. &c. having (shewing the cause of his
travel) desired one Testimonial or Licence for his safe travel to the City of
D. (shew to what place he goeth) Wherefore we (as much as in us lieth) do
license the said A. B. to travel the direct way from C. in the said County of
K. to the said City of D. so as his Journey be no longer than twenty days next
after the date hereof, praying you, and every of you, to suffer him to pass in
Peace, so that he demean himself orderly. In witness, &c.

### 30.5. A Licence to Beg.

To all Constables, Borsholders, Bailiffs, and all other His Majestie's
Officers within the County of K. and to every of them.

Kent ss. R. K and T. H. Esquires, two of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace
within the County aforesaid greeting. Whereas the Bearer hereof A. B. of C. in
the County aforesaid, being a very poor man and blind, by reason whereof he is
not able to La­bour, nor get to live of himself, without the charitable Relief
of others, and being now Re­sident [[Page
219]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=113) in the said
Town, is therefore to be re­lieved; and being likewise informed that the Town
is at this present charged with more poor and impotent people than it is able
to relieve. Know you therefore, that we the said Justices have licensed and
allowed the said Poor man and his Leader, to go abroad and beg, gather, and
receive the charitable Alms of well disposed people, inhabiting and dwelling
within the Hundred of &c. in the said County, requiring you not to molest or
trouble the said Poor man or his Leader for so doing, but desiring you rather
to relieve him and his Leader in their necessity, as to you shall seem meet.
This our Licence to remain and be in force for one whole year next ensuing the
date hereof, and no longer. In witness whereof we have here­unto set our hands
and seals, &c.

R. K. T. H.

### 30.6. A Licence to Travel by Water on the Lord's day.

WHereas by Act of Parliament made in29 Car. 2. the 29th. year of His
Majestie's Reign that now is, it is Enacted, That no person or persons shall
use, employ, or travel upon the Lord's day with any Boat, Wherry, Lighter, or
Barge, except it be upon extraordinary oc­casion, to be allowed by some
Justice of the Peace of the County, or Head-Officer, or some Justice of Peace
of the City, Burrough; or Town-Corporate where the Fact shall be com­mitted,
upon pain that every person so offen­ding shall forfeit and lose the summe of
five shillings for every such Offence, as by the said [[Page
220]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=114) Act, (among
other things) it doth and may appear: And forasmuch as A. B. of the Parish of
Saint A. in the County of M. Gent. having extraordinary occasion to travel on
the next Lord's day to B. in the County of S. and to use and employ a Boat,
Wherry, or Barge in his said Journey, hath desired my Allowance thereof: These
are therefore (in pursuance of the said Act) to will and require all
Con­stables, Church-wardens, Overseers of the Poor, and all other Officers
whom these presents may concern, to permit and suffer the said A. B. quietly
and peaceaby to perform his said Jour­ney on the next Lord's day as aforesaid,
and to use and employ any Boat, Wherry, or Barge, at his discretion, without
any Molesta­tion or Disturbance whatsoever at their peril. Given under my hand
and seal this tenth day of Iuly, Anno Dom. 1679\. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli
Secundi 31.

### 30.7. Another.

K. ss. THese are to certifie that A. B. C. D. E. F. the Bearers hereof have
made it appear before me, that they have ur­gent occasions to pass on the next
Lord's day from A. to B. by Water. All Constables, Church-wardens, and other
His Majestie's Offi­cers, are therefore required to permit the said Gent. to
pass without interruption. Given under my hand and seal this second day of
October 1680.

I. C.

[[Page 221]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=114)

### 30.8. A Licence to Travel on the Lord's day.

To all Constables, &c.

THese are to certifie that A. B. of C. &c. where he now dwelleth, having
infor­med me that he hath a Brother living at C. in the County of H. where he
lieth now very Sick, and he hath a desire to see him. Know ye that for this
cause I do hereby license him to travel upon the next Lord's day the direct
way to his Brother. Willing and requiring you not to molest or hinder him for
the same, so that he behave himself orderly in his travel. Given under my
hand, &c.

## 31\. Misdemeanours.

### 31.1. A general Warrant for the same re­tornable before a particular
Justice.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.

Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's1 Iustice. Dalt. 481. name) to command
you, that you, some or one of you, do cause A. B. of C. [[Page
222]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=115) to come before
me, to answer unto such mat­ters of Misdemeanour as (on His Majestie's
be­half) shall be objected against him, and far­ther to doe and receive as to
Justice doth ap­pertain. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand
and seal at, &c.

### 31.2. Or thus:

THese are to will and require you (in His Majestie's name) straitly to charge
and command you, and either of you, that imme­diately upon the sight hereof
(or upon Thurs­day next at two of the clock in the afternoon) you bring A. B.
of your said Town, Barber, before me, to answer to such matters of
Mis­demeanours as (on His Majestie's behalf) shall be objected against him.
And hereof fail you not at your perils. Given under, &c.

### 31.3. The like retornable before any Ju­stice, and the Accuser to have
Notice.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.

Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or
one of you, do cause A. B. of, &c. to come before me, or some other of His
Ma­jestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County [[Page
223]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=115) to answer unto
such matters of Misdemeanour as (on the behalf of His said Majesty) shall be
objected against him by E. F. of, &c. Husband­man, and farther to doe and
receive as to Ju­stice doth appertain. And you are farther hereby required to
give convenient notice to the said E. F. of the time and place when, whither,
and before whom you shall cause the said A. B. so to come, in execution of
this Precept, to the end that the said E. F. may then and there also be
personally present, to make appear the Misdemeanour aforesaid. Hereof fail not
at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

### 31.4. A Condition of a Recognizance for Misdemeanour.

UPon this Condition, That if you A. B. [...]hall personally appear before our
So­vereign Lord the King's Justices of the Peace at the next general Sessions
of the Peace to be holden for the Liberty of Saint A. and do then and there
make answer unto all such things which (on His Majestie's behalf) shall be
ob­jected against you, and do not depart thence without Licence of the Court,
Then your Re­cognizance to be void, or else to stand in full force, &c.

[[Page 224]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=116)

## 32\. Murther.

### 32.1. A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment, and to
give Evidence at the next general Gaol­delivery, alias Assizes, to both
Iu­ries in case of Murther.

THE Condition of this Recognizance isSee Title Recogni­zances. such, That if
the above bound W. B. do personally appear before His Majestie's Justices of
Gaol-delivery at the next general Gaol-de­livery to be holden for the within
named County of Kent, and do then and there prefer or cause to be preferred a
Bill of Indictment against A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. and I. K. for murther of L.
M. Gent. deceased, where­with the said A. B. and C. D. are chargeable before
the within named Justice, and with suspicion whereof the said E. F. G. H. I.
K. are also charged before the Justice aforesaid, and do also then and there
give such Evidence as he knoweth concerning the Murther afore­said, as well to
the Jurors as shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the
King, as also to the Jurors that shall pass upon the Trial of the said A. B.
C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. or any of them for the same, then this Recognizance
shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force and virtue.

[[Page 225]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=116)

### 32.2. A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill, and give Evidence at
Assizes.

THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the above bound A. B. do
personally appear before His Majestie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in
the above named County of C. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be
holden for the said County at the Castle of C. in the County aforesaid, and do
then and there prefer or cause to be pre­ferred one or more Bill or Bills of
Indictment against M. W. of, &c. and do then and there also give such Evidence
as he knoweth concer­ning the same against the said M. W. to the Ju­rors that
shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King that now
is; That then this Recognizance shall be void and of no effect, or else it
shall stand in full force.

### 32.3. A Recognizance to prefer a Bill of In­dictment, and to give Evidence
to both Iuries at the next general Gaol­delivery, alias Assizes, in case of an
Abettor in Murther.

THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound W. B. do
personally appear before His Majestie's Justices of the Gaol-delivery at the
next general Gaol­delivery to be holden for the within named [[Page
226]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=117) County of K.
do then and there prefer or cause to be preferred a Bill of Indictment against
Sir P. H. Knight, touching his the said Sir P's being an Abettor to the
Murther of M. C. de­ceased, (wherewith  [...]e is charged before the within
named Justices) and do also then and there give such Evidence as he knoweth
con­cerning the matter aforesaid, as well to the Ju­rors that shall enquire
thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors
that shall pass upon the Trial of the said Sir P. H. for the same; That then
this Re­cognizance shall be void, or else stand in full force, &c.

## 33\. Nets, Dogs and Conies.

### 33.1. A Warrant to search for Nets and Setting-dogs, upon the Statute of 7
Iacobi.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. BY virtue of an Act of Parlia­ment7 Iac. c. 11. 2 Iustices, and their
hands. in that behalf made, These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
authorize and command you, and every of you, to enter into and search the
house or houses of any person or persons within the said Hundred, other then
such person or persons [[Page
227]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=117) which have
Free-Warren, or is Lord of a Man­nor, or is such Freeholder which is seized in
his own right or the right of his Wife, of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments,
to the clear yearly value of forty pounds or more by the year, (over and above
all charges and re­prises) of some estate of inheritance; Or of Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, in his own right, or in the right of his Wife,
(for term of life or lives) of the yearly value of fourscore pounds, (over and
above all charges and reprises) Or which is worth in Goods orPheasants, &c. to
be taken onely between Michael­mas and Christmas. Chattels four hundred
pounds, suspected to have Setting-dogs, or Nets (for the taking of Pheasants
and Partridges.) And that where­soever you, or any of you, shall find any such
Setting-dog or Nets, the same you take, carry away, and detain, kill, destroy,
and cut in pieces, as things prohibited by the Act afore­said, and forefeited
to such of you as shall find out and take the same as aforesaid. Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at M. in the said County
the, &c.

### 33.2. The like upon the Statute of 22 and 23 Caroli Secundi.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.22 & 23 Car. 2. 1 Iustice (under his hand and seal.)

Kent ss. BY virtue of an Act of Parliament in that behalf lately made, These
are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to authorize and command you, and every
of [[Page 228]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=118) you.
(in the day time) to search the houses, out-houses, or other places, of any
person or persons (within the said Hundred,) other then of such person as hath
Lands and Tenements, or some other estate of inheritance, (in hisThis may be
directed to any special person or persons, (as well as to the Offi­cers. own
or in his Wife's right) of the clear yearly value of one hundred pounds per
annum, or for term of life, or which hath a Lease or Leases of ninety nine
years (or for any longer term) of the clear yearly value of one hundred and
fifty pounds, or which is the Son and Heir ap­parent of an Esquire, (or other
person of higher degree,) or which are Owners or Keepers of Forests, Parks,
Chases or Warrens, (being Stocked with Deer or Conies, for their neces­sary
use, in respect of the said Forests, Parks, Chases or Warrens) as upon good
ground shall be suspected to have or keep in his or their cu­stody any Guns,
Bows, Grey-hounds, Setting­dogs, Ferrets, Cony-dogs, or other Dogs, (to
destroy Hares or Conies) Hays, Tramels, or other Nets, Low-bells, Hare-pipes,
Snares, or other Engines for the taking and killing of Conies, Hares,
Pheasants, Partridges, or other Game, and such Guns, Bows, Grey-hounds,
Setting-dogs, Ferrets, Cony-dogs, or other such Dogs, as aforesaid, Hays,
Tramels or other Nets, Low-bells, Hare-pipes, Snares, or other Engines
aforesaid, as you, or any of you, shall so find, to seize, detain, and keep,
to and for the use of the Lord of the Mannor or Royalty where the same shall
be so found, or taken, or otherwise to cut in pieces or destroy, as things by
the said Act prohibited to be kept by persons of their degree. And what you
shall doe in the premisses, you shall make known un­to me (with all convenient
speed.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

[[Page 229]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=118)

### 33.3. A Mittimus against persons that re­fuse to enter into Recognizance,
to appear at Sessions for their keeping Ferrets, and Nets to kill Conies.

To the Constables, &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. and C. D. of E. in the County aforesaid, be­ing
this present day brought before me by Warrant by the Constable of E.
aforesaid, and being examined did upon their examination confess that they had
kept and used Nets and Ferrets for the taking and killing of Conies by the
space of a year last past, contrary to the Statute in that case made and
provided. And being required to enter into Recognizance for their appearance
at the next general Quarter-Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said
County they did both refuse so to do: These are therefore (in His Majestie's
name) straitly to charge and command you, that you receive into your Custody
the Bodies of the said A. B. and C. D. whom I send you by H. T. one of the
Constables of E. aforesaid, and them safely to keep, untill they shall enter
into such Re­cognizance as aforesaid, or that they be other­wise discharged
according to Law. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and
seal, &c.

[[Page 230]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=119)

### 33.4. A Warrant for one that Hunts with Spannels in Ear'd Corn.

To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundred of, &c.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as complaint hath been23 Eliz. cap. 10. made unto me, That A.
B. of your Town of C. Gent. did in September last past Hunt with his Spannels
in the Ground of R. H. where Corn did then grow, at which time the same Corn
was Eared or Codded, and Standing, (without the consent of the said R. H. then
Owner of the same Ground) contrary to the Statute in that case made and
provided, by which he hath forfeited forty shillings to the said R. H. the
Owner of the said Ground: These are therefore (in His Ma­jestie's name) to
command you, and every of you, that some or one of you, do warn him the said
A. B. to come before us at T. the se­cond day of Iune next, to answer the
premisses, and to be then there your self with this War­rant. Given under our
hands and seals, &c.

If he appear not, then say, to put in Sure­ties for his appearance at the next
general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County, to answer the said
offence, and pay the penalty. And in case he refuse so to doe, that then you,
some or one of you, safely con­vey him to the Gaol of, &c. and him there
deliver to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding
also you the [[Page
231]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=119) said Keeper to
receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, untill he shall
find Sureties as aforesaid. Given under my hand and seal, &c.

## 34\. Oaths.

### 34.1. The Oath which is usually ministred to a Iustice of the Peace in the
several Counties of England.

YE shall Swear, that as Justice of theWith this is to be taken the Oath of
Supremacy. Peace in the County of K. in all Ar­ticles in the King's Commission
to you directed, you shall doe equal right to the Poor and to the Rich, after
your cunning, wit and power, and after the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and
Statutes thereof made: And ye shall not be of Council of any Quarrel hanging
before you: And that you hold your Sessions after the form of the Statutes
thereof made: And the Issues, Fines, and Amercements that shall happen to be
made; and all Forfeitures which shall fall before you, ye shall cause to be
entred without any concealment (or imbeziling,) and truly send them to the
King's Exchequer; ye shall not lett for gift, or other cause, but well and
truly you shall doe your Office of Justice of the Peace in that behalf: And
that you take no­thing for your Office of Justice of the Peace to be done, but
of the King, and Fees accustom­ed, and Costs limited by the Statute: And ye
[[Page 232]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=120) shall
not direct, nor cause to be directed, any Warrant (by you to be made) to the
parties, but ye shall direct them to the Bailiffs of the said County, or other
the King's Officers (or Ministers,) or other indifferent persons, to doe
Execution thereof.

> So help you God, &c.

### 34.2. The Oath of Supremacy.

I A. B. of, &c. do utterly testifie and declare in1 Eliz. c. 1. my Conscience,
That our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second is the onely Supreme Governour
of this Realm, and of all other His Highness Dominions and Countries, as well
in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes as Temporal. And that no
foreign Prince, Per­son, Prelate, State or Potentate hath, or ought to have,
any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preheminence or Authority,
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm. And therefore I do utterly
renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and
Au­thorities. And do promise that from hence­forth I shall bear Faith and true
Allegiance to the King's Highness, His Heirs and lawfull Suc­cessors. And to
my power shall assist and de­fend all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminen­ces and Authorities, granted or belonging to the King's Highness,
His Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm.

> So help me God.

[[Page 233]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=120)

### 34.3. The Oath of Allegiance.

I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge,3 Iac. c. 4. profess, testifie, and
declare in my Con­science before God and the world, That our Sovereign Lord
King Charles the Second is lawfull and rightfull King of this Realm, and of
all other His Majestie's Dominions and Coun­tries, and that the Pope neither
of himself nor by any authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other
means with any other, hath any power or authority to depose the King, or to
dispose of any of His Majestie's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any
foreign Prince to invade or annoy Him, or His Countries, or to discharge any
of His Subjects of their allegiance and obedience to His Ma­jesty, or to give
licence or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumult, or to offer any
violence or hurt to His Majestie's Royal Person, State, or Government, or to
any of His Majestie's Subjects, within His Majestie's Dominions. Also I do
swear from my heart, That notwithstanding any Declaration or Sen­tence of
Excommunication, or Deprivation, made or granted, or to be made or granted, by
the Pope or his Successors, or by any autho­rity derived, or pretended to be
derived, from him, or his See, against the said King, His Heirs or Successors;
or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their obedience. I will bear saith
and true allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and Him and Them
will defend to the uttermost of my power, [[Page
234]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=121) against all
Conspiracies and Contempts what­soever, which shall be made against His or
their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or colour of any such
Sentence or De­claration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavour to
disclose and make known unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, all
Trea­sons and Traiterous Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of to be
against Him, or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as
impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Po­sition, That Princes
which be Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murthered
by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.Upon this Oath the party ta­king it
shall subscribe his name or mark.

And I do believe, and in Conscience am re­solved, That neither the Pope, nor
any person whatsoever, hath power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknow­ledge by good and full authority to be lawful­ly
ministred unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and
swear according to these ex­press words by me spoken, and according to the
plain and common sense and understanding of the same words, without any
Equivocation or mental Evasion, or secret Reservation what­soever. And I do
make this recognition and acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and truly, upon
the true faith of a Christian.

> So help me God.

[[Page 235]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=121)

### 34.4. A Mittimus for refusing the Oath of Allegiance.

To the Keeper or Gaoler, &c.

WE A. B. and C. D. two of His Ma­jestie's2 Iustices, one of the Quorum.
Justices of the Peace for the County of K. whereof A. B. is of the Quorum, do
hereby commit to your custody the Body of E. F. for refusing to take the Oath
of Alle­giance. Requiring you to take and safely in Prison to keep him, till
he shall be delivered by due course of Law, and for so doing this shall be
your Warrant. Given under our hands and seals this second day of Iune, &c.

### 34.5. The Oath of Abjuration.

YOU shall swear, That you shall depart out35 Eliz. cap. 1. Stam. 119. Wilk.
40. of this Realm of England, and out of all other the King's Majestie's
Dominions, and that you shall not return hither, or come again into any of His
Majestie's Dominions, but by the Licence of our said Sovereign Lord the King,
or of His Heirs.

> So help you God.

[[Page 236]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=122)

### 34.6. The Oath of an Excise-man.

[With this must be taken the Oaths of Alle­giance and Supremacy.]

YOU shall swear to execute the Office of12 Car. 2. cap. 23. 2 Iustices, who
must certifie (the taking of this Oath) to the next Quarter-Sessions there to
be Recorded. (name the place) truly and faithfully, without favour or
affection, and shall from time to time true account make and deliver to such
person or persons as His Majesty shall ap­point to receive the same; and shall
take no fee or reward for the execution of the said Office, from any other
person then from His Majesty, or those whom His Majesty shall ap­point in that
behalf.

### 34.7. The under Sheriffs Oath touching the Impannelling of Iuries.

I A. B. shall not use or exercise the Office27 Eliz. cap. 12. before two
Iustices, one of the Quorum. The Oath of Supremacy must be also taken by him,
or for­feit 40 li. of under Sheriff corruptly, during the time that I shall
remain therein; Neither shall or will accept, receive, or take, by any colour,
means, or device whatsoever, or consent to the taking of any manner of Fee or
Reward of any person or persons for impanelling or returning of any Inquest,
Jury or Tales in the said Court for the King, or betwixt party and party above
two shillings, or the value thereof; and such Fees as are allowed and
appointed for the same by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; But [[Page
237]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=122) will according
to my power truly and indif­ferently, with convenient speed, impanel all
Jurors, and return all such Writ or Writs touching the same as shall appertain
to be done by my Duty or Office, during the time that I shall remain in the
said Office.

> So God me help.

### 34.8. The Oath of a Bailiff.

I I. D. shall not use nor exercise the Office27 Eliz. cap. 12. This Oath and
that of Supremacy ought to be taken by e­very Bai­liff that executes any Writ,
or forfeit 40 li. of one of the Bearers of the Verges of His Majestie's
Houshold, and one of the Officers and Ministers of the Court of our Sovereign
Lord the King, of the King's Palace of West­minster corruptly, during the time
that I shall remain therein: Neither shall or will accept, receive, or take by
any colour, means, or de­vice whatsoever, or consent to the taking of any
manner of Fee or Reward of any person or persons for impaneling or returning
of any Inquest, Jury, or Tales in the said Court, for the King, or betwixt
party and party, above two shillings, or the value thereof, and such Fees as
are allowed and appointed for the same by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm;
But will according to my power truly and indiffe­rently, with convenient
speed, impanel all Ju­rors, and return all such Writ or Writs touch­ing the
same, as shall appertain to be done by my Duty or Office, during the time that
I shall remain in the said Office.

So help me God.

Iurat' ad utraque Sacrament' supra dict'  duo­decimo die Maij, Anno Dom. 1680.
coram nobis.

A. B. C. D..

[[Page 238]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=123)

### 34.9. The Oath usually given to Church­wardens.

YOU shall execute the Office of Church­warden in the Parish where you are
chosen for this ensuing year, according to His Majestie's Laws Ecclesiastical;
So help you God.

### 34.10. Or thus:

You shall execute the Office of Church­warden in the Parish where you are
chosen, according to your discretion and skill in His Majestie's Laws
Ecclesiastical; So help you God.

### 34.11. The Oath of Obedience Canonical.

I A. B. do swear that I do approve theCan. 6. of 1640. Doctrine and
Discipline, or Government established in the Church of England as concer­ning
all things necessary to Salvation: and that I will not endeavour by my self,
or any other, directly or indirectly, to bring in any Popish Doctrine contrary
to that which is so establi­shed, nor will I ever give my consent to alter the
Government of this Church; by Arch­bishops, Bishops, Deans and Archdeacons,
&c. as it stands now established, and as by right it ought to stand; nor yet
ever to subject it to [[Page
239]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=123) the
Usurpations and Superstitions of the See of Rome: And all these things I do
plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, accor­ding to the plain and
common sense and un­derstanding of the same words, without any equivocation,
or mental evasior, or secret re­servation whatsoever; And this I do heartily,
willingly and truly upon the Faith of a Chri­stian: So help me God in Jesus
Christ.

If any Ecclesiastical person refuse this Oath, the Bishop shall give him a
months time to inform, which if then denied, to be suspended ab offi­cio, upon
refusal at a second month granted, to be suspended, ab officio & beneficio;
and after a third month granted, to be deprived of all his Ecclesiastical
Promotions whatsoever, and execution of his Function which he holds in the
Church of England.

### 34.12. The High Constable's Oath.

YOU shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the
King in the Office of a Constable: You shall see and cause His Majestie's
Peace to be well and truly kept and preserved according to your power: You
shall arrest all such Persons as in your sight and presence shall ride or goe
armed of­fencely, or shall commit or make any Riot, Affray, or other breach of
His Majestie's Peace. You shall doe your best endeavour (upon com­plaint made)
to apprehend all Felons, Bar­rettors, and Rioters, or Persons riotously
as­sembled: and if any such Offenders shall make [[Page
240]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=124) resistance
(with force) you shall levy Huy and Cry, and shall pursue them untill they be
ta­ken. You shall do your best endeavour, that the Watch, in and about your
Hundred be du­ly kept, for the apprehending of Rogues, Va­gabonds, Night-
walkers, Eves-droppers, Scouts, and other suspected Persons, and of such as go
armed, and the like; And that Huy and Cry be duly raised and pursued according
to the Sta­tute of Winchester against Murtherers, Thieves, and other Felons;
And that the Statutes made for the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and
such other idle Persons as come within your Bounds and Limits be duly put in
execu­tion: You shall have a watchfull eye to such Persons as shall maintain
or keep any common House or Place, where any unlawfull Game is or shall be
used; as also to such as shall fre­quent, or use such Places, or shall use or
exer­cise any unlawfull Games there or elsewhere contrary to the Statutes. At
your Assizes, Ses­sions of the Peace or Leet, you shall present all and every
the Offences done contrary to the Statute made 1 Iacobi, 4 Iacobi and 21
Ia­cobi Regis, to restrain the inordinate haunting and tipling in Inns,
Alehouses, and other Vic­tualling houses, and for repressing of Drunken­ness;
You shall there likewise true presentment make of all Bloudsheddings, Affrays,
Outcrys, Rescues, and other Offences committed or done against the King's
Majestie's Peace within your Limits; You shall once every year during your
Office present at the Quarter-sessions all Popish Recusants within your
Liberty, and their Chil­dren above 9, and their Servants (scil. their monthly
absence from Church) 3 Iac. 4\. You shall well and duly execute all Precepts
and Warrants to you directed from the Justice of [[Page
241]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=124) Peace of this
County, or higher Officers; You shall be aiding to your Neighbours against
un­lawfull Purveyances: In the time of Hay or Corn Harvest, upon request, you
shall cause all Persons to meet to serve by the day for theIn this Oath is
briefly comprehen­ded the whole Duty of a Consta­ble, and principal matters of
his Office. mowing, reaping, or getting in of Corn or Hay; You shall in
Easter-week cause your Pa­rishoners to chuse Surveyors for the mending of the
High-ways in your Parish or Liberty; and you shall well and duly according to
your knowledge, power and ability, doe and exe­cute all other things belonging
to the Office of a Constable, so long as you continue in the said Office. So
help you God.

### 34.13. The Oath taken by the Officers of the Marshal's Court.

YOU shall well and truly behave your self in the Office which you now
un­dertake of one of the Bearers of the Virges of the Household of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and one of the Officers and Ministers of the Court of
our Sovereign Lord the King of His Majestie's Palace of Westminster; you shall
well and truly execute all process of the said Court that shall come to your
hands, and which may be by you executed with as much expedition as possibly
you can; you shall execute no Writ but such as is signed and sealed with the
sign and seal of this Court. You shall take no bribe, reward, or other
gratuity for the exe­cuting of any process of this Court, other than the Court
will allow of, or the Parties them­selves without exaction shall willingly
afford [[Page 242]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=125)
you; you shall make a true and just return of all such Writs of this Court as
shall be by you sued the next Court day after the same are executed. You shall
not disclose any process of the said Court to the Defendant or any other
whereby he may have intelligence there­of; you shall not conceal any wrong or
injury done or offered to the said Court, but shall forthwith disclose the
same to the Judges thereof, and shall be ready with all diligence to perform
the uttermost; you shall be com­manded by the Judges of the Court aforesaid.

> So help you God.

### 34.14. The Oath of a Constable.

YOU shall well and truly serve the King's Majesty in the Office of a Constable
of the Parish of A. all Commissions, Precepts and Warrants that are directed
to you, and shall come to your hands, you shall to the best of your power
cause to be duly and truly execu­ted, all Riots and Misdemeanours and breach
of the Peace suppress. You shall punish all Rogues, Vagrants and idle persons,
according to the Laws of this Land in that case made and provided; you shall
diligently pursue all Hues and Cries; you shall see that the King's
Maje­stie's Watch within the said Town of A. be duly and truly set according
to His Majestie's Laws; you shall also do your best endeavour to suppress
Drunkenness within the said Pa­  [...]ish, and to see the Laws and Statutes
concer­ning the same to be duly put in execution; and all other things
belonging to the Office of [[Page
243]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=125) Constable, so
long as you shall continue in your Office, you shall well and truly perform
and doe so near as you can.

> So help you God.

### 34.15. The Oath of an Ale-caster.

YOU shall swear that you shall well and truly serve the King's Majesty in the
Office of an Ale-caster or an Assiser of that Li­berty or Hundred for this
year to come; you shall duly and truly see from time to time, that the Bread
brought to be sold be truly weighed, and that the same do contain such weight
ac­cording to the prizes of Wheat, as the Sta­tute in that case hath provided;
likewise you shall have diligent care during the time of your being in office,
to all Brewers and Tiplers with­in your Liberty; that they and every of them
do make good and wholsome Bear for man's Body, and that the same be not sold
before it be assayed by you, and then to be sold agreeable to the prices
limited and appointed by the King's Majestie's Justices of the Peace; and all
faults committed and done by the Bakers, Brewers and Tylers, or by any of
them, you shall make known and present the same at the next general Sessions
to be holden for the said County; you shall likewise present all Offences of
Drunkenness and haunting of Inns and Ale­houses by the Inhabitants of the
Parish, or of any other neighbouring Parishes whereby due punishment may be
inflicted upon them for their Offence accordingly; and in every other thing
you shall well and truly behave your self [[Page
244]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=126) in the said
Office for this year to come; so help you God, and by the Contents of that
Book.

### 34.16. The Oath of a Commissioner of Sewers.

YE shall swear, that you to your cunning [...]3 H. 8. cap. 5. wit and power,
shall truly and indiffe­rently execute the Authority to you given by this
Commission of Sewers without any favour, affection, corruption, dread or
Malice to be born to any manner of Person or Persons; And as the case shall
require, ye shall consent and indeavour your self for your part to the best of
your knowledge and power, to the making of such wholsom, just, equall and
in­different Laws and Ordinances as shall be made and devised by the most
discreet and indifferent number of your fellows being in Commission with you,
for the due redress, reformation and amendment of all and every such things as
are contained and specified in the said Commission; and the same Laws and
Ordinances to your cunning, wit and power cause to be put in due execution
without fa­vour, meed, dread, malice or affection, as God you help and all
Saints.

[[Page 245]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=126)

### 34.17. The Oath of a Searcher in the Custome House.

YE shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well and truly in the Office of
the Searcher-ship in the Port of N. and doe the King's Profits in all things
that belongeth to you to doe by way of your Office, and well and truly ye
shall make due search of all the Ships and Vessels, coming in or passing out
of the said Port, and truly answer the King of all that shall belong unto him
in your said Office without fraud or malign, after your wit and power, As God
help you.

### 34.18. The Oath given to a Iury, before Evi­dence given in against a
Priso­ner at the Bar.

YOU shall true deliverance make between our Sovereign Lord the King and the
Prisoner at the Bar, as you shall have in charge according to your Evidence,
as near as God shall give you Grace. So help you God, and by the Contents of
this Book.

[[Page 246]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=127)

### 34.19. The Oath given to a Bayliff or Ser­jeant that attendeth on any Iury
or Inquest at an Assise.

YOU shall well and truly keep this In­quest from Meat and Drink, Fire and
Candle; you shall not suffer any man to speak with them, neither shall you
your self speak with them, more than ask them if they be agreed, untill such
time as they be agreed. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

### 34.20. The Oath of him who craves the Peace against another.

YOU shall swear that the surety of the Peace which you crave against A. B. is
not for hatred or malice which you  [...]ear him, but for safety of your Body
from harm, which you fear he will doe or procure to be done unto you.

> So help you God.

[[Page 247]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=127)

### 34.21. Or thus.

YOU shall swear that the surety of the Peace which you crave against A. B. is
not of any private malice, hatred or evil will, but meerly that you are afraid
of your life, or the hurting or maiming of your Body, or the burning of your
houses.

> So help you God.

### 34.22. Another Oath to give a man upon exa­mination or upon information.

YOU shall true answer make to all such matters as shall be demanded of you
concerning the beating of A. B. you shall speak the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth.

> So help you God.

### 34.23. The Oath of him that gives In­formation.

THE Information that you shall give on the King's Majestie's behalf against A.
B. shall be the truth, the whole truth, and no­thing but the truth.

> So help you God.

[[Page 248]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=128)

### 34.24. Sometimes you pump a Witness by this Oath, thus.

YOU shall true answer make to all such questions as by me shall be demanded of
you.

> So help you God.

### 34.25. The Oath to be given to any Iury, by whom a Nisi prius is to be
tryed.

YOU shall truly try this Suit of Nisi prius between Party and Party,
accor­ding to the Evidence as shall be given you in Court, as near as God
shall give you Grace.

> So help you God, &c.

### 34.26. The Oath to be given to such as are to give Evidence between a
Party and Party at a Nisi prius.

#### 34.26.1.

THE Evidence that you shall give to this Inquest concerning the matter in
vari­ence, shall be the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth
so near as God shall give you Grace.

> So help you God, &c.

#### 34.26.2.

[[Page 249]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=128)

The same Oath that your Foreman hath sworn, you of your part shall well and
truly keep.

> So help you God, &c.

### 34.27. The Oath of a great Inquest.

YOU shall truly enquire and due present­ment make of all such things as you
are charged withall on the King's behalf, the King's Council, your own, and
your fellows, you shall well and truly keep; and in all other things the Truth
present.

> So help you God, &c.

### 34.28. The Oath of those that give Evidence upon Bills of Indictment.

THE Evidence that you shall give to the Inquest upon this Bill shall be the
truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; and you shall not lett
so to doe for malice, hatred or evil will, nor for meed, dread, savour or
affection.

> So help you God, &c.

[[Page 250]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=129)

## 35\. Officers.

### 35.1. The Nomination of Officers by Iustices of the Peace.

Kane. ss. WE His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County, whose
hands and seals are hereunto set, do nominate and appoint A. B. of the
Township of C. in the said County, Bailiff of the Township aforesaid, and D.
E. of the said Township under-Bailiff of the same; commanding each of them to
take upon him his respective Office aforesaid, untill he shall be from thence
lawfully discharged, and forthwith to repair to one of His Ma­jestie's
Justices of the Peace of the Coun­ty aforesaid, before him to take his Oath
for the Faithful execution of the said re­spective Office. Given under our
hands and seals at F. in the said County the tenth day of Sept. 1679\. Annoque
Regni Regis Ca­roli Secundi 31.

[[Page 251]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=129)

## 36\. Orchards.

### 36.1. A Warrant against Robbers of Orchards, &c.

To the Constable and Borsholders of A. in the said County, &c. 43\. El. c. 7.
1 Iustice, 1 Witness, or Conses­sion.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been du­ly proved before me, That A. B. of your
Town of A. Weaver, hath within three months last past, robbed the Orchard or
Garden of C. D. of your Parish, and carried away great quantities of Ap­ples,
&c. or digged up or pulled up his Fruit-trees or cut or carried away his Corn,
Grain or Hay growing, or cut his Hedges, Pales, Rales, or Fences, or cut and
spiled his Woods or Under­woods, Pools or Trees stan­ding in A aforesaid. to
the value of 50 s. And that F. G. of your said Town, Baker, hath pro­cured and
abetted him so to doe, and re­ceived and bought of him divers of the same
things, to the great damage of the said C. D. contrary to the la [...]e Act of
Par­liament in that case made and provided. I do therefore hereby order and
require, That the said A. B. shall within six days after notice to him given
of this my Or­der, pay the said C. D. 20 s. and that the said F. G. do within
six days after notice to him given of this Order, pay unto the said C. D. 30
s. in recompence to him for his wrongs aforesaid; and that these payments he
made in the presence of the said Con­stable hereby commanded upon request to
[[Page 252]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=130) see it
done; and hereof you are forthwith to give them notice, and if either of them
shall not pay the same, that then you do give me notice thereof, to the end
they may be far­ther proceeded against according to the said Statute. And
hereof fail not, &c. Given under our, &c.

### 36.2. Upon non-payment, to be whipt.

To, &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been dulyThe Officer upon neglect to suffer
imprison­ment till the Offen­der be pu­nished. proved before me, That A. B. of
your Town of A. Weaver, hath within three months last past, robbed, &c. (as
be­fore) so made and provided; Wherefore the premisses considered, and that I
judge the said Offenders A. B. and F. G. unable to make satisfaction for the
said wrong, I do hereby order that they be forthwith com­mitted to the said
Constable of A. to be whipped, the which you are hereby requi­red forthwith to
doe at your peril. Given under our hands, &c.

[[Page 253]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=130)

## 37\. Peace.

### 37.1. A Warrant to find Sureties for the Peace.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at B. in the
County aforesaid.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. hath this1 Iustice by the first Assignavi­mus
of the Commission of the Peace. Any of these cau­ses are suf­ficient. Lamb.
47. 3 Ed. 1. c. 9. W. 1. 1 R. 2. c. 2. 1 H. 4. c. 1. 2 H. 4. c. 1. 7 H. 4. c.
1. present day taken his corporal Oath before me, that C. D. of, &c. aThat he
is afraid that A. B. of C. will beat, wound, maim, kill him, or burn his
house. That A. B. of. C. hath already assaulted, beaten, bruised him; and
farther, hath threatned him in such sort, that he is afraid that the said A.
B. will beat, wound, maim, kill or do him some other bodily harm. That A. B.
hath already threatned that he will beat, wound, maim, kill or do him some
other bodily harm. Or burn his house. And that he is afraid that he will
accordingly so doe. Where the Warrant is against two; for the Peace say, As
well for their respective personal ap­pearance, &c. And that they respectively
will in the mean time, &c. And if they or either of these A. B. and C. D.
shall refuse so, &c. Convey them or him so refusing to the Gaol aforesaid, &c.
And them or him so conveyed, there to deli­ver, &c. To receive them or him so
delivered, unto the said Gaol, and them or him so delivered there safely, &c.
Untill they or he so delivered shall find, &c. And [[Page
254]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=131) hath
therewithall prayed Surety of the Peace against the said C. D. These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and
Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said
C. D. to come before me or some o­ther of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace
of the said County, to find sufficient Security, as well for his personal
appearance at the next general Session of the Peace to be holden for the said
County at T. aforesaid, then and there to doe and receive as by the said Court
shall be injoyned, as also that he will in the mean time keep His Majestie's
Peace towards His said Majesty and all His liege People, and es­pecially
towards the said A. B. and if the said C. D. shall refuse so to doe, that then
(with­out expecting any further or other warrant) you, some or one of you, do
safely convey him to the Gaol aforesaid, and him there de­liver to the said
Keeper of the same, (toge­ther with this Precept.) Commanding also you the
said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep
untill he shall find such sufficient Security as afore­said. Hereof fail not
at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

[[Page 255]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=131)

### 37.2. A Warrant to find Sureties for the Peace where an Assault is made
upon an Officer in discharge of his Office.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County
at M. in the County aforesaid.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint was this day made unto us by W. W. Borsholder of
the Borough of the Town of C. in the said County, That R. L. of C. in the said
County, Gent. and I. W. the younger of C. aforesaid, Shoemaker, did in the
month of February last past at C. aforesaid, within the Borough aforesaid,
assault and beat seve­ral Persons, and the said W. W. then Bor­sholder of the
Borough aforesaid, being then and there present, did then and there (in His
Majestie's name) command the said R. L. and I. W. to keep His Majestie's
Peace, yet notwithstanding they did con­tinue in breaking the same in his
pre­sence, and then and there assaulted him, and threatned to kill him, all
which he hath maintained upon his Oath before us, and that he is afraid that
the said R. L. and I. W. will kill, wound, beat, or do him some bodily harm,
and hath prayed Secu­rity of the Peace to be by us granted un­to him against
the said R. L. and I. W. [[Page
256]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=132) These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and
Bor­sholders, that you, some or one of you, do bring the said R. L. and I. W.
before us, some or one of us, or some other of His Majestie's Justices of the
Peace of the said County, to find several and respective suffi­cient Security
for their several and respec­tive personal appearance at the next gene­ral
Quarter-Sessions of the Peace to be hol­den for the said County at M.
aforesaid, then and there to doe and receive as by the Court shall be
injoyned; and in the mean time to be of good behaviour, as well towards our
Sovereign Lord the King, as all His liege People. And in case that they the
said R. L. and I. W. or either of them shall refuse so to doe, that then
(without expecting any further or other Warrant) you do convey him or them so
refusing to the Gaol aforesaid, and them or him to de­liver to the Keeper of
the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper
(in His Majestie's name) to receive them or him so delivered unto you into the
said Gaol, and them or him there safely keep untill they or he shall give such
Security as aforesaid. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

[[Page 257]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=132)

### 37.3. A Supersedeas of a Warrant for the Peace.

To all Iustices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other his
Majestie's Officers (to whom it shall or may concern) within this County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as R. I. of H. hath personaly appeared before me, and hath
found two sufficient Sureties, viz. A. B. of C. and E. F. of G. either of them
in the summ of ten pounds, and the said R. I. in twenty pounds, which they
have acknow­ledged before me, by Recognizance to His said Majestie's use, upon
condition that the said R. I. shall appear at the next general Sessions of the
Peace to be holden for this County, and in the mean time to keep the Peace
towards His said Majesty and all His liege People; and especially towards L.
M. of, &c. Therefore these are (in His Majestie's name) to command and require
you, and eve­ry of you, That you do forbear and surcease to arrest, attach,
take, imprison or otherwise by any means, (for the said occasion) to mo­lest
the said R. I. And if he be or hereafter shall be, for the said occasion, and
for none other taken, or imprisoned, that then imme­diately, upon sight
hereof, you do cause him to be delivered and set at liberty without fur­ther
delay. Given under, &c.

[[Page 258]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=133)

### 37.4. A Mittimus for breaking the Peace.

Kent ss. I Send you herewithall the Body of A. B. whome I charge and require
you, (in His Majestie's name) to take into your safe custody for divers
Mis­demeanours committed by him against His said Majestie's Peace). untill he
shall pro­cure two good and sufficient Sureties to be bound with him in a
Recognizance (to His said Majesty) either of them in the summ of ten pounds,
and himself in twenty pounds to appease His said Majestie's Ju­stices of the
Peace, at the next Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County; and in
the mean time to be of good beha­viour towards His said Majesty and all His
hege People. Whereof fail not, &c. Gi­ven under, &c.

### 37.5. A Release of the Peace.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod Tricesi­mo die Octobris, Anno Regni Domini Nostri
Caroli secundi Dei Gratia Angliae, &c. Tricesimo, prae­fatus, A. B. venit
coram me praedic­to C. D. & Gratis remisit & relaxa­vit (quantum in ipso est)
praedictam securitatem pacis, per ipsum versus in­fra [[Page
259]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=133) nominatam
Prudentiam Pell, coram me petitam, die & anno supradictis.

### 37.6. The Condition of a RecognizanceSee Title Recogni­zance. to appear at
Sessions and keep the Peace.

THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do
personally appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for
the within named County of Kent at Maidstone in the County aforesaid, then and
there to doe and receive as by the said Court shall be enjoyned, and do in the
mean time keep His Majestie's Peace towards His said Majesty and all His liege
People, and espe­cially towards C. D. of, &c. That then this Recognizance
shall be void, or else to stand in full force.

[[Page 260]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=134)

## 38\. Plague.

### 38.1. A Pass or certificate in the time of Plague.

To the Constables, Borsholders, and all and every other His Majestie's
Officers within the said County, to whom these Presents shall come
re­spectively.

Kent ss. WHereas A. B. of C. having occasion to go unto F. and several other
Places in the said County to dispatch business in which he is imployed, hath
this day desired a Pass from us, that he may go and return without molestation
or interruption. These are therefore to certify all whom these Presents may
concern, that the Parish of C. aforesaid is free from the Infec­tion of the
Plague; And also to will and re­quire you, and every of you to permit and
suffer the said A. B. peaceably and quietly to go into and return from F.
aforesaid, and such other Places as the said A. B. shall go unto by reason of
his business aforesaid. The said A. B. in his passage to and from the Places
aforesaid, demeaning himself civilly, without disturbing or interrupting the
King's Majestie's Peace. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

[[Page 261]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=134)

## 39\. Poor.

### 39.1. A Warrant for the Overseers of the Poor to account and name other
fit persons.

To the Constable and Borsholders of A. in the Hundred of B. and to every of
them.

Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Iustices, 1 of the
Quorum. Within one month after Easter. name) to command you to give notice to
the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of A. that they are by
us required personally to appear before us at the house of S. M. in C. &c.
upon Monday the tenth day of May, at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the
same day, to make and yield up unto us a true and perfect account in writing
of all summs of money by them recei­ved,43 E. 2. or rated and assessed and not
received, for and towards the relief of the Poor of B. and also of such stock
(to set the Poor on work) as is in their hands, or in the hands of any of
their said Poor to work, and of all other things concerning their said office;
And that hereof they fail not at their perils. And you are farther hereby
commanded to signifie unto them, that they do then and there also certifie
unto us the names of such other sub­stantial Housholders of A. as are thought
meetDalt. 364. to be Overseers of the Poor there for the year ensuing. Fail
not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at the, &c.

[[Page 262]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=135)

### 39.2. A Warrant for the making new Over­seers of the Poor.

Kent ss. ACcording to the form of the43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Iustices. Quorum unus.
Statute in such case made and provided, We whose names are hereunto
sub­scribed (His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County) do
nominate and appoint you (whose names are hereunder written) to be (together
with the Church-wardens of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid)
Over­seers of the Poor of the said Parish for the year to come, (and to doe
and perform all such things in and touching the said Office as by Law is
required.) Whereof you are not to fail at your perils. Given under our hands
and seals at Maidstone in the County aforesaid, the tenth day of September,
&c.

A. B. C. D. &c.

### 39.3. A Warrant to make Overseers of the Poor, impowering them, and the
Church-wardens to collect the Poors Tax, and upon non-payment to de­strain.

Kent ss. WHereas by virtue of an Act of43 Eliz. cap. 2. Parliament, intituled,
An Act for Relief of the Poor, in the 43. year of the Reign of the late Queen
Elizabeth; We whose names are subscribed, His Majestie's Justices of the Peace
in the said County of K. and one of [[Page
263]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=135) us of the
Quorum dwelling in or near the Pa­rish of Saint A. B. in the said County of K.
have nominated and appointed A. B. and C. D. (together with K. L. Church-
warden for the time being) according to the said Act of Par­liament, to be
Overseers for the Poor of the said Parish; and receiving of the several summs
of money taxed and assessed by them, on the several persons on the nineteenth
day of Iune instant: These are therefore, according to the said Act of
Parliament, to authorize you the said Church-warden and Overseers of the Poor,
or any of you, to collect and receive all such summs of money as aforesaid,
and the same respectively to levy of all such persons as shall refuse to pay
the aforesaid Assessment by way of distress and sale of their Goods for so
much, rendring the over-plus, if any be, to the party or parties destrained,
and for de­fault of distress, We require all Constables and other Officers to
bring before us or some other His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of this
County the Bodies of all such persons where no distress can be had, that
further course may be taken with them according to Law. Dated the 23. day of
Iune, in the 32. year of His now Majestie's Reign, Annoque Dom' 1680.

A. B.

### 39.4. A Confirmation of the Rates for the Poor.

Kent ss. SEen, ratified, and allowed by us whose names are hereunder writ­ten,
two of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace within the County aforesaid. And
we do [[Page 264]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=136)
hereby authorize the present Church-wardens and Overseers for the Poor within
the Parish of A. and every of them, to levy by way of distress and sale of the
Goods of all such per­sons, as shall refuse or neglect to pay the several
Taxations aforesaid (upon them imposed) rendring to the Owners the overplus,
which shall remain upon the said Sale according to the Statute in that case
made and provided. Given under our hands and seals, &c.

### 39.5. A Warrant to levy the Arrears (due to the Parish) from the former
Overseers Account, by Distress.

To the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A.
in the said County, and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your com­plaint)43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Iustices, 1
Quorum. it appeareth unto us, That A. B. and C. D. Church-wardens of the
Parish aforesaid, and E. F. and G. H. Over­seers of the Poor of the said
Parish in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred sixty six, upon their
Account by them made and yielded of and for the moneys by them recei­ved and
disbursed for and in execution of their said Office, (according to the form of
the Sta­tute in that case made and provided) were in arrear and behind to the
said Parish five pounds, and have not yet paid the same over unto you [...]:
These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or
one of [[Page 265]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=136)
you do levy the said five pounds by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said
A. B. C. D. Refusing to account, to be commit­ted to Gaol. and E. F. (rendring
to them the overplus) And in default of such Distress, that then you do
forthwith certifie the same unto us, to the end that we may farther doe
therein as to Ju­stice doth appertain. Hereof fail not. Given under our hands
and seals at, &c.

### 39.6. A Warrant against an Overseer of the Poor for not keeping of Monthly
Meetings.

To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the
said County, and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Iustices. 1 Quorum.
proved before us, That A. B. (one of the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish
aforesaid, for the year of our Lord one thou­sand six hundred seventy six) did
for the space of, &c. within the said year, absent himself from such monthly
Meetings as (by the dutyTo meet monthly on Sunday evening, or forfeit 20 s.
for each de­fault allow­ing a just excuse. of his aforesaid Office) he was (by
the Statute in that he half made) injoyned, (contrary to the Statute
aforesaid) whereby he hath for­feited five pounds for his absence aforesaid:
These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or
one of you, do levy the aforesaid five pounds by Distress and Sale of the
Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. and the same to imploy and dispose of to
the use of the Poor of the said Parish, and [[Page
266]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=137) such other
uses as by the said Statute is ap­pointed; And in case of default of such
Distress, do you certifie the same to us, to the end that there may be such
farther proceedings touch­ing the premisses as by Law is required. Given under
our hands and seals at, &c.

### 39.7. A Warrant to distrain for the Poors Tax.

To the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of B.
in the said County, and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint hath been43 Eliz. cap. 2\. 2 Iustices, 1
Quorum. All things that are real, and a  [...]early Re­venue must be taxed to
the Poor. Dalt. 165\. The causes of Taxes are three. 1\. To set the Poor a
Stock. 2\. To re­lieve the Impotent money. 3\. To put out Appren­tices. Dalt.
150. made by you unto us, That the several persons here under-named have
refused to pay unto you the several summs of money adjoyning to their several
names, (being asses­sed upon them severally for and towards the necessary
Relief of the Poor of the said Parish, (according to the form of the Statute
in that case made and provided:) These are therefore (in His Majestie's name)
to command you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith levy the said
several and respective summs of money by Distress and Sale of the several and
respective Goods of the said several and respec­tive Offenders, rendring to
the parties the over-plus; And in defect of such Distress, that then you, some
or one of you, do certifie the same unto us, to the end that there may be such
farther proceeding touching the premisses [[Page
267]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=137) as to Justice
doth appertain. Given under our hands and seals at A. the, &c.

  * A. B. 1 s. 6\. d.
  * C. D. 1 s. 8\. d.

### 39.8. A Mittimus where there is not suffi­cient to Distrain.

To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County
aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto2 Iustices, 1 Quorum. us, That A. B.
of, &c. was as­sessed and rated at the summe of, &c. for and towards the
necessary Relief of the Poor of the said Parish, (according to the form of the
Sta­tute in that case made and provided) and that for his refusal of payment
of the same a War­rant was (according to the form of the said Statute)
directed to the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the
Parish aforesaid under the hands and seals of E. F. G. H. &c. His Majestie's
Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid; and for that it now appeareth
unto us, that the said A. B. hath no Goods or Chattels by Distress and Sale
whereof the said moneys can be levied, nor will he yet pay the moneys
aforesaid: We therefore do send you herewithall the Body of the said A. B.
commanding you to receive him into the said Gaol, there to remain (without
Bail or Mainprise) untill he shall pay the moneys [[Page
268]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=138) aforesaid.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

### 39.9. A Warrant for removing one come to a Parish.

To the Church-wardens and others the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H.
in the said County, and to every of them.

Kent ss. WHereas complaint hath been [...]4 Car. 2. cap. 12. 2 Iustices. 1 of
the Quorum, upon com­plaint to  [...] Iustice. made by you to us, (ac­cording
to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) That A. B. hath
within forty days before the said Complaint come into your said Parish to
settle there in a Tenement under the yearly value of ten pounds, and that he
is likely to be chargeable to the Parish afore­said, and was last legally
settled at B. in, &c. by the space of forty days at the least as a Na­tive
Native, Housholder, S [...]journer, Apprentice, o [...] Servant. there: These
are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require and authorize you, and every
of you, that you, some or one of you, do remove and convey the said A. B. to
B. aforesaid, where he was so last legally settled, unless he give sufficient
Security for the discharge of your said Parish (to be al­lowed by us.) Given
under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 269]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=138)

### 39.10. A Warrant to send a Wife and Child to her Husband, in the Pa­rish
from whence they came.

To the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the said County, and to
every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint hath been2 Iustices. by you made unto us, That
H. the Wife of R. D. (an Inhabitant in the Pa­rish of C. in the County
aforesaid) is lately come into your said Parish of H. and hath brought with
her thither a Male-child (of the said R. and H.) of the age of, &c. (or
there­abouts) and that both the said H. and Child are likely to be chargeable
to your said Parish, and you have thereupon craved from us such Relief
(touching the premisses) as by Law is appointed: These are therefore (in His
Ma­jestie's name) to authorize and require you, that you, some or one of you,
do convey the said H. and Child to the said Parish of C. and there to deliver
them to the said R. (in case you can there find him) to be with him settled
according to Law; And in case that you can­not there find him, then to deliver
the said H. and Child to the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish of C. to
be disposed of according to Law. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

[[Page 270]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=139)

### 39.11. A Warrant for apprehending one for returning to the Parish from
which he was removed.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said
County at B. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas A. B. in May last le­gally1 [...] Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Iustice.
settled as a, &c. in the Parish of T. came into the Parish of V. to settle in
a Tenement there under the yearly value of ten pounds, and likely to be
chargeable to the said Parish, was upon complaint there­of made by the Church-
wardens and Over­seers of the Poor of the said Parish, (according to the form
of the Statute in that behalf made) by Warrant to the said Church-wardens and
Overseers (according to the Statute aforesaid) directed, by them removed and
conveyed to the aforesaid Parish of T. there to remain (ac­cording to the said
Statute;) since which the said A. B. did return (of his own accord) to the
said Parish of V. (from whence he was so removed:) These are therefore (in His
Ma­jestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the
said A. B. to come before us, some or one of us, at the house of T. Inn-
holder, called the George Inn in the said County, the fifth day of Iune next
ensuing, at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, to shew cause
why he returned to the said [[Page
271]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=139) Parish of V.
and farther to doe and receive as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not
at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

### 39.12. Against those who come to Work, and return not at the end of their
Work.

To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the
said County, and to every of them.

Kent ss. WHereas complaint hath been14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 2 Iustices. If he
shall not return when his work is fi­nished, or shall fall sick or im­potent
whilst he is in the said work. made by you unto us, That A. B. an Inhabitant
in C. came into your Pa­rish to work, and is not returned upon his finishing
thereof: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require and authorize
you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do convey the said A. B.
to C. aforesaid, there to remain an Inhabitant as formerly he was. Given
under, &c.

[[Page 272]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=140)

### 39.13. A Mittimus to the House of Correc­tion of one that refuseth to be
re­moved after his Work finished.

To the Constables and Borsholders, &c. and to the Keeper of the House of
Correction, &c.

Kent ss. WHereas upon complaint (ac­cording14 Car. 2\. cap. 4\. 1 Iustice.
Vide in the Margin of the Prece­dent War­rant. to the form of the Statute in
that behalf lately made) That A. B. an Inhabitant in D. came into the Parish
of C. in the said County to work, and was not re­turned upon his finishing
thereof. And there­upon the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the
said Parish were (according to the Statute aforesaid) required and authorised
to convey the said A. B. to D. aforesaid, there to remain an Inhabitant as
formerly he was. Nevertheless the said A. B. (though lawfully required)
refused to go thither. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require
you the said Constables and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or
one of you, do take the said A. B. and him convey to the aforesaid House of
Correction, and there to deliver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same,
(together with this Precept.) Requi­ring also you the said Keeper to receive
him into the said House, and there punish him as a Vagabond. Hereof fail you
not at your peril. Given, &c.

[[Page 273]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=140)

### 39.14. A Warrant and Mittimus for one who runs away, and leaves his Family
upon the Parish.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at Maidstone in
the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly7 Iac. c. 4. Such person is adjudged an
incorri­gible Rogue. 2 Iustices of that Di­vision. Fit to have 2 Witnesses
upon Oath. proved before us that A. B. of the Parish of H. being able to
labour, and thereby to relieve himself and his Family, did nevertheless lately
run away out of this said Parish, and leave his Family upon the Parish: These
are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you the said Constable and
Bors­holders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said
A. B. and him safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to
the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you
the said Keeper, to receive him into the Gaol aforesaid, and him there safely
keep untill he shall be from thence delivered by due order of Law. Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

[[Page 274]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=141)

### 39.15. A Mittimus on the foregoing Warrant.

To the Keeper of the House of Correction.

WE send you herewithall the Body of A. B. of, &c. for that he did run away,
and left his Wife and two small Chil­dren in the said Parish which are become
a Parish charge to the said Parish of, &c. straitly charging and commanding
you the said Keeper to receive the said A. B. into the said House of
Correction, to be dealt with as an incor­rigible Rogue, and him there safely
keep, un­till he shall be thence delivered by order of Law. Hereof, &c.

### 39.16. A Warrant to the Overseers of the Poor to pay Arrears, and continue
weekly Relief to Poor persons.

To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor for the Parish of A. and to
every of them.

K. ss. WHereas complaint hath been made unto me by A. B. of your said Town,
That you I. S. and K. S. the now Overseers for the Poor of your said Parish
formerly paid unto the said A. B. the [[Page
275]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=141) summe of 1 s.
6 d. per weeek, for and towards the maintenance of herself and Children, and
that you do now suspend the payment thereof, whereby the said A. B. is utterly
disabled to provide for herself and Children. These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to charge and command you the said Overseers that pre­sently
upon sight hereof, you, or some, pay unto the said A. B. all such Arrears as
are accrued since your forbearing the payment of it, and that you continue to
her the former allowance of 1 s. 6 d. unto her for the future, or forthwith to
shew cause why you refuse to make the same. And hereof, &c.

### 39.17. A Warrant to levy Relief for the Poor.

To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor for the Parish of A. and to
every of them.

K. ss. WHereas complaint hath been made unto me, That S. G. of your said Town
who is a very Poor woman is now very sick and weak, and is utterly dis­abled
to provide for herself, or her Children, so that all of them are in danger of
perishing for want of Sustenance. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name)
straitly to charge and command you, and every of you, that im­mediately upon
sight hereof, you, or some of you, do by a general Levy throughout the whole
Town, or otherwise, make such an al­lowance to the said S. G. as may be
convenient [[Page
276]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=142) for and
towards the Relief of herself and Chil­dren; or forthwith shew cause, if you
can, why you refuse to make the same. And here­of, &c.

### 39.18. A Bond and Condition to the Church­wardens and Overseers of the
Poor to save a Town harmless upon in­habiting there.

#### 39.18.1.

NOverint universi per praesentes nos R. J. de P. in Com. N. Agricol. & H. B.
de T. praedict. pastor. tenen. & firmiter obligar. S. C. de M. in Com. N.
praed. Agricol. & T. G. de M. praedict. Agricol. in sexagint. Libris bonae &
Le­galis monetae Angl. solvend. eisdem S. C. & T. G. seu eorum alteri vel
eorum certis Atturnat. Exe­cutoribus Administratoribus vel Assign. suis ad
quam quidem solutionem bene & fidelit. facien. Ob­l [...]gamus nos & utrumque
nostr. Haeredes, Executo­res, Administrator. nostros firmiter per praedict.
sigil. nostr. sigillat. dat. Sexto die Maij, Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli
Secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Regis, &c.

#### 39.18.2.

THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas one E. I. Labourer, is
now lately come to inhabit and dwell within the said Parish of M. and likely
to be chargeable to the same. If therefore the said R. I. and H. B. or either
of them, their or either of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assignes, or every ot any of them doe, and shall from time to time, and at all
times hereafter fully [[Page
277]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=142) and clearly
acquit, discharge, save harmless and indempnifie, as well the within named S.
T. and T. G. Church-wardens of the Parish Church of M. aforesaid, and the now
Over­seers for the Poor of the said Parish, and their Successors, as also all
the Inhabitants and Pa­rishioners of the said Parish, which now are, or at any
time hereafter shall be there resident, and every of them, of and from all,
and all manner of costs, charges, payments, taxes and expences whatsoever,
which shall or may at any time hereafter, in any manner of wise arise, happen,
come, grow due, or be impo­sed upon them, or any of them, for or by rea­son or
means of the said E. I. his Wife or Children, or any of them, their or any of
their residing, living, or inhabiting in the said Pa­rish of M. and of and
from all troubles, char­ges and demands whatsoever concerning the same, That
then this Obligation to be void, and of none effect, or else to remain in full
force and virtue.

Sealed and delivered, &c.

### 39.19. A Release (from the Overseers of the Poor) to one that pay'd five
pounds to be free'd from keeping a Bastard Child.

To all Christian people to whom these presents shall come, We E. C. of A. in
the Parish of K. in the County of N. Gent. and E. W. of K. aforesaid, Baker,
the now Overseers of the Poor for the said Parish of K. [[Page
278]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=143) send greeting.
Whereas there was lately a Ba­stard Child born within the said Town of K.
begotten on the body of one F. P. And whereas R. E. of B. in the County of C.
Taylor, is adjudged the reputed Father thereof; And whereas it is agreed by
and between the said E. C. and E. W. and the rest of the Inhabitants of the
said Town of K. and the said R. E. That for and in consideration of the summe
of 5 li. of lawfull money of England, to be paid to us the Overseers for the
Poor, by the said R. E. We the said Overseers, and our Successors, and the
rest of the Inhabitants of the said Town of K. should provide for, take care
of, and maintain the said Child, and save harmless and indempnifie the said R.
E. of and from the keeping and maintaining it, and of and from all taxes,
charges and payments, now already or hereafter to be taxed or charged upon the
said R. E. for or in respect thereof. Now know ye, That we the said E. C. and
E. W. have according to and in full of the said Agreement had and received of
the said R. E. the summe of 5 li. and do, by and with the consent and
direction, and for and on the behalf of our selves, and the rest of the
Inhabitants of the said Town of K. ac­quit, release, and for ever discharge,
and free him the said R. E. of and from the said summe of 5 li. and from the
keeping or main­taining the said Child, and of and from all charges, taxes and
payments, now already or hereafter to be charged or taxed upon him the said R.
E. to or for the same. In witness whereof we the said E. C. and E. W. have
here­unto set our hands and seals, &c.

[[Page 279]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=143)

## 40\. Prisoner.

### 40.1. To allow a poor Prisoner Relief.

To A. B. Gent. Treasurer for Relief of the Pri­soners in His Majestie's Gaol
for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas T. S. (now Prisoner in the said Gaol) is in very great
necessity for want of present Relief for his subsistance there: These are
therefore (so far forth as in us lieth) to appoint and autho­rize you the said
Treasurer, to allow unto the said T. S. competent Relief (during his
neces­sity) in the said Gaol. Given under our hands and seals the third day of
Iune, Anno Dom. 1679.

### 40.2. A Discharge of a Prisoner to a Gaoler.

To the Gaoler or Keeper of the common Gaol at A. in the County aforesaid.

K. ss. WE R. K. and A. B. Esquires, two of His Majestie's Justices of the
Peace for the County aforesaid, greeting. [[Page
280]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=144) Forasmuch as
A. H. of C. &c. Barber, hath found sufficient Sureties before us for his
per­sonal appearance at the next Quarter-Sessions to be holden at C.
aforesaid. These are there­fore (in His Majestie's name) to require and
authorize you, that forthwith upon sight here­of you discharge the body of A.
H. aforesaid, if he be detained, for no other cause but upon A. B. and C. D.
their Warrant, and this shall be your Discharge. Given under our hands and
seals at A. &c.

### 40.3. Or thus:

To the Gaoler or Keeper, &c.

WHeres A. B. being by me committed to your Custody in your Gaol, till he put
in Sureties for the Peace or good Beha­viour, as the case requires. These are
there­fore, &c. as before.

### 40.4. For a Prisoner to be Bailed.

THese are to charge and require you, that immediately (upon your Receipt of
this) you bring before me the body of A. B. now in your Custody to be Bailed,
as Law re­quireth.

[[Page 281]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=144)

### 40.5. A Warrant from a Judge to bring a Prisoner from a Gaol to give
Evidence.

To the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol of N. or his Deputy.

YOU are hereby required to bring the body of T. S. in safe Custody to
West­minster, upon Monday next being the seventh day of this instant February,
by one of the clock in the afternoon of the same day, to testifie the truth
according to knowledge in a certain Cause now depending in the Court of King's
Bench, and there to be tried by Nisi prius before the Lord Chief Justice of
the said Court, Between P. Earl of C. Plaintiff, and G. B. Defendant, in a
plea of Trespass on the case on the part of the Plaintiff, and after his
Evidence given to remove him back safe to your Gaol. Hereof fail not. Given
under my hand and seal this fifth day of February, 1675.

[[Page 282]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=145)

## 41\. Quakers.

### 41.1. A Mittimus of Quakers.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County
at B, in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I have received in­formation,13 & 14 Car. 2. cap. 1. 1
Iustice. That A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. and I. K. being persons com­monly called
Quakers, and every of them of the age of sixteen years or upward, have late­ly
departed from the places of their several habitations, and assembled
themselves at T. in the said County, (under pretence of joyning in a Religious
Worship not authorized by the Laws of this Realm: These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name.) to will and require you the said Constable and Borsholders,
and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said A. B. C. D.
E. F. G. H. and I. K. to come before me, or some other of His Ma­jestie's
Justices of the Peace of the said Coun­ty with sufficient Securities to be
bound with them to appear at the next Quarter-Sessions, in order to their
Conviction of the Offence afore­said; and in case of their, or any of their
re­fusal, or neglect so to doe, that then you do convey such of them so
refusing or neglecting, to the aforesaid Common Gaol, and deliver [[Page
283]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=145) them or him so
refusing or neglecting to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with
this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive them or him
into the said Gaol, and them or him there safely to keep, untill they or he
shall be bound with such Se­curities as aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under my hand and seal the, &c.

Upon Conviction by verdict or Confession, The first Offence a Fine not
exceeding 5 li. The second Offence 10 li.

Upon every Offender on non-payment, first Of­fence 3. months imprisonment,
second Offence 6 months, the third Offence, abjure the Realm. But upon taking
the Oaths, Con­forming, and giving Security not to meet in such unlawfull
Assemblies, to be dischar­ged of all the penalties.

## 42\. Rape.

### 42.1. A Warrant concerning a Rape.

To the Constables and Borsholders, &c.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as we received Informa­tion13 Ed. 1. 24. 2 Iustices. and
Charge against A. B. of C. &c. touching a certain Felony, (that is to say)
with the carnal Knowledge and Ravish­ment of M. the Wife of C. D. of, &c.
These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to com­mand you, and every of
you, that, you some or one of you do attach the body of the said A. B. [[Page
284]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=146) and bring him
before us, or some of us, to the house of, &c. on the twelfth day of this
instant May, at one of the clock in the afternoon, to be examined touching the
premisses, and to be further dealt with according to Law. Here­of fail not at
your perils. Given under, &c.

## 43\. Rates for Hay, Oats, &c.

### 43.1. A Warrant to appoint Rates for Hay, Oats, &c. upon His Ma­jestie's
passing through any place.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A- in the said County, and
to every of them.

K. ss. WHereas we have received notice from the Green-cloath, that His Majesty
will shortly pass through the Road13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Iustices. in this
County leading between B. and C. We therefore (according to the form of the
Sta­tute in that case made and provided) do set down and appoint the Rates and
Prices to be paid during His Majestie's abode within this Division, for Hay,
Oats, and other Accommo­dations for Horses, as is here under written: (which
Rates are to be observed and kept and obeyed by all persons concerned at their
perils.) And we do will and require you and every of you, that you, some or
one of you, do in the Market-town within the said Hundred, on the Market-day
now next ensuing, cause to be pro­claimed the Rates aforesaid; as also that
you [[Page 285]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=146) do
in the like manner cause to be proclaimed the Rates aforesaid, in all the
Towns and Villa­ges within the said Hundred within, &c. days now next ensuing;
to the end that notice may be taken of the same Rates and Prices. Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

For a Bushel of Oats, &c.

And so ratably for every greater or lesser quan­tity, &c.

### 43.2. A Warrant for levying the Penalty forfeited for not observing the
Rates aforesaid.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as it hath been duly pro­ved13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 1 Iustice.
Lodging, Horse­meat, Sta­ble-room, or other Ac­commoda­tions. before me, That
A. B. of C. in the said County, Inn-keeper, hath taken of C. D. Yeoman of the
Guards, more for his Lodg­ing, &c. during His Majestie's late abode within
this Division than by the Justices of the Peace of this County was (according
to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) set down and
appointed, (contrary to the form of the Statute aforesaid:) These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you, and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do levy (to the use of the said C. D. by
Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B.) 40 s. by him
forfeited to the said C. D. for the Offence aforesaid, returning the over-plus
to the said A. B. (the charge of the Distraining being first deducted.) Hereof
fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, &c.

[[Page 286]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=147)

## 44\. Recognizances.

### 44.1.

When you take a Recognizance of anyDirections thereupon. it must be in Latine;
set down the time of making it, the Principal's name and dwelling Place, and
his Trade or Calling, and so of the others his Sureties, and bind them (in a
summ of money) to the King; and that being done, you reade the same
Recognizance in English thus, (viz.) for the Peace.

YOU A. B. of C. &c. do acknowledge your self to owe unto our Sovereign Lord
the King's Majesty twenty pounds. And you C. D. of H. &c. and E. F. of I. &c.
his Sureties do likewise each of you acknowledge to owe unto our said
Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty ten pounds apiece to be levi­ed of your
several Goods and Chattels, Land and Tenements to His said Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors, upon condition, That if the said A. B. shall personally appear
before our said Sovereign Lord the King's Majestie's Ju­sticesA Condi­tion for
the Peace. of the Peace at the next general Ses­sions of the Peace to be
holden for this Bur­rough of A. and do then and there make an­swer unto all
such matters which on His Ma­jestie's behalf shall be objected against him,
and in the mean time to keep the Peace to­wards our Sovereign Lord the King's
Majesty [[Page 287]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=147)
and all His Liege-people, but especially to­wards one G. H. and do not depart
thence without Licence from the Court, then your Recognizance to be void or
else to stand in full force.

The Recognizance being made is to be en­grossedDirections. in Parchment, and
subscribed with the Justice's hand onely, But he that en­ters into it, need
not put his hand or seal to it.

Note, All Recognizances for the Peace are to be stiled, At the next Sessions
of the Peace; And for Felony, At the next Gaol-delivery.

### 44.2. The manner of entring the note of Recognizances in your Book of
Recognizances.

A. B. de C. &c. xx li. ad Comparen­dum ad proximam Sessionem Pacis &
conservare versus C. D. &c. E. F. de C. &c. x li. & G. H. de C. &c. x li.

#### 44.2.1. Subscribe the Cause thus.

Bound over for the suspicious stealing of a [Cow] being the Goods of A. H. &c.
[as the Case requireth.]

[[Page 288]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=148)R. P. de
Paroch. A. &c. Victular 10 li. The Re­cogni­zance for the Li­cence of an
Alehouse.

R. S. de Paroch. A. &c. Victular 5 li.

P. S. de Paroch. A. &c. Victular 5 li.

Sub Conditione quod praedict' R. P. bene & fideliter observavit omnes &
singulos Articulos in Licentia sua pro Tipulatione Content' Capt' & Recogn' XX
die Maii Anno Dom. 1680\. Coram Nobis, &c.

The Recognizance must be certified to the3 H. 7. c. 1. 1 & 2 Ph. & M. c. 13. 2
& 3 Ph. & M. c. 10. next Sessions or Gaol-delivery where he or they is, are,
or hath been Justices; that the Party so bound may be called: And if the
Par­ty make default, the same then there to be re­corded; and the same
Recognizance, with the Record of that default shall be sent and certi­fied in
the Chancery, the King's Bench, or in­to the Exchequer.

#### 44.2.2. Every Condition of a Recognizance must have these things.

  * 1\. It may be in English.
  * 2\. It may have the first words [The Condi­tion of this Recognizance is such, That if the above bounden A. B. &c.]
  * 3\. It must shew what he is bound to doe, As [personally to appear at the next Quarter­sessions [[Page 289]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=148) to be holden for the County of K. and in the mean time to be of Good behaviour to­wards

Behaviour.

our Sovereign Lord the King and all his People,] or as the case requireth.

  * 4\. The Close thus [That then this Recogni­zance to be void or else to stand in force.]

All this may be done on the back of the Recognizance or underneath it.

### 44.3. A single Recognizance taken before Justices of the Peace.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod tertio die Aprilis anno Regni Domini no­stri Caroli
Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Regis, Fidei
Defenso­ris, &c. venerunt coram A. B. & C. D. Armig. Iust. dicti Domini Regis
ad Pacem in Com. K. conservand. Assig. R. H. de S. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, &
T. H. de eodem Carpenter, ac R. S. de F. in Com. praed. Mercer, & Recog­nover.
se debere dicto Dom. Regi, (viz.) quill­bet Manucaptor praed. Quinque libras &
praed. R. H. decem libras bonae & legalis monetae An­gliae (solvend. eidem
Dom. Regi in Festo Nati­vitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae proximo futuro post
datum praesent.) Et nisi fecerint, concesse­runt pro se Haered. Executor. &
Administra­tor. suis per praesentes, quod dictae separales summae leventur &
recuperentur de Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis, Bonis, Catallis &
Haereditamentis ipsorum R. H. T. H. & R. S. haered. Executor. & Assign.
suorum, ubicunque fuerint invent. Dat. &c.

[[Page 290]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=149)

### 44.4. Another single Recognizance.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quarto die Ja­nuarii Anno Regni Dom. nostri Ca­roli
Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, &c. A. B. de C. in Com. praed. Yeoman,
personaliter venit co­ram R. K. Armig. uno Iust. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in
Com. praedict. Conservand. Assign. & Recognovit se debere dicto Dom. Regi
decem li­bras bonae & legalis monetae Angliae, de Bonis & Catallis, Terris &
Tenementis suis fieri & Le­vari, ad opus dicti Dom. Regis, Haered. &
suc­cessor. suorum, si defecerit in Corditione in­dorsat.

### 44.5. A Recognizance to prefer an In­dictment, or to prefer a Bill, and
give Evidence.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quarto die Septemb. anno Regni Dom. nost. Caroli
Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Regis, Fidei
Defenso­ris, &c. A. B. de C. in Coin. K. Yeoman▪ in propria persona sua, venit
coram me R. K. uno Iusticiariorum dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in dicto Com.
conservandam necnon ad diversas Felonias, Transgressiones, & alia malefacta in
eodem Com. perpetranda audiendum, & determinandum as­signat. Et cognovit se
debere dicto Domino Re­gi Quadraginta Libras de Bonis & Catallis, Terris &
Tenementis suis ad opus dicti Domini Regis levandas, sub Conditione indorsata,
viz.

[[Page 291]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=149)

### 44.6. A Recognizance for two to give Evidence.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod decimo die Februarii anno Regni Dom. nost. Caroli
Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Fran­ciae & Hiberniae Regis, Fidei
Defensoris, &c. W. B. de S. in Com. praedict. Husbandman, & W. R. de S. in
eodem Com. Husbandman, in propriis personis suis venerunt coram me R. K. uno
Iusticiar. dicti Domini Regis ad pacem, in Com. praed. conserv. necnon ad
diversas Felonias, Trans­gressiones, & alia Malesacta in eodem Com.
per­petrand. audiend. & determinand. assignat. Et quilibet uterque eorum per
se cognovit, se debere dicto Domino Regi viginti libr. de Bonis, & Ca­tallis,
Terris & Tenementis suis ad opus dicti Do­mini Regis levandas, sub conditione
indorsata.

### 44.7. A Recognizance to give in Evidence against a Prisoner.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo ter­tio die Maii anno Regni Domini nostri
Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, &c. T. R. de E. in praed. Yeoman, venit
coram me R. K. uno Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com. praed.
conservand. assignat. & cognovit se debere dicto Domino Regi Quinque libr.
legalis monetae Angliae, sub conditione, quod si ipse perso­naliter comparebit
coram Iust. dicti Domini Re­gis [[Page
292]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=150) ad proximam
generalem Gaolae delib. in Com. praed. tenend. ad tunc & ibidem ostendendum in
Evidenc. secundum formam stat. vers. A. B. nu­per de C. in Com. praed. qui
modo attach. & sus­pect. Feloniae Gaolae dicti Domini Regis Com. praedict.
commissus existit; quod tunc, &c. alio­quin, &c.

### 44.8. For the Good behaviour.

MEmorandum, Quod R. A. de C. in Com. praed. Gen. B. A. de W. in eodem Com.
Gen. S. A. de W. praed. Yeoman, B. R. de W. praed. Yeoman, & A. C. de W.
praed. Yeoman, veniunt coram me W. M. Armig. uno Iusticiar. Domini Regis nunc
ad Pacem in Com. praed. con­servand. assign. & quilibet praed. B. A. S. A. B.
R. & A. C. manucepit pro dicto R. A. in vi­ginti libris legalis monetae
Angliae, & praed. R. A. manucepit pro seipso in viginti libris consimilis
mo­netae, viz. quod dictus R. A. à modo se bene ge­rat erga dictum Dominum
Regem & cunctum populum suum, & praecipue erga T. P. de S. in Com. praedict.
Husbandman, pro uno anno nunc proxim. futur. ita quod ipse non inferet nec
inferri procurabit, per se nec per alium, nomine suo ei­dem T. P. seu alicui
de populo dicti Domini Re­gis damnum aliquod seu gravamen de Corporibus suis
per insidias, insultus, seu aliquo alio modo quod in laesionem seu
perturbationem Pacis dicti Domini Regis cedere valeat quovismodo: quas quidem
separales pecuniarum summas praedictas, quilibet manucapt. praedictorum per
se, ac dictus R. A. per se recognov. se debere dicto Domino Regi & concessur.
eas de terris, tenementis, & catallis suis, & cujuslibet eorum, ad opus [[Page
293]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=150) dicti Domini
Regis levand. si dictus R. A. in praemissis, seu in aliquo praemissorum
deliquerit, & inde legitimo modo convictus fuerit. Dat. de­cimo die Aprilis.
Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia, &c.

### 44.9. Another.

K. ss. MEmorandum, &c. & quod ipse A. B. interim se bene geret erga Dom. Reg.
& cunctum populum suum, & praeci­pue erga L. M. Et quod ipse non inferet nec
in­ferri procurabit per se nec per alios, damnum ali­quod seu gravamen
praefato L. M. seu alicui de populo ipsius Dom. Regis de Corporibus suis, per
insidias, insultus, seu aliquo alio modo, quod in laesionem seu perturbationem
pacis dict [...] Dom. Regis cedere valeat quovis modo, viz. uterque praedict.
D. E. & H. J. sub poena Quinquagint. libr. & praedict. A. B. sub poena Cent.
libr. &c.

### 44.10. A Recognizance to give in Evi­dence against one that is suspec­ted
of Felony.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo die Novemb. Anno Regni Dom. no­stri Caroli
Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Regis, Fidei
Defensor', &c. Tricesimo R. T. nuper de C. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, venit
coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com.
praedict. conservand. assignat. & Recognovit se de­bere [[Page
294]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=151) dict. Dom.
Reg. Quinque libras legalis mo­netae Angl. sub conditione, quod ipse
personaliter comparebit coram me & sociis meis Iustic. praed. ad proximam
generalem Gaolam in Com. praed. tenend. Et ad tunc ibidem ostend. in Evidenc.
secundum formam Statuti versus D. E. in Com. praed. qui modo attach. &
suspect. Feloniae Gaolae dict. Dom. Reg. Com. praed. commissus existit quod
tunc, &c. alioquin, &c.

### 44.11. A Recognizance for keeping of a Tavern.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quarto die Octob. Anno Regni Dom. nostri Caroli
Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, &c. vicesi­mo tertio venerunt coram nobis R. K. &
H. W. Armig. Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem dict. Dom. Reg. in Com. E.
conservand. necnon alia malefacta ac diversas transgress. perpetrat. audiend.
& terminand. assignatis A. B. de E. in Com. praed. L. & R. A. in Com. praed.
H. & W. T. de eadem in eodem Com. Weaver, Et Manuceperunt, viz. quilibet
manucapt. praedict. sub paena Quinquagint. solid. Et praedict. M. T. assumpsit
pro se sub poena Quinque libr. quod ipse W. T. bene gerat Tabernam secundum
formam Statuti. Quas quidem seperales summas quilibet eorum cognovit se debere
dict. Dom. Reg. Atque volunt, & concedunt de Terris & Tenementis, Bo­nis &
Catallis suis & cujuslibet eorum fieri & levari, si praedict W. T. defecerit.

[[Page 295]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=151)

### 44.12. A Recognizance for one that is Bail for a Boy that lay under a Bed
in the Night.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo sep­timo die Martii Anno Regni Re­gis Caroli
secundi Dei gratia Angliae, &c. vi­cesimo T. H. de B. in Com. K. Taylor, in
pro­pria persona sua venit coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiar. dicti Domini
Regis ad pacem in dicto Com. K. conservand. assignat. & ma­nucepit pro T. H.
de B. praed. filio suo quod ipse praedict. T. H. filius comparebit coram
Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in dicto Com. con­servand. assignat. ad
proximam generalem Sessio­nem pacis in Com. praed. tenend. ad respondend. F.
D. pro fractione & intratione in domum Mansionalem ipsius F. & omnibus quae
versus ipsum tunc & ibidem objicientur sub poena ma­nucapt. praed. quadragint.
libr. quam quidem summam quadragint. libr. praed. manucapt. re­cognovit se
debere dicto Dom. Regi de terris & tenementis, bonis & catallis suis ad opus
dicti Domini Regis haered. & suceessorum fieri & Levari si contingerit ipsum
T. H. filium prae­missa in aliquo infringere in cujus rei Testimoni­um ego
praedict. W. P. sigillum meum apposui dat. die & Anno supradict.

[[Page 296]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=152)

### 44.13. A Recognizance for Bastardy where two are Manucapters for the man
in custody.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod septimo die Augusti Anno Regni Regis Ca­roli Secundi
Angliae, &c. Tricesimo primo An­noque Dom. 1679. M. F. de S. in Com. praed.
Victualler, & E. W. de S. praed. Gen. venerunt Coram me R. K. Armig. uno
Iustic. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com. praed. conservand. assign. Et
manuceperunt & uterque eorum manucepit pro H. I. de parochia D. in Com. praed.
Husband­man, sub poena vigint. libr. legalis monetae An­gliae, quas quidem
summas dict. Domino Regi debere concesserunt & uterque eorum concessit de
bonis & catallis, terris & tenementis suis fieri & levari ad opus & usum dicti
Dom. Regis haered. & successor. suorum si praefat. H. I. defe­cerit in
conditione indorsat. &c.

### 44.14. A Recognizance for a married Wo­man upon a Rescue.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod tricesimo die Julii Anno Regni Regis Caroli Secundi,
&c. Angliae, &c. vicesimo quarto Anno Domini 1672. W. M. de E. in Com. praed.
& R. G. de F. in Com. praed. Gen. venerunt coram me R. K. Armig. uno
Iusticiar. dicti Domini Re­gis ad pacem in Com. praed. conservand. assign. Et
[[Page 297]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=152)
manuceper. & uterque eorum manucepit pro Anna If 3\. quili­bet eorum. uxore T.
C. de I. infra Parochiam S. in Com. praed. Taylor, sub poena vigint. libr.
legalis monetae Angliae, quas quidem summas dicto Domino Regi debere
concesserunt & uterque eorum concessit de bonis & catallis, terris &
tenementis suis & utriusque eorum ad opus & usum dicti Domini Regis fieri &
levari si praefat. A. C. defecerit in conditione indorsata.

> Capt. & Cogn. die & Anno supradict. coram me.

### 44.15. A Recognizance for one that hath hurt another, and on the War­rant
of Behaviour.

MEmorandum, Quod quarto die Mail Anno Regni Regis Caroli Secundi, &c. Angliae,
&c. Annoque Domini, &c. venerunt coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiar. dicti
Domini Regis ad pacem in Com praedict. con­servand. assign. apud N. in Com.
praed. W. H. de B. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, & R. H. de eadem & assumpserunt
pro seipsis sub poena ducentarum libr. legalis monetae Angliae & E. L. de
eadem villa praedict. Malster, & E. L. de M. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, tunc &
ibidem in propriis personis suis simi­liter venerunt & manuceperunt & uterque
eo­rum seperatim manucepit pro praefat. W. H. & R. H. sub poena sexagint.
libr. legalis monetae Angliae, quas quidem separales summas dicto Domino Regi
debere concesserunt & quilibet [[Page
298]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=153) eorum
concessit de bonis & catallis, terris & tenementis suis, & cujuslibet eorum
fieri & levari ad opus & usum dicti Dom. Regis hae­red. & successor. suorum si
praefat. W. H. de­fecerint in Conditione indorsat.

### 44.16. For the Peace.

MEmorandum, Quod R. W. de S. in Co­mitatu1 Iustice. praedicto Labourer, J. B.
de S. praed, Husbandman, & R. C. de W. in dicto Comitatu Com. Husbandman, ven.
coram me E. Littleton Armig. uno Iusticiar. Domini Regis nunc ad Pacem in
Comitatu praedicto conservand. assign. apud W. in Comitatu praedicto, &
quilibet praedictorum. J. B. & R. C. manuceperunt pro dicto R. W. in decem
libris legalis monetae An­gliae, & dictus R. W. manucepit pro seipso in
vi­ginti libris consimilis monetae Angliae, viz. quod dictus R. W. comparebit
ad generalem Sessionem Pacis in Comitatu praed. proxim. tenend. & quod ipse
interim Pacem dicti Domini Regis erga ipsum Dominum Regem & cunctum populum
suum, & praecipue erga J. A. de S. in Comitatu praedict. Yeoman, conservabit:
quas quidem separales pe­cuniarum summas praed. quilibet eorum recognovit se
debere dicto Domino Regi, & eas concessur. de terris, tenementis, bonis, &
catallis suis, ad opus dicti Domini Regis levand. si dictus R. W. in aliquo
praemissorum deliquerit, & inde legitimo modo convictus fuerit. Dat. decimo
die Jan. Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia, &c.

[[Page 299]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=153)

### 44.17. For Felony.

MEmorandum, Quod 20 die Maii Anno1 Iustice. Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi
Dei gratia, &c. R. C. de L. Gent. E. C. de L. praedict. Gent. J. B. de eadem,
Gent. & M. C. de eadem, Yeoman, veniunt coram me J. H. Armigero uno Iusticiar.
dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem in Com. praedict. conservand. assign. &
manuceperunt pro R. B. de L. in Com praedict. Gent. viz. quilibet eorum Corpus
pro Corpore, quod idem R. B. personaliter comparebit coram praefat. Iusticiar.
& sociis suis, ad proximam generalem Sessionem Pacis, in Com. praedicto
tenend. ad stand. recto in Cur. si quis ver­sus eos tunc loqui voluerit de
diversis Feloniis & transgress. unde idem R. B. indictatus ex­istit (ut
dicitur) & ad respond. dicto Do­mino de eisdem, prout debet. Datum, &c.

### 44.18. A Release of a Recognizance writ­ten under the Recognizance thus,
by the same Iustice, or by some other, &c.

EGO praefatus A. B. qui supra nominatum C. D. de Preston ad securitatem Pa­cis
inveniendam ex mea discretione compuli, eandem securitatem de se bene gerendo
quan­tum in me est ex mea discretione; sexto die [[Page
300]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=154) Maii, Anno
Domini 1680. Remisi & Relaxa­vi, In cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti
Re­laxationi meae sigillum meum apposui Datum.

### 44.19. The Parties Release of the Peace.

MEmorandum, Quod tertio die Julii An­no 32. Regis Caroli Secundi, &c. A. B.
venit coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiariorum Domini Regis nunc ad Pa­cem,
&c. & Gratis Remisit & Relaxavit (quantum in se est) praedictam securitatem
pacis per ipsum versus supra nominatum T. H. petitam. In cujus rei testimonium
ego praefa­tus R. K. &c. Dat. apud, &c.

And in like sort the Justice or Justices of Peace may doe, which took Sureties
for Good behaviour if they see cause.

[[Page 301]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=154)

## 45\. Riot.

### 45.1. A Precept to the Sheriff to return a Iury to inquire upon a Riot,
Rout, or unlawfull Assembly.

Kent ss. W. B. and R. R. Esquires;2 Iustices. 13 H. 4. cap. 7. To be inqui­red
within one month after the Riot. 19 H. 7. cap. 13. two of His Majestie's
Ju­stices assigned to keep the Peace in the Coun­ty aforesaid; to the Sheriff
of the said Coun­ty, Greeting. On the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King we
command you, that you do cause to come before us at H. in the Parish of G. in
the said County, upon Thursday the 10. day of Iune next ensuing, four and
twen­ty honest, sufficient and lawfull men, dwelling within the said County,
(whereof every of them have to Lands and Tenements within the County
aforesaid, to the yearly value of twen­ty shillings of Charter-hold or Free-
hold, or twenty six shillings eight pence of Copyhold, or of both, over and
above all charges) for to inquire for His Majesty of some Riots, Routs, and
unlawfull Assemblies, committed and done at S. in the said County, (as it is
said.) And that you do return upon every Person so by you impannelled in
issues, at the first day twenty shillings, at the second day forty shillings
to be by them forfeited if that they appear not, and be sworn to inquire the
premisses at the first day: All which you shall in no case omit upon pain of
twenty pounds. [[Page
302]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=155) which you
shall forfeit to His said Majesty (if you shall make default in not returning
the said Persons or issues in form aforesaid.) And have you then the names of
the said Jurors, and this Precept. Given under our hands and seals at T. in
the said County, &c.

### 45.2. The like Precept in Latine.

K. ss. T. C. & R. K. Armigeri (duo Iu­sticiariorum 2 Iustices. 13 H. 4. cap.
7. (To be in­quired within a month af­ter the Riot.) 19 H. 7. cap. 13. Dom.
Regis ad pacem in Com. suo praed. conservand. assign. necnon ad diversas
felonias, transgressiones & alia malefacta in eodem Com. perpetrat. audiend. &
terminand. assignat.) Vic. ejusdem Com. salutem. Ex parte Dom. Regis tibi
praecipimus, Quod venire facias coram nobis apud S. in Com. praed. die Iovis
26 die Aprilis prox. sequen. ad horam octavam ante meridiem ejusdem diei
viginti & quatuor probos, sufficientes & legales homines infra Com. praed.
commorantes, quorum quilibet habeat terras & tenementa infra eundem Com. ad
valentiam viginti solidorum per chart. tent. sive liberi te­nementi, vel
viginti & sex solidorum & octo de­nariorum terrae per copiam rotulorum Curiae
tent. (ultra omnia onera) Ad inquirend. pro Dom. Rege super sacram. suum de
quibusdam Riotis, Routis, & illicitis aggregationibus commiss. & perpetrat.
apud H. in Com. praed. (ut dicitur) Quodque retornes super quamlibet personam
per te impanellat. in exitibus viginti solidos per ipsos forisfaciend. si non
compareant ut jurati sint ad inquirend. de praemissis ad diem illum, omnia
quae nullatenus omitt. sub paena viginti librar. quam noveris te forisfactur.
eidem Dom. Regi [[Page
303]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=155) si defalt.
feceris in non retorn. personas pr [...]d. sive exit. in forma praed. Et
habeas ibi tunc no­mina Iur. ill. & hoc praeceptum. Dat. sub Si­gillis
nostris, apud S. ultim. die Martii, Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi
(Dei gra­tia) Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Regis (Fidei Defensor.
&c.) 27.

### 45.3. A Warrant for certain Riotous Persons.

To the Constables, &c.

Kent. ss. FOrasmuch as I am credibly in­formedHis Maje­sty shall bear the
los­ses that the Iustice of Peace shall sustain in the execu­tion of the
Statute. 13 H. 4\. cap. 7\. Of Riots, &c. 2 H. 5\. c. 8. by A. B. Gent. that
C. D. &c. and diverse and sundry other Per­sons unknown, have come upon the
Ground of the said A. B. in M. aforesaid, and there have been aiding and
assisting to these Persons here­under named, in forceable manner, to carry
away the Wood and Timber, &c. there of late growing, being the Wood and Timber
of A. B. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, and
every of you, to arrest as well the said Parties hereunder named, as the said
Parties unknown, being shewed unto you by the said A. B. and to bring the same
before me, and this shall be your Warrant and Dis­charge. Given under, &c.

[[Page 304]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=156)

## 46\. Rogues.

### 46.1. For Apprehending and Committing a dangerous Rogue.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the County afore­said.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. a Rogue, Vagabond, wandring, idle or dis­orderly
Person was1 Iac. c. 7. 2 Iustices. found and apprehended at C. in the Hundred
and County aforesaid, in a ge­neral privy Search by our command made
(ac­cording to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) and
brought before us this present day at our Assembly at T. in the County
aforesaid: We do therefore (in His Majestie's name) command you the Constable
and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do (at the charge of the said
Hundred) con­vey the said A. B. to the aforesaid House of Correction, and
there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this
Pre­cept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said
House, and there set him to work and labour, or otherwise to deal with him
according to Law, untill he shall be from thence lawfully delivered. Hereof
fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at A. aforesaid the,
&c.

[[Page 305]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=156)

### 46.2. A Mittimus of a dangerous Rogue.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. a wandring39 Eliz. cap. 4. 2 Iustices of the Quor.
Rogue doth appear to be dan­gerous Dan­gerous to the inferi­our sort of
People, or one that will not be reformed of his roguish kind of life by any
other provision contain'd in the Statute in that behalf made. We do therefore
(in His Ma­jestie's name) charge and command you the said Constable and
Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do safely convey the said A. B. to
the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same,
(together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive
him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep untill the next Quarter-
sessions of the Peace, to be hol­den for the said County at A. aforesaid, that
he may then and there be farther dealt withall according to the Law. Hereof
fail not at your perils. Given under, &c.

[[Page 306]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=157)

## 47\. Sacrament.

### 47.1. A Certificate for Receiving the Sacra­ment and Oath.

Kent ss. WE A. B. Minister of the Pa­rish-Church25 Car. 2. cap. 2. of C. in
the County of D. and E. F. Church-warden of the same Parish and Parish-Church,
do hereby cer­tify, That M. N. of O. in the County of P. Gent. upon the Lord's
day, commonly called Sunday, the 10. day of Iune, immediately af­ter Divine
Service and Sermon, did in the Pa­rish-Church aforesaid receive the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper according to the usage of the Church of England. In
witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our hands the 10. day of, &c.

A. B. Minister of the Parish and Parish-Church of C.

E. F. Church-warden of the said Parish and Parish-Church.

H. I. of K. in the County of K. Gent. and L. M. of, &c. do severally make
Oath, That they do know M. N. in the above written Cer­tificate named, and who
now present hath de­livered the same into this Court; and do far­ther
severally make Oath, that they did see the said M. N. receive the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper in the Parish-Church of C. &c. in the said Certificate
mentioned, and upon the day, [[Page
307]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=157) and at the
time in the said Certificate in that behalf certified and expressed; and that
they did see the Certificate above written subscribed by the said A. B.
Minister of the said Church, and E. F. Church-warden there; and farther, that
the said H. I. and L. M. do say upon their respective Oaths, that all other
matters or things in the said Certificate recited, mentioned or ex­pressed,
are true, as they verily believe.

### 47.2. A Certificate of Receiving the Sacrament according to the Act.

K. ss. MEmorandum, That at the Quarter­sessions for the said County hol­den at
C. in the County aforesaid, upon Tues­day the 22. day of Iuly in the year of
our Lord one thousand six hundred seventy three, and from thence adjourned to
M. in the said Coun­ty, and there holden (by the same Adjourn­ment) upon
Monday the 28. day of Iuly afore­said, R. W. of the Parish of M. in the County
aforesaid Esq did (upon the said 28. of Iuly in the said Court of Quarter-
sessions there) de­liver into the said Court a Certificate under the hands of
I. P. Clerk, Minister of the Parish and Parish-Church aforesaid, and I. M.
Church­warden of the same Parish and Parish-Church, by which they certified,
that the said R. W. up­on the Lord's day (commonly called Sunday) the 18. day
of M, in the said year of our Lord one thousand six hundred seventy three,
(im­mediately after Divine Service and Sermon) did (in the Parish-Church
aforesaid) receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper according to the usage
of the Church of England.

[[Page 308]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=158)

### 47.3. A Testimonial upon the Receiving the Sa­crament according to the
Act.

Kent ss. MEmorandum also, That at the time and place of the said de­livery of
the said Certificate, A. B. C. D. and E. F. did (upon enquiry made by the said
Court) then and there severally make Oath, that they did know the said R. W.
in the said Certificate named; and that they were present, and delivered the
same into that Court; and that they did see the said R. W. receive the
Sa­crament of the Lord's Supper at the time, day and place, and in the manner
in the said Certi­ficate certified; and that they did also see the Certificate
aforesaid subscribed by the said Mi­nister and Church-warden; and that the
said R. W. did upon the 20. day of May then last past (and for several years
before) inhabit, and then did inhabit in the above named Pa­rish of H. and
County of Kent.

### 47.4. A Declaration to be subscribed ac­cording to the Act.

I A. B. do declare, That I do believe that25 Car. 2. cap. 2. there is not any
Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or in the Elements
of Bread and Wine at, or after the Consecration thereof by any person
what­soever.

[[Page 309]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=158)

## 48\. Scavingers.

### 48.1. A Warrant for Scavingers to Distrain.

To the Constables and Headboroughs, and other His Majestie's Officers of the
Liberty of A. &c.

Kent ss. WHereas Complaint hath been made unto us, That the se­veral Persons
whose names are hereunder writ­ten, being Inhabitants in the Liberty of A.
have refused, and yet do refuse to pay the summs of money hereunder mentioned,
being respective­ly rated, assessed and taxed on them for and towards the
scouring and clensing of the Streets according to the form of the Statute in
that case made and provided: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
charge and com­mand you, and every of you, to bring the said Persons so
refusing before us to shew cause for such their refusing; And if they or any
of them shall refuse to come before us, or shall absent themselves, or refuse
to be spoke withall, due notice in writing being left at their respective
Houses, That then you immediately levy all and every the said several summs
unpaid, and all the Arrearages thereof of all and every the said Per­sons so
refusing by Distress and Sale of the Of­fenders goods, you rendring to the
Parties the overplus that shall remain upon the Sale of the said Goods, if any
shall be. And for your so doing this shall be your Warrant. Given un­der our
hands and seals this, &c.

[[Page 310]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=159)

## 49\. Search.

### 49.1. A Warrant to Search for stoln Goods.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I have received In­formation [...] Iustice. by A. B.
that two Sheep were lately feloniously taken and stoln from him: These are
therefore (in His Maje­stie's name) to command you, that immedi­ately upon
receipt hereof you do make dili­gent Search for the said Sheep in all and
every such suspected Houses and Places within the said Hundred as you and the
said A. B. shall think convenient; And if upon your said Search you find any
of the said Sheep, or o­ther just cause of suspicion, that then you bring all
such suspected Persons before me, or some other of His Majestie's Justices of
the Peace of the said County, to be examined touching the premisses. And
farther to doe and receive as to Justice doth appertain. Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

[[Page 311]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=159)

### 49.2. A Warrant to make general Search for Rogues, Vaga­bonds, &c.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's7 Iac. c. 4. name) to command you, and
every of you, that (taking assistance of sufficient men of the said Hundred)
you do (in the night before the twentieth day of October next ensuing) make a
gene­ral privy Search within every of the Pari­shes, Villages and Hamlets
within the same, for the finding out and apprehending of all Rogues,
Vagabonds, and wandring and idle persons, in and about the said Parishes,
Villages, and Hamlets; And that such Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandring and idle
persons, as you shall then find and apprehend, (in the said Search) you do
bring before us, or some of us, on the aforesaid twentieth day of October, at
the house of Iohn Price in C. at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same
day, there to be examined of their idle and wandring life, and to be farther
dealt withall according to Law; And that you do then and there also give unto
us an account and reckoning (upon Oath, in wri­ting, and under the hand of the
Minister of each respective Parish) what Rogues, Vaga­bonds, [[Page
312]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=160) and wandring
and disorderly persons you have apprehended, both in the same Search, and also
since the last like general Search made, and how many have been pu­nished, or
otherwise sent to the House of Correction. (All which you are not to ne­glect
upon forfeitures of such fines, pains and penalties as (by the Statute in such
case made and provided) may be by us in­flicted upon you for such your
neglect.) We do likewise hereby (in His Majestie's name) farther command you,
and every of you, to bring before us, or some of us, (at the time and place
aforesaid) all such persons (within the said Hundred) as be masterless (or
live out of Service,) or be common Alehouse-haunters, or expenders of their
mo­neys in riotous living, (not duly labouring for their living whereby so to
maintain them) to the end that we may proceed against them as to Justice doth
appertain; And that you your selves be then and there also personally present,
to give account of the execution of this our Warrant. Hereof fail not at your
pe­rils. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

[[Page 311]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=160)

## 50\. Servants.

### 50.1. For sending a Servant to his Service to serve the time agreed, to
pre­vent Charge on the Parish.

To the Overseers of the Poor for the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as you have complained2 Iustices, 1 Quorum. unto us, That
B. C. being re­tained into Service by D. E. of T. &c. for on [...] year (not
yet expired) is come out ofhe or she. her Service in the said Parish of T. and
likely to be chargeable to the same: These are therefore (in His Majestie's
name) to command you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do
forthwith convey the said B. C. to her said Master (or Mistress) and deliver
her unto him (or her) to remain with him (or her) untill she shall be from him
(or her) lawfully discharged; and in case of refusal of the said D. E. to
receive the said B. C. accordingly, That you, some or one of you, do forthwith
certifie us, or one of us of the same, to the end that such farther
proceedings may be thereupon had as by Law is required. Hereof fail not. Given
under our hands and seals at A. the, &c.

[[Page 312]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=161)

### 50.2. A Mittimus against one that retur­neth into a Parish after he was
removed.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the said County
at M. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas upon complaint (ac­cording to the form of the14 Car. 2. cap.
12. Statute in that behalf lately made) That A. B. an Inhabitant Native,
Housholder, Sojourner, Apprentice, or Servant. Last legally settled in, &c.
as, &c. in D. came into the Parish of H. in the County aforesaid, To work if
the case be so, otherwise leave these words out. To settle in a tenement there
under the yearly value of 1 [...] li. to work, and was not returned, and
thereupon the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish, did
(according to the Sta­tute aforesaid) convey the said A. B. to D. aforesaid,
there to remain an Inhabitant as for­merly he was; after which said conveying,
the said A. B. did return of his own accord to the aforesaid Parish of H. from
whence he was re­moved: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him convey to the aforesaid
House of Correc­tion, and there deliver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the
same, (together with this Pre­cept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to
receive him into the said House, and there punish him as a Vagabond. Hereof
fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, &c.

[[Page 313]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=161)

### 50.3. A Warrant to levy 40 s. on the Ma­ster for putting away his Servant
before the end of his term.

To the Constables and Borsholders of A. &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto us5 Eliz. 4. this day upon Oath, That
A. B. of your Town of A. Yeoman, hath put C. D. his Servant (lawfully retained
with him) out of his service, before the end of the term agreed, contrary to
the Law of this Realm. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge
and command you, and every of you, forthwith upon the receipt hereof that you
levy the summ of 40 s. (by him the said A. B. 20 s. to the King, and 20 s. to
the Prosecutor. forfeited by the Statute for his offence) by way of Distress
and Sale of the Offender's Goods, upon his not payment thereof, rendring to
the said A. B. the over-plus, (if any be) And that you bring with you the said
40 s. at the next general Quarter-Sessions of the Peace to be holden for these
parts of K. except the said A. B. shall shew good cause to the contrary, to
His Majestie's Justice of the Peace at A. afore­said, upon Thursday next being
the twelfth day of this instant December. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given at the general Quarter-Sessions of the Peace at B. the second day, &c.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H.

[[Page 314]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=162)

### 50.4. For not paying Wages.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. THese are in (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some
or one of you, do cause A. B. to come before me, or some other of His
Majestie's Iustices of the Peace of the County aforesaid, to answer unto such
matters as shall be objected against him by C. D. touching his detention of 20
s. due unto C. D. (as he saith) for wages, and farther to doe and receive as
to Justice doth appertain, unless the said A. B. shall forth­with pay unto the
said C. D. the wages afore­said, or do otherwise give satisfaction unto him
for the same; And you are hereby also farther required to give unto the said
C. D. convenient notice of the time, places when, and whither, and before whom
you shall cause the said A. B. to come (in execution hereof) to the end that
he may be also then and there present to make appear his due to the wages
aforesaid. Hereof fail not, &c.

[[Page 315]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=162)

### 50.5. A Warrant for Relief of a Man-ser­vant that is out of Service.

To the Constables, &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint is made43 Eliz. cap. 2. unto me by A. B. That
he being lawfully retained in the Service of C. D. of your Town of E. Yeoman,
at Lady day was twelve-month, and being discharged his Ser­vice at Lady day
last, hath been at the Statute Sessions, and cannot find himself a Service,
and being destitute of means whereby to re­lieve himself. These are therefore
(in His Majestie's name) straitly to charge and com­mand you, and every of
you, that presently upon the receipt hereof you do receive the said A. B. into
your Town, and see him set on work and provided for according to the Statute
in that case made and provided. Here­of fail not, &c.

[[Page 316]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=163)

### 50.6. A Warrant against one that depar­teth out of Service before his time
expired.

To the Constable and Borsholders, &c.

Kent ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or
one of you, do attach C. D. of E. and bring him before me, or some other
Ju­stice of the Peace of and within the said Coun­ty, to answer for that he is
departed out of Service from A. B. of C. (his time of Cove­nant with him made
being not expired,) con­trary to the Statute in that case made and pro­vided.
And farther to  [...]e dealt with [...] accord­ing to Law. Hereof, &c.

### 50.7. To fetch back a Servant.

To all Constables, Borsholders, &c.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. a Servant to C. 5 Eliz. 4. of D. Joyner, hath gone
from his said Master without his lawfull Licence or Testimonial, in the County
of E. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to re­quire and command
you, some or one of you, that forthwith upon sight hereof you go with [[Page
317]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=163) the Bearer
hereof, and as speedily as may be apprehend the said A. B. and him to bring
be­fore me, or some other of His Majestie's Justi­ces of the Peace for the
said County, to the end that such farther proceedings may be thereupon had as
by Law is required. Hereof fail not, &c. Given under, &c.

### 50.8. A Discharge of a Servant from his Service within the time agreed,
upon his absenting himself.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto1 Iustice. me, That A. B. was retained
by C. D. to serve him for a term (not yet ex­pired.) And the said A. B.
without consent of him the said C. D. hath for the space of, &c. now last past
absented himself from the said Ser­vice, and is gone into some place unto the
said C. D. unknown. I therefore upon the conside­ration of the premisses, and
of the equity there­of, on the part of the said C. D. allow the cause and
matter aforesaid to be reasonable and suf­ficient to discharge the said C. D.
from any farther keeping the said A. B. in his said Ser­vice, and do
accordingly discharge the said A. B. from his Service aforesaid. Given un­der
my hand and seal at T. the twenty second day of May, &c.

[[Page 318]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=164)

### 50.9. A Testimonial for the discharge of a Servant.

MEmorandum, That A. B. Servant to C. D. 5 Eliz. 4. of E. Husbandman or Taylor,
&c. in the said County, is licensed to depart from his said Master, and is at
his liberty to serve else­where, according to the Statute in that case made
and provided. In witness whereof, &c.

In a Town, to be under the Seal of the Town and two Housholders there; if in
the Coun [...]y, under the Seals of the Constable or Consta­bles, and two
Housholders there, where he last served.

A Master that retains a Servant without such a Testimonial forfeits 5 li.

It must be Registred by the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of the Parish who is to
have 2 d. for doing thereof.

[[Page 319]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=164)

## 51\. Silk-Throsters.

### 51.1. An Order for the payment of monies to a Silk-Throster by his Workman
who imbezils his Silk.

Kent ss. WHereas upon the complaint14 Car. 2. cap. 15. 1 Iustice. of A. B. of
C. Silk-Throster, made that he having delivered to C. D. of E. Silk­winder, or
Doubler, or Iourny­man. of Silk to be by him Silk­winded or Silk-dou­bled. for
the said A. B. and the aforesaid C. D. hath Unjust­ly or deceit­fully and
falsely pur­loin-imbe­zil, pawn, sell, or detain. Buyer or Receiver. par­cel
thereof, which complaint upon my exa­mination of the same (according to the
form of the Statute in that case made) hath been made, apparent unto me to be
true, I have thereupon determined the offence aforesaid, and do hereby order
and appoint, that the said C. D. shall give and pay to the said A. B. the summ
of 40 s. for his damages, losses, and charges thereabouts, within fourteen
days now next ensuing. Given under my hand and seal, &c.

[[Page 320]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=165)

### 51.2. Against an Offender for not perfor­ming the Order before mentioned.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. WHereas upon the complaint of A. B. of C. Silk-Throster, to me made,
That he having delivered to C. D. (a) to be by him (b) for the said A. B. As
afore. And that the aforesaid C. D. had (c) parcel thereof, which complaint
upon my examina­tion of the same (according to the form of the Statute in that
behalf made) was made appear unto me to be true. And I did there­upon
determine the offence aforesaid, and did by Warrant under my hand and seal
order and appoint, that the said C. D. should give and pay to the said A. B.
for his damage, loss, and charges thereabouts, 40 s. within fourteen days then
next ensuing. And forasmuch as the said C. D. did not within the said fourteen
days, nor at any time since, make such Recom­pence or Satisfaction to the said
A. B. as was by me as aforesaid ordered and appointed, al­though he had
convenient notice so to doe. These are, &c. to will and require you, that you,
some or one of you, do apprehend and whip the said C. D. or set him in the
Stocks, in the place where the same offence was commit­ted, or in some Market
in this County near unto the place aforesaid. Given under my hand, &c.

[[Page 321]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=165)The like
Warrant against the Receiver, Buyer, or Taker to pawn.

## 52\. Souldiers.

### 52.1. A Warrant to warn in a Muster at a certain day, &c.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of S. and to every of them.

K. ss. BY Command from the Right ho­nourable H. Earl of W. (Lord Lieutenant of
the said County) I require you to warn all the persons mentioned in a List
hereunto annexed, to appear compleatly Armed and Furnished with Coats
(according to for­mer Orders) at S. near C. upon Monday the twelfth day of
this instant September, at eleven of the Clock in the forenoon of the same day
(at the furthest;) And every of them is to bring with him four days pay, and
the Muster­master's Salary. The Musqueteers to bring with him one pound of
Powder, and Match and Bullets proportionable, then and there to receive
further Orders. And you the said Constable to be then and there present, to
make appear what you have done in execution hereof, of what is here commanded.
No per­son concerned herein is to fail at his peril. Gi­ven [[Page
322]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=166) under my hand
and seal the seventh day of May 1681\. 33. Regni Regis, &c.

### 52.2. A Certificate for a Trained Souldier.

THese are to certifie you, That A. B. the Bearer hereof is a Trained Souldier
of the Burrough of S. for his Majestie's service appointed under my command,
and therefore not otherwise to be charged or molested, as you will answer the
contrary at your perils. Given under my hand at, &c.

### 52.3. To order an Allowance to a poor Souldier out of the Stock for Maimed
Souldiers.

To the Treasurer of the said County for maimed Souldiers.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. Officer, Souldier, or Marriner, maimed, indigent,
aged, or dis­abled in bo­dy for work in the ser­vice of His late Maje­s
[...]y, or His Majesty that now is, or under the late Wars, or so
impoverish­ed by his sufferings under any the late usurped Powers, as that he
is▪ dissolute of any competent subsistence or livelihood. hath according to
the form of the14 Car. 2. cap. 9. 2 Iustices. Statute (in that behalf lately
made) made ap­pear unto us, that he hath continued faithfull to his trust, and
not deserted the same by ta­king up Arms against His late Majesty, or His
Majesty that now is, or otherwise; And hath repaired to W. in the said County,
(being the place where he wa [...] last settled before he took Arms: We do
therefore (according to the said Statute) assign for his Relief until the
[[Page 323]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=166) next
Quarter-Sessions to be holden for the County of K. which you are hereby
required to pay unto him. Given under our hands and seals, &c.

### 52.4. The like for Allowance to Wife or Orphan.

To the Treasurer of the said County for maimed Souldiers.) 14 Car. 2. cap. 9.
2 Iustices.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. Widow or Orphan of such per­son as is described in
the Margin of the last before going Warrant. hath (ac­cording to the form of
the Sta­tute in that behalf lately made) made appear unto us, that A. B. late
of C. continued faithfull to his trust, and not deserted the same by ta­king
up Arms against His said late Majesty, or His Majesty that now is, or
otherwise: We do therefore (according to the said Statute) ad­judge that over
and besides such relief as she or they. shall gain by her or their. work and
labour, and shall be allowed by the charity and benevolence of the Parish of
A. where she or they. is now settled. Given under our hands and seals this,
&c.

[[Page 324]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=167)

## 53\. Swearing.

### 53.1. To pay 1 s. for Swearing in the pre­sence of a Justice of the Peace.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of D. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the
Parish of B. in the County afore­said, and to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of, &c. in the [...]1 Iac. cap. 20. 1 Iustice,
within 20 days after the Offence, by Conses­sion, or 2 Witnesses. County
aforesaid, Butcher, (be­ing of above the age of twelve years) did in my
hearing this present day (in the Parish aforesaid) prophanely swear one Oath,
for which Offence he forefeited and was to pay (to the use of the Poor of the
Parish) the summ of 12 d. These are therefore (in His Ma­jestie's name) to
command you to levy to the use of the Poor of the said Parish, the aforesaid
12 d. by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A. B. (rendring to him the
over-plus.) And in defect of such Distress, that you the said Constable do set
the said A. B. in the Stocks, by the space of three whole hours. Hereof fail
not, &c.

[[Page 325]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=167)

### 53.2. A Warrant to levy Monies for pro­phane Swearing.

To the Constables and Borsholders, &c.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as it was this present day proved before me, that A. B. of,
&c. did in the said Parish offend by pro­fane Swearing four Oaths, by reason
where­of he hath forfeited to the use of the Poor of the said Parish the summ
of, &c. that is to say, 3 s. 4\. d. for every time he did so offend, according
to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided. These are therefore
(in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do
forthwith levy the said forfeiture of, &c. upon the Goods and Chattels of the
said A. B. by Distress and Sale of the same, returning the over-plus. And that
forthwith after your levying of the said forfeiture of, &c. you pay the same
to the Church-wardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish,
or to some or one of them to the use of the Poor aforesaid. And in case no
sufficient Distress shall be found, and that the said A. B. shall not pay the
said for­feiture, or give security for the same. That then you do set him in
the Stocks there to remain the space of three whole hours Hereof fail not, &c.

[[Page 326]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=168)

### 53.3. A Certificate of Conviction for Swearing.

Kent ss. I R. K. Esquire, one of His Ma­jestie's Justices, &c. do hereby
certifie to the Clerk of the Peace of the Coun­ty of K. that the persons whose
names are hereunto subscribed were, since the last Ses­sions, committed before
me for Swearing one prophane Oath a piece. Given under my hand and seal this,
&c.

## 54\. Tax.

### 54.1. A Warrant to the Assessors to make a Tax upon an Act of Parliament
for Royal Aid.

K. ss. BY virtue of an Act of this present Parliament, intituled, An Act for
granting a Royal Aid unto the King's Majesty of 2477500 li. to be raised,
levied, and paid in the space of three years in manner following, (that is to
say) 68819 li. 9 s. by the month, for thirty six months, beginning from the
25\. day of Decemb. 1664. These are to will and require you, and every of you,
whose names are hereunder writ­ten for the purpose aforesaid, for the second
[[Page 327]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=168) and
third quarterly payments of the said six months Assessments, with all care and
diligence to assess on all Lands, Tenements, Heredita­ments, Annuities, Rents,
Parks, Warrens, Goods, Chattels, Stock, Merchandise, Offices, (other than
Judicial and Military Offices, and Offices relating to the Navy, under the
com­mand of the Lord High Admiral, and Offices within His Majestie's Houshold)
Tolls, Profits, and all their Estates both reall and personal, within the
Limits, Circuits and Bounds of your Hundred of A. the full and just summ of,
&c. by a pound rate wherein you are to assess the Tenant, one sixth part of
the whole in respect of his stock upon Land, and you are to assess all other
persons for their personal estate, (other then their stock upon Lands and
Houshold-stuff) for every 20 li. proportio­nably to 1 li. by the year in
Lands. And you are to take especial care that therein you assess not any part
of the said monies upon the Rents and Revenues due, and payable to ei­ther the
Universities, or any other Colleges, Halls, Hospitals, Almes-houses or Free-
schools. Nevertheless you are to assess the Tenants of all such Lands and
Tenements for so much as the same are worth by the year, over and above what
Rents or Revenues they pay to the said Universities, Colleges, &c. And you are
here­by further willed and required that you bring the said Assessment fairly
written, exactly cast up, and by you signed unto us at the house of, &c. (tali
die) by two of the clock in the afternoon of the same day; Of all which you
nor any of you, are to fail, upon pain of 20 li. Given under our hands and
seals at A. the, &c.

> To A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H.

[[Page 328]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=169)

### 54.2. The Preamble of the Tax Book.

The Hundred of A. &c.

Kent ss. A Tax made the second day of May, Anno Dom. 1664\. and in the
sixteenth year, &c, by us whose names are hereunder subscribed, in pursuance
of a War­rant to us directed under the hands and seals of A. B. C. D. E. F.
Esquires, and others, Com­missioners, nominated in an Act of this present
Parliament, intituled, An Act for granting, &c. (as before.) We are required
to assess upon the said Hundred, on all Lands, Stock, Goods, &c. the summ of,
&c. by a pound rate wherein the Tenant is to be assessed one sixth part of the
whole which we have accordingly assessed, viz▪ the Landlord at 5 d. in the
pound Rent, and the Tenant 1 d. on the pound in respect of his Stock, upon the
said Lands, and for all other Goods, Stock, &c. for every 20 li.
proportio­nably to 2 s. per annum, on Lands as followeth. viz. A Burrough

Tenants.

Rents. per Annum.

Tax on Lands.

Tax on Stock Lands and

Landlords.

Trade.

C. D.

20 li.

0\. 08. 04.

0\. 1. 8.

A. B. Esq E. F. J. K.

G. H.

50.

1\. 00. 10.

0\. 4. 2.

L. M.

80.

1\. 13. 04.

0\. 6. 8.

Abatement to be allowed to the Landlord, in respect of the Water, In-lets, and
other Charges imposed on the said Lands.

[[Page 329]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=169)

### 54.3. A Warrant to the Collectors of the Tax upon the Royal Aid.

Kent ss. BY virtue of an Act of this present Parliament, intituled, An Act for
granting a Royal Aid unto the King's Majesty of 2477500 li. to be raised,
levied, and paid in the space of three years. These are to will and require
you, and every of you, whose names are hereunder written, to collect all and
every the summs of money mentioned in the Assess­ment hereunto annexed, so
that you duly pay the summ (which you are hereby required so to doe) unto A.
B. of, &c. whom we have no­minated and appointed head Collector of the moneys
aforesaid, at his house in A. aforesaid, in manner following, (that is to say)
one Moiety thereof (being the second quarterly payment of the said three years
Assessment) on or before the twentieth day of, &c. next ensuing, and the other
Moiety thereof, (being the third quarterly payment of the said three years
Assessment) on or before the twentieth day of October then next following▪ And
in  [...]ase any person or persons shall neglect or re­  [...]se to pay any
summ of money whereat he is in the said Assessment rated or assessed, then
you, and every of you, are hereby authorized and required to levy the summ
assessed by Di­stress and Sale of the Goods of such person or persons so
refusing or neglecting to pay, de­ducting the summ assessed and reasonable
char­ges of Distraining; and you shall restore the e­ver plus to the Owner
thereof. Yo [...], and every of [[Page
330]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=170) you, are
hereby likewise authorized to break open in the day time any House, Trunk,
Chest, Box, or other thing where any such Goods are, and to call to your
assistance the Constable, Tithing-man, and Headburrough within the place where
any such refusal, neglect, or re­sistance shall be made, which said Officers
are by the said Act required to be aiding and assist­ing in the premisses, as
they will answer the contrary at their perils. And in case any per­son or
persons shall refuse or neglect to pay his or their Assessment, and convey his
or their Goods, or other personal Estate, where­by the summ of money so
assessed cannot be levied according to the said Act, that then you certifie to
us, or any two of us, the name or names of such person or persons so refusing,
or neglecting, or conveying as aforesaid. To the end such proceedings may be
had there­upon against him, her, or them, as by the said Act is directed. And
in case any Lands or Houses within your Hundred shall lie unoc­cupied, and no
Distress can be found on the same, by reason whereof your said Hundred is
forced to pay and make good the Tax asses­sed upon such Lands lying
unoccupied, Then you, and every of you, are hereby authorized and required, at
any time after, with the assi­stance of the Constable or Tithing-man within
your Hundred for the time being, to enter and distrain upon the said Lands and
Houses when there shall be any Distress thereupon to be found, and the
Distress and Distresses (being the proper Goods of the Owner, or any claim­ing
any Estate, Interest, or Profit under him) if not redeemed within fourteen
days, by pay­men [...] of the Tax and Charges of Distraining, to sell,
rendring the over-plus to the Owner or [[Page
331]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=170) Owners of such
Distress. And you are hereby enjoyned to distribute the money raised by the
Sale proportionably to the parties who contri­buted to the Tax of the said
unoccupied Lands, you, and every of you, are hereby further enjoyned, that
where any Wood-land shall be Assessed and no Distress can be had, that in such
case, with the assistance of the Constable, Headburrough, or Tithing-man, you
cut and sell to any person or persons so much of the Woods growing on the said
Wood-lands as will pay the Assessment or As­sessments so behind and unpaid,
and the charge incident thereunto. And the person or persons and his Assigns,
to whom such Woods shall be sold, are by the said Act authorized to fell, cut
down, dispose, and carry away the same to his own use, rendring the over-plus
(if any be) to the Owner thereof. You, and every of you, are hereby likewise
authorized, that where any Tax or Assessment within your said Hundred shall be
laid upon Tiths, Tolls, Pro­fits of Markets, Fairs, or Fisheries, or other
annual Profits not distreinable, in case the same shall not be paid within
fifteen days after such Assessment so charged, or laid, and demanded, That
then you, or any of you, seize, take and sell so much of the said Tithes,
Tolls, and other Profits so Charged as shall be suffidient for the levying of
the said Tax and Assessment, and all Charges occasioned by such non payment
thereof, rendering the over-plus to the Owner (if any be) of all which you,
nor any of you, are to fail upon such pains and penalties as by the said Act
may in such case be inflicted on you. And lastly, we do hereby declare unto
you, that upon your Collection of the whole summe appointed to be Collected by
you, and pay­ment [[Page
332]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=171) thereof as is
hereby appointed: you are to have▪ and receive for your pains in collec­ting
and paying the moneys one penny in the pound, which the said head Collector is
by us authorized, to pay unto you accordingly. Gi­ven under our hands and
seals at A. the, &c.

> To A. B. C. D. E. F. Collectors for the Hun­dred of A. in the said County.

### 54.4. A Warrant to levy 5 li. upon the Collectors for neglecting to
col­lect their Assessment.

To the Constable and Borsholders, &c.

Kent ss. WHereas complaint hath been made unto us this present day by A. B.
of, &c. high Collector of the second and third quarterly payments of the Royal
Aid granted to His Majesty, That the severall Persons whose names are
here­under written, being petty Collectors of the said two quarterly payments
within your said Hundred, have wilfully neglected and refu­sed to pay unto the
said A. B. the several summs of money charged upon them to collect and pay
unto the said high Collec­tor on the several days and times to them limited
and appointed for the payment of the same notwithstanding▪ several Warrants
have been issued out unto them to make payment thereof as they would avoid the
Penalties to be inflicted upon them by the [[Page
333]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=171) Law for their
non-payment thereof. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command
you, that you, some or one of you, do immediately upon receipt hereof levy
upon the several Persons whose names are hereunder written upon each of them
the summ of 5 li. for such his neglect and refusal as aforesaid by way of
distress and sale of his Goods, according to the Act of Parliament in that
case made and provided. Hereof fail not at your perils. And for so doing this
shall  [...] your suffi­cient Warrant. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

## 55\. Testimonials.

### 55.1. A Testimonial for conveying a Rogue who hath been punished.

A. B. a sturdy Vagrant Beggar (of middle personage, Black haired, having a
Scar in the right Cheek) aged about 30 years, was this 10. day of Novemb. in
the 32 year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second over
England, &c. openly whipped at T. in the said County (according to Law)39
Eliz. cap. 4. 1 Iustice and Consta­ble hands and s [...]als. But by Lamb.
Iu­stice, p. 206. 1 Iustice sufficient. for a wandring Rogue, and is assigned
to pass forthwith from Parish to Parish by the Officers thereof the next
streight way to R. in the [[Page
334]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=172) County of H.
where (as he confesseth he was born (or dwelled last by one whole year, &c.)
if the case be such,) and he is limited to be at R. aforesaid within twelve
days now next ensuing at his peril. Given at T. under the hand and seal of R.
K. Esquire, one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of the said County of
Kent, and R. H. the Constable of T. aforesaid.

### 55.2. A Testimonial for one that hath suffered shipwreck.

R. K. of M. in the County of Kent Esq one of His Majestie's Iustices, &c. To
all Constables, Borsholders, &c.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as the Bearer hereof A. B. aged about, &c. having lately
been at Sea in a Ship called, &c. hath suffered Shipwreck and got to land at
G. in the1 Iustice dwelling near the place of his landing. said County of K.
upon the 10. day of March last past (as I am credibly informed as well by the
report of the said A. B. as also by the testimo­ny of divers of the
Inhabitants of G. afore­said;) and for that the said A. B. hath not
where­withall to relieve himself in his travel home­wards to T. in the County
of S. where he saith he was born (or hath a dwelling, &c.) These are therefore
to pray you, and every of you, to whom these Presents shall come, not to
molest or trouble the said A. B. in his travel to T. afore­said, where he is
limited to be within 20 days next after the date hereof, but to desire you
[[Page 335]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=172) rather
to relieve him in his necessity, as to you shall seem meet; and withall you
the Consta­bles and Borsholders of every Town where he shall come to help him
with Lodging in con­venient time, so that he travel the direct way to T.
aforesaid, not doing any thing contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm. Gi­ven under my hand, &c.

The like may serve (with alterations) for a poor Souldier, &c.

## 56\. Tiling.

### 56.1. A Deputation for Tile-searchers.

Kent ss. WE whose names are hereun­to17 Ed. 4\. cap. 4\. 2 Iustices. To pay
the Searchers for every 1000 of Plain-tiles 1 d. Every 100 of Roof-tiles ob.
and for every 100 of Corner or Gutter­tiles q. written, His Majestie's
Justices of the Peace of the said County, do (according to the form of the
Statute in that behalf made in the seventeenth year of the Reign of the late
King Edward the Fourth) ordain, assign and depute A. B. of C. and D. E. and
either of them (during our wills and pleasures) to search and examine the
digging, casting, turning and ordering of Earth for all Plain-tile, Roof-tile,
Corner-tile, and Gutter-tile, to be made [within the Di­vision of the seven
Hundreds] in the County aforesaid; and to search and examine all the Tiles
aforesaid, that the same be good, reaso­nable, [[Page
336]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=173) and very
sufficient, and thoroughly whited and anealed, and do contain such length,
breadth, thickness and deepness as by the said Act is required; and generally
to doe and perform all such other things as to the Office of Searchers do (by
virtue of the said Act) appertain; and to receive and have such Fees and
Salaries for their and either of their labour in the premisses as by the said
Act is appointed. Given under our hands and seals at, &c.

## 57\. Trespass.

### 57.1. A Warrant upon Hedg-breaking, &c. where the Party's not able.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it was this pre­sent43 Eliz. cap. 7\. 1 Iustice where
the Offence is committed, or the Par­ty appre­hended. Confession, or 1
Wit­ness. Iustice not to act here­in in his own case. day duly proved before
me, That A. B. hath lately unlawfully (a) of C. D. at H. (contrary to the form
of the Statute in that case made and provi­ded.) And forasmuch as upon hearing
and determining of the said matter, I have or­dered and appointed, That the
said A. B. should forthwith give and pay unto the said C. D. &c. of lawfull
money of England, in and for recompence and satisfaction for his damages which
he hath sustained by oc­casion of the Trespass aforesaid; And foras­much as
the said A. B. is thought in my [[Page
337]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=173) discretion not
able nor sufficient to make such recompence or satisfaction as aforesaid:
These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or
one of you, do whip the said A. B. for the Offence aforesaid. Hereof fail not
at your perils. Gi­ven under my hand and seal at, &c.

### 57.2. A Warrant or Order to pay where he is able.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it was this pre­sent43 Eliz. cap. 7. 1 Iustice, as
before. day duly proved before me, That A. B. hath lately unlawfully (a) of C.
D. at H. (contrary to the form of the Statute made and provided:) Now upon
hearing and determining of the said matter, I do order and appoint, That the
said A. B. shall within ten days now next ensuing give and pay unto the said
C. D. &c. of lawfull money of England, in and for re­compence and satisfaction
for his damages which he hath sustained by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid.
Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

[[Page 338]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=174)

### 57.3. To whip where not paid accor­ding to Order.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hun­dred of K. and to every of them.

Kent ss. WHereas upon the 10. dayAs before. of Iune it was duly pro­ved before
me, That A. B. had then lately unlawfully a of C. D. at H. (contrary to the
form of the Statute in that case made and provided:) And whereas upon hearing
and determining of the said mat­ter, I did then order and appoint, That the
said A. B. should within, &c. then next ensuing, give and pay unto the said C.
D. &c. of lawfull money of England, in and for re­compence and satisfaction
for his damage which he hath sustained by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid;
And forasmuch as it doth now sufficiently appear unto me, that the said A. B.
hath not hitherto given or paid unto the said D. the aforesaid, &c. accor­ding
to my said order and appointment: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name)
[...]o command you, that you, some or one of you, do whip the said A. B. for
the Of­fence aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your pe­rils. Given under my hand
and seal at, &c.

[[Page 339]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=174)

### 57.4. A Warrant from the Justices at a Quarter-sessions for apprehending
one indicted for a Trespass.

To all Constables, Headboroughs, and all other His Majestie's Officers and
Ministers within the County of K. and to every of them whom it may concern.

Kent ss. THese are to will and require you, and (in His Majestie's name)
straightly to charge and command you forthwith upon receipt hereof, to bring
[[Page 340]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=175) before
us, and other His Majestie's Justices of the Peace of this County to the
Sessions of Peace holden for the County of K. at A. in the said County, the
Body of T. R. &c. standing indicted for a Trespass (if the Court there be then
sitting,) or if not, before some other of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace
for the said County, then and there to answer the same, and all such mat­ters
as on His Majestie's behalf shall be ob­jected against him; and if he cannot
be taken during this present Sessions, that then so soon after as he shall be
taken you bring, or cause to be brought before us, or some other of His
Majestie's Justices of the Peace of this County to find sufficient Sureties
for his personal appearance at the next Sessions of Peace to be holden for the
said County to answer as aforesaid, and farther to be dealt withall according
to Justice. Hereof you are not to fail at your perils. Dated in open Sessions
at A. aforesaid, the one and twentieth day of April, &c. Annoque Dom. 1680.

[[Page 341]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=175)

## 58\. Uagrants.

### 58.1. A Warrant for apprehending Beg­gars and other Idle persons.

To the Constable and Headboroughs, and others His Majestie's Officers of any
the Parishes in the said County, and to all others whom this doth or may
concern.

M [...]dd. ss. WHereas the Suburbs of Lon­don 2 Iustices. and Places adjacent
are now infected with many Rogues, Vaga­bonds and Sturdy Beggars, and other
Idle persons that can give no good accompt of their life and conversation, to
the danger of the Inhabitants, and contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm. These are there­fore (in His Majestie's name) straightly to charge and
command you, and every of you, That at all convenient times hereafter taking
with you a convenient aid and assistance, you make diligent search in the
several Places afore­said, and in all other suspected Places within any the
Parishes in the said County for all such Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars,
and other suspected and Idle persons; And them to apprehend and bring before
us, or one of us to be examined and dealt with according to Law. Hereof fail
not, &c. Given under our hands, &c.

[[Page 342]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=176)

### 58.2. A Testimonial or Pass for him to the1 Iac. c. 7. 39 Eliz. cap. 4. 14
Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Iustice. place of his Birth.

Kent ss. A. B. a Vagrant, middle sta­ture, aged about 30 years, was this
present day taken Taken  [...]gging Va­  [...]nt, wan­dring, or misordering
himself,  [...]pped naked from the middle upwards, and be open­ly whipped
untill his  [...] be  [...]oudy. at B. in the County aforesaid, and then and
there by my appointment punished (according to the form of the Statute in that
case provi­ded;) And he is to be conveyed from Pa­rish to Parish by the
Officers of every of the same the next straightway to the Pa­rish of T. where
(as he confesseth) he was born (there to put himself to labour as he ought to
doe;) and he is limited to pass thither within, &c. days now next ensuing, at
his peril. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

This must be signed by the Iustice and Minister, Constable, &c. or two of
them.

### 58.3. The like where the Place of his Birth is not known.

Kent ss. A. B. a Vagrant, of low sta­ture, aged about 20 years, was this
present day taken As  [...]ovesaid. at T. in the County aforesaid, and then
and there by my appointment punished (according to the form of the Statute in
that case provided;) [[Page
343]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=176) And for that
the Parish where he was born is not known, (though it be demanded of him,) And
for that also he did last dwell before the same punishment by the space of one
whole year in the Parish of T. &c. (as he confesseth:) He is therefore to be
con­veyed from Parish to Parish by the Officers of every of the same the next
straight way to the said Parish of T. there to put him­self to labour (as he
ought to doe;) And he is limited to pass thither within, &c. days now next
ensuing, at his peril. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

### 58.4. The like where neither the Place of his Birth, nor last abode is
known.

Kent ss. A. B. a Vagrant, of middle sta­ture, aged about 40 years, was this
present day taken As abovesaid. at T. in the said County, and then and there
by my ap­pointment punished (according to the form of the Statute in that case
provided;) And for that neither the Parish where he was born, nor the Parish
where he did last dwell before the said punishment by the space of one whole
year, is known (though both were by me demanded of him:), He is therefore to
be conveyed from Parish to Parish by the Officers of every of the same the
next straight way to the Parish of B. in the, &c. (through which he last
passed without punishment, as he saith,) and he is to be from thence conveyed
by the Officers of the said Parish (according to the form of the Statute in
[[Page 344]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=177) that
case made and provided,) and is limi­ted to pass thither within, &c. days now
next ensuing, at his peril. Given under my hand and seal at, &c.

### 58.5. The like where the Vagrant is appre­hended in a general privy
Search.

Kent ss. A. B. a Vagabond, of small sta­ture, [...] Iac. c. 4. 2 Iustices.
aged about 20 years: was sound and apprehended at T. in the said County, in a
general privy Search by our command made (according to the form of the Statute
in that case made and provided) and brought before us this present day at our
Assembly at V. and by our appointment punished according to Law: And he is to
be conveyed from Parish to Parish, &c. [as be­fore in one of the three
precedent Warrants, accor­ding to the Case.]

### 58.6. To pay two shillings for apprehen­ding a Vagrant.

To the, &c. of A. in the Parish of B. in the County aforesaid.14 Car. 2. cap.
12. 1 Iustice.

Kent ss. WHereas A. B. did lately ap­prehend and bring unto me C. D. Rogue,
Vagrant, or sturdy Beggar. which did pass through your [[Page
345]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=177) aforesaid, &c.
in the Parish aforesaid unap­prehended: These are therefore (in His
Ma­jestie's name) to will and require you forth­with to pay to the aforesaid
A. B. 2 s. for each. 2 s. for his said apprehension of the C. D. afore­said
(according to the form of the Statute in that case lately made.) Hereof fail
not at your peril. Given under our hand and seal at, &c.

### 58.7. Upon not payment of the same.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the aforesaid County,
and to every of them.

Kent ss. WHereas A. D. did lately ap­prehend14 Car.  [...]. cap. 12. 2
Iustices. The forfei­ture is by 1 Iac. c.  [...]. The power to levy it is by
39 Eliz. cap. 4. and bring unto T. H. one of His Majestie's Justices of the
Peace of the said County, C. D. which did pass through the, &c. in the Parish
of T. in the County aforesaid, un-apprehended; of which said place of
apprehension A. B. was then Bors­holder or Constable. And thereupon the
aforesaid Ju­stice did (according to the form of the Sta­tute in that behalf
made) require the said A. B. to pay to the aforesaid A. D. two shil­lings for
his said apprehension of the aforesaid C. D. Nevertheless the said A. B. hath
ne­glected to pay the same: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy by
Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. ten shil­lings
by him forfeited and lost for not  [...] [[Page
346]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=178) the aforesaid
C. D. to be punished and con­victed (according to the form of the Statute in
that behalf made,) And that out of the moneys by you so levied, you do pay to
the said A. D. the aforesaid 2 s. and, &c. more which we think fit to allow
unto him for loss of his time, and that you do imploy and dispose of the
residue of the said 10 s. to the relief of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, &c.

### 58.8. A Certificate of apprehending a Va­grant in the confines of ano­ther
County.

To A. B. one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace of the said County of C.

Kent ss. THese are to certify you, That14 Car. 2. cap. 12.  [...] Iustice. C.
D. Rogue, Vagrant, or sturdy Beggar. having passed through the Parish of T. in
the said Coun­ty of C. un-apprehended, was upon the se­cond day of Iune
apprehended at T. in the said County of C. in the confines of the County
aforesaid, by R. W. Given under my hand the, &c.

[[Page 347]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=178)

### 58.9. To pay the two shillings thereupon.

To, &c. of A. in the Parish of B. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas I have received a14 Car.  [...]. cap.  [...]2\. 1 Iustice.
Certificate under the hands of A. B. one of His Majestie's Justices of the
Peace for the County of K. That C. D. Rogue, Vagrant, or sturdy Beg­gar.
having passed through the Parish of T. in the said County of C. un-
apprehended, was upon the second day of Iune apprehen­ded at T. in the said
County of C. in the confines of the County aforesaid by R. W. which said
Parish of T. was then in your Hun­dred or Bo­rough. 2 s. for each. These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and require you forthwith to pay to
the aforesaid R. W. 2 s. for his said apprehension of the aforesaid C. D.
(ac­cording to the form of the Statute in that case lately made.) Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, &c.

### 58.10. Upon non-payment of the same.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. WHereas I lately received a14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Iustice. Certificate
under the hand of A. D. one of His Majestie's Justices of [[Page
348]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=179) the Peace of
the County of K. That C. D. having passed through the Parish of, &c. in the
said County of K. un-apprehended was apprehended at T. in the said County of
K. in the confines of the County aforesaid, by R. W. of which said Parish A.
B. of C. was then Con­stable or Borsholder. And whereas I did (according to
the form of the Statute in that behalf lately made) by warrant under my hand
and seal require the said A. B. to pay the aforesaid R. W. two shillings for
his said apprehension of the aforesaid C. D. (according to the Sta­tute
aforesaid) nevertheless the said A. B. hath neglected to pay the same: These
are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to require you, and every of you, that
you, some or one of you, do levy by Distress and Sale of the Goods and
Chattels of the said A. B. ten shillings by him forfeited and lost by not
causing the aforesaid C. D. to be punished and conveyedThe forfei­ture and
power to le­vy is by 39 Eliz. cap. 4. (according to the form of the Statute in
that behalf made) And that (out of the moneys you have so levied) you do pay
to the said R. W. the aforesaid 2 s. and, &c. more which we think fit to allow
him for his expences and loss of time; and that you do imploy and dispose of
the residue of the said 10 s. to the relief of the Poor of the said Parish of
T. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, &c.

[[Page 349]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=179)

## 59\. Waggons and Carts.

### 59.1. An Affidavit to be made before a War­rant granted, for destreining
for 40 s. forfeited for drawing with six Horses in length in a Team, Cart, or
Waggon.

K. ss. G. R. of the Parish of, &c. in the22 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Iustice. 1
Witness. County of, &c. Upholster, ma­king Oath, That I. D. did upon the
fourth day of this instant Febr. travel his Waggon through the common High-way
in the said Parish of, &c. drawn with six Horses at length, con­trary to an
Act of Parliament made in the 22. year of His now Majestie's Reign, intituled,
An additional Act for the better repairing of the High-ways and Bridges. And
that the Wag­gon was not imployed in and about Husban­dry, and managing of
Lands, nor in the car­rying of Hay, Straw, Corn unthrasht, Coal, Chalk, Timber
for Shipping, Materials for building, Stones or such Ammunition or Ar­tillery
as shall be for His Majestie's service.

G. R.

Iurat' 15 Feb. 1680.

[[Page 350]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=180)

### 59.2. A Warrant to destrain upon such as travel with a Waggon or Cart,
drawn with six Horses at length.

To the Constables, Surveyors of the High-ways, and other the Officers of the
Parish of K. whom these may concern.

Kent ss. WHereas G. R. of the Parish of, &c. in the County of, &c. Yeoman,
hath this present tenth day of Feb. made Oath before me, one of His
Ma­jestie's Justices of the Peace for the County aforesaid, that M. D. of the
said Parish of K. did upon the fourth day of this instant Feb. travel with his
Waggon through the Parish of, &c. in the said County, drawn with six Horses at
length (contrary to the Statute in that case made and provided,) for which
of­fence he hath forfeited the summ of 40 s. These are therefore to authorize,
and (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, and every of you,
forthwith to levy the said summ of 40 s. upon the Goods and Chattels of the
said M. D. rendring to him the over­plus, if any be, (reasonable Charges of
De­straining first deducted.) And the same mo­nies so by you levied, you are
to pay as fol­loweth, viz. one Third part to the Surveyors of the High-ways
within your said Parish, to be imployed in the repairs of the said High­ways,
one other Third part you are to pay to the Overseers of the Poor within your
said [[Page 351]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=180)
Parish, to be to the use of the Poor there; and the other Third part you are
to pay to the said G. R. for discovering the same. Hereof fail not. Given
under my hand and seal this, &c.

## 60\. Watch and Ward.

### 60.1. A Warrant to the High Constable for putting in Execution the
Sta­tute of 13 Car. 2\. (Renting the Statute,) and for keeping good Watches
(upon His Majestie's go­ing to Oxford.)

To A. B. one of the High Constables of the Hun­dred of C. in the County of M.

M. ss. WHereas His Majesty having13 Car. 2. cap. 1. commanded us whose names
are hereunder written, and others, His Ma­jestie's Justices of the Peace of
the County of Middlesex, to attend him in Council the 25. day of February last
past, did by Himself, and the Right Honourable the Lord President, ac­quaint
us, That His Majesty was in a short time to remove His Court to Oxford, and
did require and command us to use our utmost en­deavours, with care and
industry, to preserve the Peace of this important County, during His
Majestie's absence, and in particular to [[Page
352]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=181) put in
Execution the Statute made in the 13. year of His now Majestie's Reign, For
the pre­servation of His Majestie's Sacred Person, (whom God preserve with
long life) in and by which said Statu [...]e it is enacted, That if any person
or persons whatsoever during the natural Life of our most gracious Sovereign
Lord the King that now is, shall within this Realm, or without, compass,
imagine, invent, devise, or intend death or destruction, or any bodily harm
tending to death or destruction, maim or wounding, impri­sonment or restraint
of the Person of the same our Sovereign Lord the King, or to deprive or
de­pose him from the Stile, Honour, or Kingly Name of the Imperial Crown of
this Realm, or of any other His Majestie's Dominions or Countries, or to levy
War against His Majesty within this Realm, or without, or to move or stir any
Fo­reigner or Stranger with force to invade this Realm, or any other His
Majestie's Dominions or Countries, being under His Majestie's Obeysance, and
such compassings, imaginings, inventions, de­vices or intentions, or any of
them shall express, utter, or declare, by any Printing, Writing, Preaching, or
malicious and advised Speaking, Every such Person and Persons so as aforesaid
offen­ding, shall be deemed, declared, and adjudged to be Traytors, and shall
suffer pains of Death, and also lose and forfeit as in cases of High Treason.
And that if any Person or Persons at any time, during His Majestie's Life,
shall maliciously and advisedly publish or affirm the King to be an Heretick,
or a Papist, or that he endeavours to introduce Popery, or shall maliciously
and advised­ly, by Writing, Printing, Preaching, or other Speaking, express,
publish, utter, or declare any words, sentences, or other thing or things, to
in­cite or stir up the people to hatred or dislike of [[Page
353]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=181) the Person of
His Majesty, or the established Go­vernment, Then every such person and
persons, be­ing thereof Legally convicted, shall be disabled to have, enjoy,
or exercise any Place, Office, or Pro­motion Ecclesiastical, or Civil, or
Military, or any other Imployment in Church or State, and shall be likewise
liable to such further and other punishments as by the Laws or Statutes of
this Realm may be inflicted in such Cases. And we having taken into
consideration His Majestie's most gracious Speech then made unto us, and his
commands laid upon us, Do therefore hereby will and require, and strickly
charge and com­mand, That you do forthwith issue forth your Warrants to the
several petty Constables with­in your Division, thereby commanding them, that
they do with their utmost diligence and endeavours, apprehend and secure all
persons so as aforesaid offending against the said Sta­tute, and bring such
person or persons before us the said Justices, at our petty Sessions to be
held weekly on Tuesday in every week, at or in A. &c. in the said County of
Mid. by nine of the clock in the forenoon of the said days, to the intent they
may be proceeded against according to Law and Justice. And we do hereby will
and require you, that you do sur­vey the Watches that are kept by the petty
Constables in your Division, and order them the said petty Constables, that
they do within their respective limits for the future keep their Watches from
nine a clock at night untill six in the morning, to the intent that the King's
Peace may be the better secured. And we hereby further will and require you,
that you do in your said Warrants command the said petty Constables, that they
do for the future take an Account in writing of all the names of [[Page
354]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=182) those persons
they Summon to be upon the Watch, and that they take particular notice of all
and every person that shall after such Summons given make default, and not
appear himself, or send some able and fit person to watch in his stead. And
that they bring the said Account fairly written to us, who shall be assembled
at the said petty Sessions, to the intent they may be proceeded against
accord­ing to Law. And hereof you and the said petty Constables are not to
fail at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the fourth day of March,
in the year of our Lord, 1680. and in the 33. year of the Reign of our
Sove­reign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, &c.

### 60.2. Another Warrant upon the same Statute.

To all Constables and other His Majestie's Officers whom these may concern
within the Parish of, &c.

M. ss. THese are (in His Majestie's name)13 Car. 2. cap. 1. to will and
require you to take notice of, and to apprehend and bring before us at our
weekly Meetings, all manner of per­sons that shall maliciously and advisedly
publish or affirm the King to be an Heretick, or a Pa­pist, or that he
endeavours to introduce Po­pery, or that shall maliciously and advisedly by
Writing, Printing, Preaching, or other Speaking, express, utter, or declare
any words, [[Page
355]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=182) sentence, or
other thing or things, to make or stirr up the People to hatred of the person
of His Majesty, or the established Government, to be dealt with according to
Law. And fur­ther from time to time to appoint and settle sufficient Watches,
(to meet at nine at night, and not to depart till six in the morning, a­mongst
whom a competent number of good House-keepers are alwaies to be present.) And
you, and every of you, are to bring us the Names and Conditions of your
respective Wat­ches at our said weekly Meetings, that the per­formance of your
Duties herein may be the bet­ter known and taken notice of, His Majesty (in
Council) having given us strict command herein. You are likewise to give us an
Ac­count of all such as Arm themselves beyond their Qualities, and to use your
utmost endea­vours, by all the ways imaginable, to preserve His Majestie's
Peace during his absence from this City. Dated this eighth day of March, 1680.

### 60.3. A Warrant for Watch and Ward, and to apprehend idle persons.

To the High Constable of the Hundred of A. and the petty Constables, &c.
within the said Hun­dred.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as information hath2 Iustices. 13 Ed. 1. cap. 4. Watch and
Ward to be kept in eve­ry Town, from Mi­chaelmas­day to As­cension­day. been
given unto us, that very many suspicious idle persons do wander about the
Country without Controlment or Question, [[Page
356]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=183) for the better
prevention thereof for the fu­ture, and of Robberies, and other Misdemea­nours
often occasioned thereby. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to
charge and command you, and every of you, to look to your Offices herein, and
to see that you keep and cause Watches to be duly kept in all the Parishes and
places within your said Hun­dred of A. by able and well-armed men every night,
and Ward by day from Sun to Sun, and command them that they do apprehend all
such Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, and other wandring and idle suspicious
persons, as you shall apprehend by day or night, and con­ceive to be more than
ordinary dangerous, and bring them before us or some other of His Majestie's
Justices of the said County to be examined and dealt with according to Law.
And all persons whatsoever are hereby com­manded to be aiding, assisting, and
obedient to you herein. Hereof fail not. Given under our hands, &c.

### 60.4. A Warrant by order of Quarter-Sessions to set Watch and Ward.

To the High Constable of the Hundred of A. and the petty Constables and
Borsholders within the same Hundred.

K. ss. WHereas there hath been of late several Robberies, Felonies, and
Burglaries committed within this County, it was ordered at the last general
Quarter-Sessions [[Page
357]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=183) of the Peace
holden for the said County at M. That for the prevention thereof for the
future, you do from henceforth cause Watching and Warding to be continued,
duly set, and kept in all and every usual place and places within your
Hundred, by honest and able men within your several Precincts and Di­visions,
and that you do therein apprehend all and every suspicious person and persons,
and bring them before us, or some or one of us, or some other of His
Majestie's Justices of the Peace of, &c. within the said County, to the end
he, she, or they may be examined, as also proceeded against according to the
Law. And you are further required to give in to us, or some other Justice of
the Peace of the said County, weekly an Account of your Service. And hereof
you nor any of you are to fail, as you will answer the contrary at your
perils. Given, &c.

[[Page 358]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=184)

## 61\. Weights and Measures.

### 61.1. A Warrant to warn in all Trades­men, and others, to have their
Weights and Measures examined by the Standard.

To the Borsholder of the Burrough of F.

Kent ss. THese are to will and require you,2 Iustices, 1 of the Quorum may (by
Examina­tion or En­quiry) hear and deter­mine the faults of head Offi­cers in
Ci­ties, Bur­roughs and Market-Towns, that do not twice yearly view and
ex­amine Weights and Mea­sures, and Break and Burn the Defec­tive. As also the
de­faults of Buyers and Sellers by false Weights and Measures, and may Break
and Burn the Defective Weights and Measures, and Fine the Of­fenders at their
discretion, and make process against them as if they were indicted of trespass
against the Peace. 11 H. 7. c. 4\. & 12 H. 7. c. 5. and (in His Majestie's
name) to charge and command you, that you warn all persons inhabiting within
your said Bur­rough, which have or use any Weights or Mea­sures to be by me
tried and examined by His Majestie's Standard, at the late Market place near
H. in the County of K. on Thursday the 28. day of this instant Month of
August, by eight of the clock in the forenoon of the same day. And that you
also warn to be at the time and place aforesaid fifteen sufficient men of your
said Burrough, that they, and every of them, personally appear before me to
doe and perform such things as for His Majestie's ser­vice shall be then and
there enjoyned them: And that you your self be there also personally present
with this Precept, and have there the names of all Clothi [...]rs, Corn-
Masters, Far­mers, Vintners, Inn-keepers, Alehouse-keepers, Millers, Bakers,
Butchers, Chandlers, Mercers, Grocers, Weavers, Drapers, Tailors, Tanners,
Land-measurers, Smiths, Glovers, Malsters, [[Page
359]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=184) and of all
other Artificers, Tradesmen, and other persons whatsoever within your said
Bur­rough, having or using any Weights or Mea­sures whatsoever. Hereof fail
not at your peril. Given under my hand and the seal of the said Mannor the,
&c.

### 61.2. The Clerk of the Market's Warrant.

To all and every of the Constables of the Parish of A. &c.

Kent ss. THese are in the King's Majestie'sA. B. Clerk of the Mar­ket. name,
&c. to will and require you, and every of you, upon sight hereof, to summon
and cause the several Inhabitants with­in your respective Wards that buy and
sell by Weight or Measure to have their respective Weights and Measures (as
well Yards and Ells, as others used by them) to be tried and examined before
me on Monday the first day of September next, by the hour of eight in the
forenoon at the George Inn in A. and that at the said time and place you
deliver unto me in writing the Christian-name and Sir-name of every such
Inhabitant with their respective Callings. Whereof you and every of you are
not to fail, &c. Dated under my hand and seal the 23. day of August, Anno Dom.
1680\. and in the 32 year of His now Majestie's Reign.

[[Page 360]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=185)

## 62\. Witnesses.

### 62.1. A Warrant for Witnesses touching Felony.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. in the said County, and
to every of them.

K.. ss WHereas I have received infor­mation, That A. B. was lately robbed at
D. in the County aforesaid; And whereas I am informed that E. F. of, &c. can
give information (on His Majestie's be­half) touching proving the Robbery
afore­said: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to command you, that
you, some or one of you, do cause the said E. F. forthwith to come before me,
to give such information and evidence (as he knoweth) touching the said
Robbery, to the end that I may farther proceed touching the same as to Justice
doth appertain. Given under my hand and seal at H. in the County aforesaid,
the first day of March 1679\. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Se­cundi 3 [...].

[[Page 361]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=185)

### 62.2. For a Witness to appear and give Evidence at the Sessions.

To the Constable, &c.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of, &c. Barber, is thought to be a fit and
necessa­ry Witness to be examined on His Majesties behalf. These are therefore
(in His Majestie's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do
forthwith warn him the said A. B. personally to appear before the Justices of
the Peace at the next Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County at H.
then and there to testifie his knowledge on the be­half of His said Majesty,
to and upon such mat­ters as he shall be then and there examined of. Hereof
fail not, &c.

[[Page 362]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=186)

## 63\. Wood.

### 63.1. A Warrant against one that stole Wood, &c.

To the Constable and Borsholders of T. &c.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto me14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Iustice. by the
confession of A. B. of your said Town of T. That he the said A. B. hath
late­ly unlawfully cut down certain Sticks of Wood within your said Parish
belonging to E. F. of your said Town, Gent. contrary to the form of the
Statute in that case made and provided. And whereas it further appeareth unto
me upon Oath, that the said Sticks of Wood were worth to be sold five
shillings. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) straitly to charge and
command you, and every of you, that in case the said A. B. do not forthwith
pay unto the said E. F. the said summ of five shillings, that then you do
immediately cause the said A. B. to be publickly whipped about the said Town
of T. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under, &c.

[[Page 363]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=186)

### 63.2. To make a general Warrant to search for stoln Wood, &c.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as it is observed in these15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Iustice. parts
of the said County, That Woods, Underwoods, Poles, Young-trees, Bark or Bast
of Trees, Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Rails, Hedge-wood, Broom, and Furze,
are unlawfully cut, stoln, spoiled and taken away from the lawfull Owners of
the same, (contrary to an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act for
the punishment of unlawfull cutting, or stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Un
­der-wood, and destroyers of young Timber-trees:) These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name) to charge and command you, and every of you, that you do
(with all convenient speed) enter into and search the Houses, Out-houses,
Yards, Gardens, or other places belonging to the houses, (within the said
Hundred,) of all and every person or persons which you shall suspect to have
any kind of such Wood, Un­der-wood, Poles, or Young-trees, or Bark or Bast of
any Trees; or any such Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or Hedge-wood,
Broom, or Furze: And wheresoever you shall find any such, to apprehend or
cause to be apprehended all and every person and persons suspected for the
cutting or taking of the same, and them and every of them, in whose houses or
other [[Page 364]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=187)
places belonging to them, any such Wood, Under-wood, Poles, or young Trees, or
Bark or Bast of any Trees; or any Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or
Hedge-wood, Broom, or Furze shall be found, to bring before me or some other
of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the said County, to be proceeded
against as by the said Act is directed. Hereof fail not, &c.

### 63.3. A Warrant to search for stoln Wood, &c. upon a particular Complaint.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint hath been15 Car. 2. ca [...]. 2. 1 Iustice.
made unto me by A. B. That Wood Under­wood, Poles, Young­trees, Bark or Bast
of Trees, Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Railes, Hedge­wood, Broom, or▪ Furze.
were within five days now last past ta­ken out of his Lands in L. in the said
County, and hath prayed such relief from me therein, as by an Act of
Parliament in such cases lately made I am authorized to give. These are
therefore (in His Majestie's name) to will and command you, and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do enter into and search the Houses, Out-houses,
Yards, Gardens, or other places belonging to the houses within the said
Hundred, of all and every person or persons which you shall suspect to have
any of the said Wood Under­wood, Poles, Young­trees, Bark or Bast of Trees,
Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Railes, Hedge­wood, Broom, or▪ Furze. And
wheresoever you shall find any such, to apprehend or cause to be appre­hended,
all and every person or persons sus­pected for the cutting and taking of the
same; And them, and every of them, as also those [[Page
365]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=187) in whose
houses or other places belonging to them, any such Wood Under­wood, Poles,
Young­trees, Bark or Bast of Trees, Gates, Stiles, Posts, Pales, Railes,
Hedge­wood, Broom, or▪ Furze. shall be found, to bring before me or some other
of His Majestie's Ju­stices of the Peace of the said County, to be proceeded
against as by the said Act is directed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under my hand and seal the, &c. 15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Iustice. Person
ap­prehen­ded by

### 63.4. An Order against a person apprehended with Bundles, &c. of Wood, &c.
to make satisfaction, &c. for the same to the Owner. The first Offence.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. was within five days last past appre­hended
by Officer or Inbabi­tant, ha­ving or car­rying, or any ways conveying a
Burthen or Bundle of having a Bundle of any kind of Wood, Un­der-wood, Poles,
young Trees, Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates, Rails, Pales, Posts,
Hedge­wood, Broom or Furze. and this day brought before me to give ac­count
how he came by the said any kind of Wood, Un­der-wood, Poles, young Trees,
Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates, Rails, Pales, Posts, Hedge­wood, Broom or
Furze. by the consent of the Owner (according to an Act of Parllam t [...]
lately made, intituled, An Act for the punishment of unlawfull cutting, or
stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Under-wood, and de­stroying of young Timber-
trees:) And for that he did not give such account thereof as did sa­tisfie me,
nor produce the party of whom he bought the same, or any other credible
Wit­ness to depose upon Oath such Sale thereof, whereby he is (according to
the said Act) by me deemed and adjudged as convict of the Of­fence of cutting
and spoiling of the said any kind of Wood, Un­der-wood, Poles, young Trees,
Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates, Rails, Pales, Posts, Hedge­wood, Broom or
Furze. within the meaning of another Act of Parlia­ment, which was made in the
third and fourth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, (intituled, An
Act to avoid and prevent Misde­meanours in idle and lewd persons:) And
foras­much as it appeareth unto me, That C. D. of, &c. was lawfull Owner of
the said any kind of Wood, Un­der-wood, Poles, young Trees, Bark or Bast of
any Trees, Gates, Rails, Pales, Posts, Hedge­wood, Broom or Furze. I do [[Page
366]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=188) therefore
(according to the said first before mentioned Act) order and appoint, That the
said A. B. shall within six days now next en­suing, give the said C. D. of
lawfull money of England for recompence and satisfaction for his damages, and
that the said A. B. shall (over and above) pay down presently unto the
Over­seers for the use of the Poor of the Parish of T. in the said County (whe
[...]e the said Offence was committed) Any summ not exceeding 10 S. of lawfull
money. Given un­der my hand and seal the, &c.

### 63.5. For not obeying that Order.

To the Constable and Borsholders o [...] the Hundred of A. in the said County,
and to e [...]ery of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for
the said County at B. in the Cou [...] afore­said.

K. ss. WHereas A. B. of C. within eight15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Iustice. days last
past, was apprehen­ded by Note: (a) as before having a Bundle of Note: (b) as
before and lately brought before me to give account how he came by the said
Note: (b) as before by the consent of the Owner, (according to an Act of
Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act for the punishment of unlawfull
cutting, or stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Under-wood, and destroyers of
young Timber­trees:) And for that he did not give such ac­count thereof as did
satisfie me, nor did pro­duce the party of whom he bought the same, or any
other credible Witness to depose upon Oath such Sale thereof, whereby he was
then [[Page 367]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=188)
(according to the said Act) by me deemed and adjudged as convict of the
Offence of cut­ting and spoiling of the said Note: (b) as before within the
meaning of one other Act of Parlia­ment, which was made in the third and
fourth year of the Reign of the late Queen Eliz. (in­tituled, An Act to avoid
and prevent divers Mis­demeanours in idle and lewd persons:) And whereas it
then appeared unto me, That C. D. of, &c. was Owner of the said Note: (b) as
before and I did therefore (according to the said first before mentioned Act)
order and appoint that the said A. B. should within six days then next
ensuing, give the said C. D. &c. o [...] lawfull money of England, for
recompence and satis­faction for his damages: And that the said A. B. should
(over and above) pay down then presently to the Overseers for the use of the
Poor of the Parish of T. in the said County, (where the said Offence was
committed,) & [...]. Note: (c) as before of like money: And foras­much as the
said A. B. did not (according to the said order and appointment) give or pay
the moneys aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge
and command you, the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you,
forthwith to convey the said A. B. to the aforesaid House of Correction, and
him there deliver to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.)
Commanding also you the said Keeper,  [...]o receive him into the said House,
and him there detain by the space of Any time not exceeding a month. days next
after such your receipt of him. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my
hand a [...]d seal the, &c.

Note, The Iustice may (if he think fit) not send the Offender to the House of
Correction, but [[Page
368]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=189) may make a
Warrant to the Constable, &c. to whip him, which may be made with the same
recitals as in the last precedent War­rant, till you come to these words,
These are therefore, &c. And then say thus.

These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you to whip
the said A. B. for the said Offence. Hereof fail not, &c.

Note, This is onely for the first Offence.

Now for the second Offence, thus.

### 63.6. A Mittimus to the House of Correc­tion for the second like Offence.

To the Constable and Borsholders▪ of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said
County aforesaid at B. in the County aforesaid.

Kent ss. WHereas, &c. As in the former [...]5 Car. 2.  [...]p. 2.  [...]
Iustice. Warrant, till you come to these words, And whereas it then appeared,
&c. In­stead of which you go on thus, And forasmuch as the said A. B. was once
before convict of the said Offence, and was thereof so convicted as before:
These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, the
said Constable and Borsholders, to convey the said A. B. to the aforesaid
House of Correction, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same,
(together with this Precept.) Commanding [[Page
369]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=189) also you, the
said Keeper, to receive him into the said House, and there keep him one month
to hard labour. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal
the, &c.

### 63.7. An Order against the Buyer of stoln Wood, &c. to pay treble the
va­lue thereof.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as upon examination15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Iustice. by me this
day, (according to an Act of Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act for the
punishment of unlawfull cutting, or stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Under-
wood, and destroyers of young Timber-trees:) it appeared unto me, That A. B.
of, &c. did within six days last past buy Any Burthens of Wood, or any Poles,
or sticks of Wood, Un­derwood, young Trees, Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates,
Stiles, Posts, Pales, Railes, Hedge-wood, Broom, or Furze. of E. F. (being a
per­son justly suspected to have unlawfully come by the same, and that the
same was unlawfully come by, and unlawfully taken from C. D. of, &c. and was
of the value of, &c. of law­full money of England:) I do therefore (ac­cording
to the said Act) award that the said A. B. shall pay to the said C. D. &c. of
lawfull money of England, (being the treble value of the Note: (a) aforesaid
Given under my hand and seal the, &c.

[[Page 370]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=190)

### 63.8. A Warrant to distrain for non-pay­ment of the Money according to the
foregoing Order.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.

K. ss. WHereas lately by examination by me taken (according to an Act of
Parliament lately made, intituled, An Act for the punishment of unlawfull
cutting, or 15 Car. 2. c [...]p. 2. 1 Iustice. stealing, or spoiling of Wood
and Under-wood, and destroyers of young Timber-trees:) it appeareth unto me,
That A. B. of, &c. did (within, &c. days last past) buy Note: (a) as before of
E. F. being a person justly suspected to have unlaw­fully come by the same,
and that the same was unlawfully come by, and unlawfully taken from C. D. of,
&c. and was of the value of, &c. of lawfull money of England: I did therefore
(ac­cording to the said Act) award that the said A. B. should pay to the said
C. D. &c. of law­full money of England, (being the treble value of the Note:
(a) as aforesaid And forasmuch as the said A. B. hath not paid to the said C.
D. the aforesaid, &c. (according to my said award:) These are therefore (in
His Majestie's name) to charge and command you to levy the  [...]aid, &c. by
Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A. B. (rendring to him the over-
plus) and after you have so levied the said, &c. forthwith to pay the same to
the said C. D. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my ha [...]d and
seal the, &c.

[[Page 371]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=190)

### 63.9. A Mittimus against the Buyer of stoln Wood, &c. for want of
Distress.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majestie's Gaol for the County
aforesaid at T. in the said County.

Kent ss. WHereas lately, &c. (as in 15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Iustice. the last
before mentioned Warrant, till you come to the words [Hereof fail not, &c.]
then go on thus.) And forasmuch as you the said Constable have returned unto
me, That in default of such Distress you cannot levy the aforesaid summ of,
&c. These are therefore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you the
said Constable and Bor­sholders, and every of you, to attach the said A. B.
and him safely convey to His Majestie's Gaol aforesaid, at his own charge, and
there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (toge­ther with this Precept.)
Commanding also you the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and
him there safely keep one month without Bail. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under my hand and seal the, &c.

[[Page 372]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=191)

## 64\. Woollen.

### 64.1. A Certificate for burying in Woollen.

#### 64.1.1.

K. ss. A. B. of the Parish of C. in the30 Car. 2. County of D. Gent. maketh
Oath, that E. F. of the Parish of G. in the County of H. Gent. lately deceased
was not put in, wrapt or wound up, or buried in any Shirt, Shift, Sheet or
Shroud made or mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or Silver, or other
then what is made of Sheeps Wool onely, nor in any Coffin lined or faced with
any Cloath, Stuff, or any other thing whatso­ever made or mingled with Flax,
Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or Silver, or any other material but Sheeps Wool onely.
Dated the 2. day of Iuly in the one and thirtieth year of the Reign o [...]
our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, &c. Annoque Dom. 1679.

Sealed and subscribed by us who were pre­sent Two Per­sons must witness the
Certifier's swearing. and Witnesses to the swearing of the aforesaid
Affidavit.

A. B. C. D.

#### 64.1.2.

[[Page 373]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=191)

I H. B. Esq (one of the King's Majestie's Justices of the Peace for the County
of D.) do hereby certify, That the day and year abovesaid the said A. B. came
before me, and made such Affidavit as is above specified, ac­cording to the
late Act of Parliament, (inti­tuled▪ An Act for burying in Woollen.) Wit­ness
my hand the day and year first above written.

H. B.

### 64.2. Or this.

I P. S. Esq (one of His Majestie's Justices of the Peace for this County) do
hereby cer­tify, That A. B. came before me this present second day of Iune
1679\. and made Oath, that C. D. deceased was not put in, wrapt or wound up,
or buried in any Shift, Shirt, Sheet, or Shroud made or mingled with Flax,
Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or Silver, or other then what is made of Sheeps Wool
onely, or in any Coffin lined or faced with any Cloath, Stuff, or any other
thing whatsoever made or mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or Silver,
or any other material but Sheeps Wool onely.

P. S.

Sealed and signed by us Witnesses that were present, and did hear this Oath
made.

A. B. C. D.

[[Page 374]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=192)

### 64.3. The Minister's Certificate for being buried in Woollen.

I A. B. Rectour of the Parish Church of C. 30 Car. 2. in the County aforesaid,
do hereby certi­fy, That the day and year abovesaid the said C. D. came before
me and made such Affida­vit as is above specified, according to a late Act of
Parliament, (intituled, An additional Act for burying in Woollen.) Witness my
hand the day and year first above written.

A. B.

### 64.4. A Minister's Certificate of not bring­ing an Affidavit of a Corp's
being buried in Woollen.

To the right Worshipfull R. K. Esq (one of His Majestie's Iustices of the
Peace for the County of Kent,) the humble Certificate of me A. B. Rectour of
the Parish Church of C. in the County aforesaid.

I Humbly certify, That C. D. was lately bu­ried13 Car. 2. in the Parish
aforesaid, viz. on the

As by the Register Book kept for the same Parish doth appear; And further,
That (according to the Act of Par­liam [...] in this behalf) I did forthwith
after the  [...] [...] the  [...] C D. cause notice  [...]o be given  [...] my
hand to the Church­warden [[Page
375]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=192) of the said
Parish to bring unto me the said A. B. an Affidavit concerning the bu­rial in
Woollen of the said C. D. (according to the direction and appointment of the
said Act) And I further certify, That by the space of eight days next after
the said Interment of the said C. D. no Affidavit hath been brought to me the
said Rectour concerning the bu­rial of the said C. D. in Woollen, as by the
said Act is required. Witness my hand this 10. day of May in the year of our
Lord. 1 [...]81.

### 64.5. A Warrant for levying the 5 li. for not burying in Woollen according
to the Act.

K. ss. FOrasmuch as it appeareth unto me30 Car. 2. by the Certificate of A. B.
Mini­ster, officiating in your said Parish, to you the Church-wardens and
Overfeers of the Poor of the same Parish, That the Corps of the Per­son of C.
D. deceased (but not of the Plague) was buried in Linnen (contrary to the Act
hereafter mentioned) on Monday the second day of Iune, and that such an
Affidavit and Certificate concerning the Parties being inter­red according to
the direction of a late Act of Parliament (intituled, An Act for burying in
Woollen) was not brought to him within the time limited by the said Act; And
forasmuch as by reason thereof, the forfeiture and penalty of five pounds of
lawfull money of England is incurred, and the Goods and Chattels of the
deceased by the said Act made liable to the aforesaid forfeiture, to be levied
by way of Di­stress and Sale thereof, by Warrant of the chief [[Page
376]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=193) Magistrate in
any Town-corporate, or any Ju­stice of the Peace, or in default thereof, by
like Distress and Sale o [...] the Goods of the Person in whose house the said
Party died, or of any that had a hand in putting such Person in any Shirt,
Shift, Sheet, Shroud, or Coffin, contrary to the said Act, or did order or
dispose the doing thereof; and in case such Person were a Ser­vant, and that
he or she died in the family of his or her Master or Mistress, that the same
be levied upon the Goods and Chattels of his or her said Master or Mistress;
and if such Per­son died in the family of his or her Father or Mother, that
then the same be levied upon the Goods and Chattels of his or her Father or
Mo­ther, in manner and by Warrant as aforesaid: These are therefore (in His
Majestie's name, and by the Authority of the said Act of Parlia­ment) to will
and require you, or some of you, to levy the said forfeiture by distress and
sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said deceased, or in default thereof, of
the Goods and Chattels of such other Parties as aforesaid, rendring the
overplus thereof to the Parties whose Goods you shall so distrain, (all
reasonable charges being deducted.) And for your so doing, this (by the
Authority of the said Act) shall be your Warrant. Given under my hand and seal
the 10. day of Iune in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles
the Second, (by the grace of God) of England, Scotland, France and Ireland
King, Defender of the Faith, &c. Annoque Dom. 1679.

To the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of, &c.

[[Page 377]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=193)

## 65\. Additional Presidents to the former.

### 65.1. The form of the Record that is re­turned of the Alehouses that are
licensed.

#### 65.1.1.

K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo ter­tio die Februarii Anno Regni Domini
nostri Caroli secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Regis,
Fidei De­fens. vicesimo septimo apud W. in Com. K. praed. R. K. & G. P. Armig.
duobus Iusticiariis dicti Domini Reg. ad pacem in Com. praed. conservand.
assignat. & quilibet▪person. infra nominat. Victuall. in person. praesent.
tunc & ibidem per nos dict. Iu­sticiar. Licenc. ad vendend. panem & Cervisiam
in Conditione infra scrip. recognoverunt se debere dicto Dom. Regi seperal.
summas decem librar▪ bonae & legalis monetae Angliae, & quilibet perso­narum
infra nominat. & manucapt. pro praedict. person. licenc. & in person.
praesent. tunc & ibidem recogn. se debere dicto Dom Regi summ. quinque librar.
& pro praed. person. Licenc. & non in pers. praesent. in decem libr.
consimilis monetae Angl. de Bonis & Catallis, Terris & Tenementis suis &
cujuslibet eorum ad opus & usum dicti Dom. Re­gis haered. & successor. suorum
fieri & leva [...]i si defecerint in conditione sequorum.

#### 65.1.2.

[[Page 378]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=194)

THE Condition of these Recognizances are such, That whereas the above and
within named Justices have licensed and al­lowed all and every the Alehouse-
keepers and Victuallers whose names are under and within written, to sell Ale
and Beer in the Town and Houses where they now inhabit and dwell for the space
of one whole year next ensuing the date hereof and no longer. If therefore
they and every of them shall during their time of keeping Alehouses sell good
wholsome Ale and Beer a full Ale-quart of their best for one Pen­ny, and of
their smallest second sort two full Ale-quarts for a Penny, nor shall suffer
any disorder or unlawfull Games to be used in or about their Houses or
Grounds, nor lodge any Strangers above one day and one night without giving
notice thereof to the Consta­ble or his Deputy, nor dress nor cause to be
dressed in or about their Houses any manner of Flesh to be eaten or sould at
any time pro­hibited by Law. Nor receive into their Hou­ses any manner of
Persons suspected or defa­med of or for Theft, Murther, Drunkenness or
Incontinency, nor shall buy nor take to pawn any stoln Goods, nor shall suffer
any to be taken to pawn, nor shall suffer any Persons to be drinking in their
Houses on the Lord's day nor Holy days during Divine Service, nor af­ter nine
of the Clock at night, nor at any other time than the Statute doth permit. And
if they the said Alehouse-keepers, and every of them, shall likewise keep good
Rule and Order in their several Houses, and doe and perform all other things
according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm in that case made and
provided. Then these Recogni­zances [[Page
379]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=194) to be void and
of none effect, or else to remain and be in full force and virtue.

Hundred de, &c. Hundred de H. W. B. Victualler, debere in decem librar. T. K.
de R. 6. li. & I. de eadem manit. 6 li. Write at the bottom of all, Capt. &
Recogn. coram nobis. R. K. W. P. E. H. At the same time when the Licences are
granted the Overseers Books are passed, and you write in their Books at the
foot of the Accompt. If money due to the old Overseers, you say, Due to be
paid from the new to the old Overseers 10 00 &c. 11 April 1670\. seen and
allowed by us R. K. W. P. If money due to the new Overseers, you say,
Remaining in the old Overseers hands to be paid to the new ones 10 00 00 11
April seen and allowed by us R. K. W. P. At the bottom of every Overseers
Warrant put what is due from the one to the other.

[[Page 380]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=195)

#### 65.1.3. Overseer's Warrant.

WE whose names are hereunto subscri­bed Justices of the Peace for this County
of K. do approve and appoint I. S. and T. D. of, &c. to be new Overseers for
the Poor of the said Parish for the space of one whole year next ensuing the
date here­of, commanding them, together with the Church-wardens, to provide
for the said Poor (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided.) Given under our hands and seals, &c. Anno Regni Regis, &c. Anno
Domini 1670.

Remaining in the old Overseers hands to be paid to the new ones 10 00 00

### 65.2. The Return made by one Justice of Peace when he swears another.

A. M. miles infra script. praestitit seperalia infra mentionat. juramento
quinto die Decembr. Anno Domini 1681\. virtute brevis infra script. mihi
direct. dat. Anno & die su­pradict. A Seal to the side.

R. K.

[[Page 381]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=195)

### 65.3. The Examination of a Felon himself.

The Examination of J. C. taken before R. K. Esquire, one of His Majestie's
Iustices of the Peace for the said County of K. the 25. day of July Anno
Domini 1678. & Regni Regis Caroli Secundi nunc Angl. &c. XXX.

K. ss. THE said I. C. being charged by E. M. of the Parish of D. Vic­tualler,
That he the said I. C. lately came into the Dwelling-house of him the said E.
M. situate in the said Parish of D. and did then and there feloniously take
and steale out of the said House one silver Cup of the Goods and Chattels of
the said E. M. to the value of forty shillings. He the said I. C. upon his
Examination before me the said 25. day of Iuly doth confess that he stole the
said silver Cup from out the House of the said E. M. and sold it to one M. B.
in the City of London, Goldsmith, for 24 s. and 6 pence.

And further saith not.

R. K.

[[Page 382]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=196)

### 65.4. The Information of the Witness when no Confession.

The Information of A. B. of the Parish of C. a­gainst D. E. taken upon Oath
before me R. K. Esquire, one of His Majestie's Iustices of the Peace for the
said County, the 25. day of May Anno Dom. 1677. & Regni Regis Caroli Se­cundi
nunc Angl. &c. xxix.

Kent ss. THE said A. B. being this day examined upon Oath before me, saith,
That, &c.

> And further deposeth not.

### 65.5. A Mittimus for Whores.

To the Keeper, &c.

K. ss. WHereas the Persons hereunder named are of Evil same, and are accused
for resorting to Houses, reputed Houses of common Bawdery: These are
there­fore (in His Majestie's name) to charge and command you, That presently
upon sight here­of you receive and take them into your Custo­dy, and them safe
to keep untill they shall be thence discharged by due course of Law. Here­of
fail you not. Given under my hand and seal this, &c.

[[Page 383]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=196)

## 66\. Law-Cases relating to the fore­going Subject.

IF the Warrant be to bring before him, orCo [...]. Rep. 5. fol. 59. any other
Justice, it is at the election of the Officer, to which Justice he will go.

A Warrant may be made to bring before aFoster's cas. Ibid. Cok. Rep. 9. fol.
119. b. In Lord Samhur's case. 2. Brown. 41. Legate's case. particular
Justice.

Justices not imprison, but in the Common Gaol.

One Justice of the Peace connot commitIenkins 174. canother Justice for breach
of the Peace.

Sessions of the Peace may.

If a Justice pursue not the Statute, thereIones 170. Cole's case. his Act is
void: But if he pursue it, then nei­ther B. R. nor Justices of the Peace can
dis­charge him.

### 66.1. Apprentice.

3\. Bulstrode 164. Brown's ca. 1. Brownl. 67. Coven­try. Goldsbo­rough 161.
March. 3. Noy 105.

Must be bound out by Indenture.

Master cannot send Apprentice beyond the Sea (except go with him:) But may
send him to any place in England.

Action of account is not maintainable against an Apprentice.

By custom of London a man may turn over his Apprentice to any other within the
City.

Action lies by Master for inticing an Ap­prentice [[Page
384]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=197) to depart from
his Service, so if in­ticeRichmond. to take money, or play.

### 66.2. Bastard-child.

If the two next Justices make not provisionIones 330. for Bastard, the
Sessions must settle it, as the two Justices ought to have done.

Sessions cannot originally make order toStyle 475. Denton. keep Bastard, but
it ought to be made by the two next Justices to the place where the Child was
born.

Maintenance of Bastard by Mother and re­putedIenkin. 47. pl. 90. Father is by
these modern Laws of 18 Eliz. cap. 3. and 7 Iac. cap. 6. the former Laws were
onely for punishment.

Not questioned for having one Bastard.2\. Bulstrode 398. Then she had another,
she is not to be pro­ceeded against by 7 Iac. (as for a second Offence.)

The two next Justices are not to commit2\. Bulstrode 342\. Thekins and Smith.
2\. Bulstrode 393\. Bowler's case. 2\. Bulstrode 341\. 2. Bulstrode 341\.
Twyning. Noy 79\. Iermin. for not obeying their Order, but to take bond for
their appearance at Sessions.

Neither Sessions nor Assizes can meddle touching Bastardy, but upon Appeal:
(other­wise the two Justices must order.)

If two Justices make an Order, if Party re­fuse to perform, or enter into bond
to appear at the next Sessions, they may commit him without Bail.

If (by practice and design) a Child be born in a Parish, the Parish where the
practice was, shall keep the Child.

Bound to pay 20 d. per week for keeping a Bastard, Defendant cannot plead that
there was no Order made.

[[Page 385]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=197)

### 66.3. Behaviour.

Justice cannot bind to Good behaviour up­onStyle 16. Bronker's case. Moore
606. numb. 837. 3. Croke 680. Dean's case. 3. Croke 78. Latch. 5. a general
information, or commit him for not finding Sureties upon such information.

May break house upon warrant for the Good behaviour.

If Justice (for want of Sureties for Good behaviour) commit (without good
cause) false imprisonment.

To say of a Major, he is a Fool, breach of Good behaviour.

So to threaten Witnesses.

### 66.4. Conventicles.

These are against the Statute of 16 Car. 2\. Vide the Statute.

### 66.5. House of Correction.

If delivered of a Child in the House of Cor­rection,2\. Bul­strode 358. the
Child must be sent to the Parish, from which the Mother was sent.

A Rogue must not be sent to the House of2\. Bul­strode 358. Correction, but
whipped, and sent to the place where last setled (if known) else to the place
of birth. But the House of Correction is for the Poor of the Parish that
refuse to work.

### 66.6. Deer.

Heir shall have them in the Park, and notOwen 20. Greg. 2. Leonard 222.
Executor.

Waste cannot be assigned for killing Deer, except he kill them all.

[[Page 386]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=198)

### 66.7. Drunkenness.

If twice drunk, and convicted, bound toIenkins 173. Godbold 514. Rolle 409.
Tayler. Good behaviour.

Drunkard may be punished in Ecclesiastical Court, or by justice of Peace.

Being a Drunkard, cause to remove a Ma­gistrate.

### 66.8. Gaol.

Every County hath two Gaols, one for Debt,Latch. 16. which may be in any house
where the Sheriff will. The other is for the Peace, and matters of the Crown,
which is the County Gaol.

Gaoler shall be answerable for Escapes, andCok. Rep. 9. fol. 96. b. in Reynes.
3. Cr. 815. if not sufficient, respondet superior.

If Gaol broken by Thieves, Gaoler is char­geable, (otherwise if by Enemies.)

### 66.9. High-way.

1\. Cr. 366. Sir Edw. Duncomb. 1. Crooke 266. Popham 142. Earl of
Northum­berland's case.

If inclose part of the High-way, must main­tain it (though the Parish did it
before.)

To stop one way (which was foul) and lay out another (without publick
Authority) not justifiable.

Cannot lay Logs in the High-way, though there is sufficient room for
Passengers be­side it.

Style 130. Moore 180. Cok. Rep. 9. fol. 33. a. William's case. Justice may
upon his view present want of repair of High-way, and before the Fine can be
taken off, the presented must certify the Amendment.

Action for stopping or incroaching upon High-way, not maintainable without
particular damage, for the usual way is by Indictment.

[[Page 387]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=198)If to
repair the High-way, ratione tenurae, itKeilway 53 a. pl. 4. need not be
prescribed, but ratione residentiae must.

Indictment in High-way ad nocumentum pro­pe inhabitantium (naught) it should
have beenRolle 406. The King and Horn­sey. omnium ibidem transeuntium.

### 66.10. Huy and Cry.

Statutes of 13 Edw. 1\. and 27 Eliz. are con­cerning it.

The Party robbed ought to give convenientNoy 155. notice so soon as he can.

Though know the Robber, yet shall haveMarch 10. pl. 18. Action against the
Hundred, by 13 Edw. 1.

The Party robbed is not bound to lend his Horse to pursue the Thief, nor is he
bound to goe and pursue the Thief presently.

Robbery after day-break, and before Sun­rising2\. Crooke 106. (Hundred must
answer,) so that after Sun-set, and before it is dark.

Oath of a Robbery before a Justice of the1\. Crooke 211. County, though taken
out of the County, good.

### 66.11. Poor.

Assessment for them ought to be made ac­cordingIenk. 327. pl. 49. to the
visible Estates of the Inhabi­tants there (both real and personal.) But not
for any Estate they have elsewhere. The Occupiers of the Lands (and not the
Land­lords) are to be taxed.

The Grand-mother (being of ability) hadStyle 283. a poor Grand-child reliev'd
by the Parish, who marrieth; her Husband is liable towards kee­ping the Child,
for that his Wife was of abili­ty when he married her: otherwise if she had
[[Page 388]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=199) not
been of ability. And the Sessions must order what he shall contribute towards
the charge.

### 66.12. Peace.

1000 li. bond may be required for theStyle 322. Peace, (as the case may stand)
viz. if the Person be dangerous.

If he which is bound to the Peace break hisStyle 369. Recognizance, he may be
indicted for it, for it is a new Offence.

Bound to the Peace upon malice, or forStyle 364. vexation, may be discharged
by the King's Bench.

Justice may take money to lie in deposito for1\. Croke 446. security of the
Peace, and if break the Peace, the money to be forfeited to the King.

Two Justices (though neither of the Quo­rum) 2\. Leonard 184. pl. 223. may
inquire of unlawfull Assemblies, though they cannot determine the same.

### 66.13. Rogue.

Is not to be sent to the House of Correction,2\. Bul­strode 358. but to be
whipped, and sent where last settled (if known,) otherwise to the place of his
birth. But the House of Correction is pro­perly for those that will not work.

If Inhabitants of the County goe withIenkins 318. Wares to sell at Houses in
that County, they are Rogues.

### 66.14. Riot.

Fine upon Riotors cannot be less than 10 li. Style 303. for the principal, and
four marks a-piece for the rest.

[[Page
389]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=199)Information
against two Justices for not in­quiringStyle 245. of a Riot, found against one
of them (good.)

Stage-players may be indicted for Riot, andRolle 109. unlawfull Assemblies.

### 66.15. Souldiers.

If Souldiers prest to serve the King, de­part2\. Anderson 151. out of the
service, it is Felony by 7 Hen. 7\. 3 Hen. 8\. and 2 Edw. 6.

The Captain is he who is to command,1\. Croke 71. Hutton 134. and the
Conducter is he who is hired to guide the Souldiers in the way to their
Captain, and departing from him is Felony.

Justices of the Peace may try the Offence at their Sessions, and so may
Justices of Oyer and Terminer.

[[Page 390]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=200)

## Appendix A THE TABLE.

Alehouses.

  * A Licence to keep an Alehouse Page. 1
  * Another Page. 2
  * A Licence to Brew, and keep an Alehouse Page. 3
  * A Recognizance thereupon, with Condition Page. ibid.
  * Another Recognizance for an Alehouse-keeper, and Condition Page. 4 & 5
  * A Warrant against an Inn-keeper, Alehouse­keeper, &c. suffering to tipple Page. 5
  * —to levy money for tippling Page. 6
  * A Mittimus (for an Alehouse-keeper suffering to tipple [...] fo [...] [...] of Distress Page. 7
  * For an unlicensed Alehouse Page. 9
  * The like upon the Statute 3 Car. the first Con­viction Page. 10
  * The like for the second Conviction Page. 11
  * [[Page 391]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=200)—for the third Conviction Page. 12
  * A Warrant for Witnesses against an unlicensed Alehouse-keeper. Page. 13
  * —for suppression of an Alehouse for dis­order Page. 14
  * —for renewing Licences of Alehouse­keepers Page. ibid.
  * —against an Alehouse-keeper for selling less than measure Page. 15
  * A Mittimus for selling less than measure for want of Distress Page. 16
  * A Warrant for suppressing an Alehouse after suppression at the Quarter-sessions Page. 18
  * A Licence to keep an Alehouse, with Ar­ticles Page. 19
  * The form of a Record that is returned of the Alehouses that are licensed and condi­tioned, &c. Page. 377

Apprentices.

  * A Warrant to put out poor Children Appren­tices Page. 22
  * An Indenture for an Apprentice so put out Page. 23
  * A Warrant against them which refuse to take Apprentices Page. 25
  * —against a Master for abusing his Ap­prentice Page. 26
  * A Warrant against a disorderly Apprentice Page. ibid.
  * A Discharge of an Apprentice Page. 27
  * A Warrant against one that departeth out of Service before his time expired Page. ibid.
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 383

Bail.

  * [[Page 392]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=201)Recognizances for Bail Page. 28
  * A Condition to prefer a Bill and give Evi­dence Page. 29
  * A Condition to give Evidence Page. 30

Bastards.

  * A Warrant for the apprehending and convey­ing the Woman to the House of Cor­rection Page. 32
  * A Mittimus of the Mother of a Bastard-child to the House of Correction Page. 33
  * A Warrant against the Mother (for the se­cond Offence) to commit to the House of Correction, and find Sureties of Good be­haviour Page. 34
  * —to convene the Mother and reputed Father Page. ibid.
  * —against the reputed Father of a Bastard­child Page. 36
  * An Order for Relief of the Parish touching a Bastard-child, and for punishing the Mo­ther and reputed Father Page. 37
  * A Warrant to be written under the Order aforesaid for giving notice thereof to the Mother and reputed Father Page. 40
  * —for the punishment of the Mother and reputed Father of a Bastard-child Page. ibid.
  * —and Mittimus against the reputed Father for not obeying the Justices Order Page. 43
  * An Order for relief of the Parish in case of a [[Page 393]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=201) Bastard-child out of the Estate of the repu­ted Father Page. 45
  * A Warrant for punishment of the reputed Fa­ther of a Bastard-child for not keeping the Child and obeying the Order Page. 46
  * —for sending a Bastard-child (found wan­dring) to the Place of its birth Page. 48
  * —for apprehending a Woman on suspicion of having murthered her Bastard-child Page. 49
  * A Condition of a Recognizance for the ap­pearance of the reputed Father of a Bastard­child Page. 50
  * —of a Recognizance of one charged to be the Father of a Bastard-child before its birth, to appear at Sessions Page. ibid.
  * —to discharge Church-wardens and Pari­shioners of a Child born in the Parish Page. 51
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 384

Good behaviour.

  * A Warrant and Mittimus for Good beha­viour Page. 52
  * Causes for Good behaviour Page. 53
  * Another Warrant for Good behaviour Page. 54
  * A Mittimus to the Gaol for one that refuses to find Sureties for his Good behaviour Page. 55
  * A Supersedeas for the Good behaviour Page. 56
  * A Recognizance thereupon Page. 57
  * A Condition of a Recognizance for the same Page. ibid.
  * Another Condition Page. 58
  * —Condition Page. ibid.
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 385

Bridges.

  * [[Page 394]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=202)A Warrant to a Hundred for assessing a pro­portionable rate of a Tax (appointed by the Body of the County) towards repair of the County Bridges Page. 59
  * —to make a Tax for County Bridges re­paired Page. 61
  * —to collect a Tax for repairing County Bridges Page. 62
  * —for not paying the same Page. 63

Burying see Title Woollen.

Carriages for the King.

  * A Warrant to provide Carriages Page. 64
  * Another Warrant for provision of Carriages for the King's use Page. 65
  * —to levy the Penalty for not appearing with Carriages for the King upon notice Page. 66
  * A Mittimus for one that doth impress or take away any Cart or other thing from the Owner under pretence of power from the Green-cloath, for carriage of His Majestie's Provisions, without lawfull Authority Page. 67

Certificates.

  * A Certificate from the Minister and chief Inha­bitants of the Parish of a man's Honesty Page. 68
  * [[Page 395]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=202)—for continuing of an Alehouse-keeper Page. 69
  * —for the time of the Birth of a Child Page. ibid.
  * —for one that hath not been touched of the Evil Page. 70

Chimney-money.

  * A Mittimus for disturbing a Collector Page. ibid.

Church.

  * A Warrant for not coming to Church Page. 71
  * —to levy the forfeiture for not coming to Church Page. 72
  * A Mittimus to the Gaol of one not repairing to Church (for want of Distress) Page. 73
  * A Warrant to distrain for a Church-Tax Page. 74
  * —a Minister for not reading Prayers, &c. once in a month Page. 75
  * A Mittimus for Preaching whilst disabled Page. 76

Coals.

  * A Warrant upon complaint touching Coals Page. 77
  * —for delivery a moity of such Coals as are sold contrary to the Statute to the Informer Page. ibid.
  * —touching Prices of Coals Page. 78

Constables Charges.

  * [[Page 396]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=203)A Warrant for making of Constables Page. 79
  * Another Page. ibid.
  * A Warrant for a Tax for the Constables Char­ges in the execution of his Office Page. 80
  * —to appear and shew cause for their not paying the said Charges Page. 81
  * —for refusing to appear to shew cause for not paying the said Charges Page. 82
  * —to levy the Charges upon their refusing to pay the same Page. 83
  * The Condition of a Recognizance to appear and answer the not paying the same at next Sessions Page. 84
  * A Warrant for levying 3 s. 4 d. upon a Con­stable for neglect of his Duty in giving an account of Rogues and Vagabonds Page. ibid.
  * —to sell the Goods of an Offender that refuseth to bear his own Charges to the Gaol Page. 85
  * —to make a Tax for conveying a Felon to the Gaol Page. 87

Conventicles.

  * A Condition of a Recognizance in case of an Appeal made touching Conventicles Page. 87
  * A Record of a Conventicle Page. 89
  * —concerning Conventicles where several Persons are convicted Page. 90
  * —of the Conviction of certain Persons ta­ken at a Conventicle Page. 92
  * Memorial of a Record of a Conventicle Page. 95
  * [[Page 397]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=203)A Mittimus thereupon upon the first Offence Page. 97
  * —upon the second Offence Page. 98
  * —upon the third Conviction Page. 99
  * A Record against one that suffereth a Conven­ticle, &c. to be kept in his House Page. 101
  * A Mittimus thereupon upon the first Convic­tion Page. 102
  * —thereupon upon the second Conviction Page. 103
  * —thereupon upon the third Conviction Page. 104
  * A Warrant to levy the Penalty of the Statute upon the Teacher of a Conventicle Page. 105
  * —Pro testes to prove the Conventicle Page. 106
  * —to levy the money upon the Offenders Page. 108
  * —to levy the money upon the Offenders Page. 109
  * —to levy money upon a Gaoler, &c. for suffering one committed (upon this Act) to goe at large Page. 114
  * The like for suffering one at large to joyn with the Offender in custody in the exercise of Religion Page. 115
  * A Warrant against a Peer of the Realm for be­ing at a Conventicle, the first Conviction Page. 116
  * —upon the second Conviction Page. 117
  * —against a Peer for suffering a Conventi­cle, &c. to be kept in his House, &c. the first Conviction Page. ibid.
  * —upon the second Conviction Page. 118
  * A Mittimus for a Nonconformist, &c. Page. 119
  * A Certificate to the Militia, &c. for aid in case of a Conventicle Page. 120
  * [[Page 398]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=204)—made by a Justice where the Offenders live in a Corporation Page. 121
  * —for the taking the Oath according to the said Act Page. 122
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 385

Corporations.

  * A Certificate upon taking the Oaths and sub­scribing the Declarations mentioned in the
  * Act for regulating Corporations Page. 123

Court-Leet and Court-Baron.

  * A Precept directed to the Bayliff of the Man­nour by the Steward of the Court-Baron to warn the Court Page. 124
  * —to warn a Jury for a Court-Leet Page. 125
  * —for a Borsholder, or other Officer, to take upon him the said Office, and to re­paire to a Justice of Peace to take his Oath for his faithfull execution of the same Page. 126
  * —to bring in a Scold to be tryed at a Court-Leet Page. 127
  * The manner of making up of Court-Rolls Page. 128
  * The manner of making up of Estreats Page. 136

Customs.

  * A Warrant against those who abuse an Officer of the Customs, in the due execution of his Office Page. 140
  * [[Page 399]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=204)—against carrying away Goods without paying Custom, &c. Page. 141
  * A Mittimus upon the precedent Warrant for the first Offence Page. 142
  * —upon the second like Offence Page. 143

Deer.

  * A Warrant for Deer-stealing Page. 144
  * —to levy 20 li. for stealing Deer Page. 145
  * A Mittimus to the House of Correction for want of Distress Page. 146
  * Another Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Di­stress Page. 147
  * A Warrant for a Buck Page. 148
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 385

Drunkenness.

  * A Warrant for Drunkenness the first Convic­tion Page. 148
  * —the second Conviction Page. 149
  * Law-cases thereon Page. 386

Excise.

  * A Certificate upon taking the Oath about Excise Page. 151
  * A Warrant to summon those who refuse to pay the Excise Page. 152
  * —for Distress on Alehouse-keepers for not paying Excise Page. 153
  * A Mittimus where not sufficient to pay Excise Page. 154
  * [[Page 400]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=205)A Warrant to levy the forfeiture for not ma­king a due Entry Page. 155
  * —to levy the double value of the Excise on a Brewer for not paying according to Entry made Page. 156
  * Loss of allowance for making false Entries Page. 157
  * A Warrant upon complaint of false Entry to appear Page. 158
  * —not sufferage to gage the Vessels Page. ibid.
  * —against one that procureth a false Return to be made in the Office of Excise Page. 160
  * A Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress Page. 161
  * A Warrant (against several Persons) to di­strain for the duties of Excise, &c. Page. 162

Felony.

  * A Warrant to apprehend a Felon Page. 165
  * A Mittimus of a Felon Page. ibid.
  * Another Page. 166
  * A Warrant to search for a Felon on suspicion Page. 167
  * —for apprehending of one that hath dange­rously hurt another Page. 168
  * A Liberate to deliver a Prisoner committed for Felony Page. 169
  * A Warrant to bind Persons to give in evidence against a Felon Page. 170
  * Another Page. ibid.
  * A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill and give evidence against Principals and Accessary in case of Felony Page. 171
  * —of a Recognizance where two Felonies are committed to give evidence Page. 172
  * [[Page 401]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=205)A Condition to give evidence for Felony Page. 173
  * —of a Recognizance to appear upon Fe­lony Page. ibid.
  * —to appear upon suspicion of Felony Page. 174
  * A Bond Page. ibid.
  * A Condition to save one harmless who was bound for the appearance of a Person sus­pected for Felony Page. 175
  * A Condition for Felony or suspicion of Fe­lony Page. 30
  * The Examination of a Felon himself Page. 381

Fire.

  * A Testimonial from Justices of the Peace for poor men that have had loss by fire Page. 176
  * A charitable Request made by certain Justices of the Peace to the Inhabitants of a Division for relief of F. S. who had been there lately ruined by fire Page. 178

Forceable Entry.

  * A Warrant to return a Jury to inquire of a Forceable Entry Page. 179
  * A Record of Forceable Entry Page. 180
  * A Warrant to the Sheriff for Restitution Page. 182
  * A Mittimus upon view of Forceable De­tainour Page. 183

Foreign Wares.

  * [[Page 402]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=206)A Warrant to search for and seize Foreign Manufactures prohibited, &c. Page. 184

Gaol.

  * Law-Cases Page. 386

High-ways.

  * A Warrant to levy 5 li. on the Inhabitants of a Parish for not choosing Surveyours of the High-ways Page. 185
  * —to distrain for High-way Tax Page. 186
  * —for not sending in Teams to work in the High-ways Page. 187
  * —against those that refuse or neglect to work in the High-ways Page. 188
  * —to impower the Surveyours to dig Gra­vel, &c. upon Wasts or Commons out of the Parish Page. 189
  * —to appoint what shall be paid by the Sur­veyours for digging Gravel, &c. in any man's Ground Page. 190
  * —against Surveyours for not accounting Page. 191
  * —against Surveyours who have not paid the moneys in their hands to the next Sur­veyours Page. 192
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 386

House of Correction.

  * [[Page 403]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=206)A Warrant and Directions for general privy Search Page. 193
  * A Mittimus of a Rogue thither, taken in the general Search Page. 197
  * —of an idle Person out of Service, &c. Page. 198
  * —to the House of Correction of an idle Person, that would run away, and will not work to maintain his Family Page. 199
  * A Liberate from thence Page. 200
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 385

Huy and Cry.

  * The Examination of a Person robbed on the High-way praying an Huy and Cry Page. 201
  * Another Page. 202
  * The Examination of a Person robbed on the High-way by three Persons, one of which he knew Page. 203
  * A Huy and Cry upon the escape of a Prisoner from the Constable Page. 204
  * A Warrant for a Huy and Cry after a Felon Page. 205
  * —to search for a Person (who hath com­mitted a Robbery) and for Goods stoln Page. 206
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 387

Inns of Court.

  * [[Page 404]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=207)A Warrant from one of the Judges, a Member of an Inns of Court, against one of that So­ciety, for refusing to observe the Order of the House Page. 208

Irish Cattel.

  * A Warrant to seize certain Cattel imported from foreign Parts into England Page. 210
  * —to deliver to the Owners certain Cattel seised, as forfeited for being imported from foreign Parts, upon proof that they were not so imported Page. 211
  * —to kill the said Cattel Page. 212
  * —to levy 40 s. upon the seisour or Church­wardens that shall fail in killing or making distribution as aforesaid Page. 213

Lent.

  * A Warrant for observing of Lent Page. 214

Licences.

  * A Licence for a Badger of Corn Page. 215
  * A Licence for a petty Chapman Page. 216
  * A Licence or Pasport for a poor man to his Friends for relief Page. 217
  * Another Page. 218
  * A Licence to beg Page. ibid.
  * [[Page 405]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=207)—to travel by Water on the Lord's day Page. 219
  * Another Page. 220
  * A Licence to travel on the Lord's day Page. 221

Misdemeanours.

  * A general Warrant for the same retornable be­fore a particular Justice Page. 221
  * Another Page. 222
  * The like retornable before any Justice, and the Accuser to have notice Page. ibid.
  * A Condition of a Recognizance for misde­meanour Page. 223

Murther.

  * A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment to give evidence at the next general Gaol-delivery, alias Assizes, to both Juries in case of Murther Page. 224
  * —of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill and give evidence at Assizes Page. 225
  * A Condition-recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment and to give evidence to both Juries at the next general Gaol-delivery, alias Assizes in case of an Abbettor in Mur­ther Page. ibid.

Nets, Dogs and Conies.

  * A Warrant to search for Nets and Setting­dogs upon the Statute of 7 Iacobi Page. 226
  * [[Page 406]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=208)The like upon the Statute of 22 and 23 Caroli Secundi Page. 227
  * A Mittimus against Persons that refuse to enter into Recognizance to appear at Sessions for their keeping Ferrets and Nets to kill Co­nies Page. 229
  * A Warrant for one that hunts with Spaniels in Eared-corn Page. 230

Oaths.

  * The Oath which is usually ministred to a Ju­stice of the Peace in the several Counties of England Page. 231
  * The Oath of Supremacy Page. 232
  * The Oath of Allegiance Page. 233
  * A Mittimus for refusing the Oath of Alle­giance Page. 235
  * The Oath of Abjuration Page. ibid.
  * The Oath of an Excise man Page. 236
  * The Under-sheriffs Oath touching the impan­nelling of Juries Page. ibid.
  * The Oath of a Bailiff Page. 237
  * The Oath usually given to Church-wardens Page. 238
  * Another Page. ibid.
  * The Oath of Obedience Canonical Page. ibid.
  * The High-constables Oath Page. 239
  * The Oath taken by the Officers of the Mar­shals Court Page. 241
  * The Oath of a Constable Page. 242
  * —of an Ale-caster Page. 243
  * —of a Commissioner of Sewers Page. 244
  * —of a Searcher in the Custom-house Page. 245
  * The Oath given to a Jury before Evidence gi­ven in against a Prisoner at the Bar Page. 245
  * [[Page 407]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=208)—given to a Bailiff or Serjeant that attendeth on any Jury or Inquest at an Assize Page. 246
  * —of him that craves the Peace against ano­ther Page. ibid.
  * Another Page. 247
  * Another Oath to give a man upon examination or upon information Page. ibid.
  * The Oath of him who gives information Page. ibid.
  * Another Page. 248
  * The Oath to be given to any Jury by whom a Nisi prius is to be tryed Page. ibid.
  * —to be given to such as are to give evidence between a Party and party at a Nisi prius Page. ibid.
  * —of a great Inquest Page. 249
  * —of those that give evidence upon Bills of Indictment Page. ibid.

Officers.

  * The nomination of Officers by Justices of the Peace Page. 250

Orchards.

  * A Warrant against Robbers of Orchards Page. 251
  * —upon non-payment to be whipt Page. 252

Overseers see Title Poor.

Peace.

  * A Warrant to find Sureties for the Peace Page. 253
  * [[Page 408]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=209)—to find Sureties for the Peace where an As­sault is made upon an Officer in discharge of his Office Page. 255
  * A Supersedeas of a Warrant for the Peace Page. 257
  * A Mittimus for breaking the Peace Page. 258
  * A Release of the Peace Page. ibid.
  * The Condition of a Recognizance to appear at Sessions and keep the Peace Page. 259
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 388

Plague.

  * A Pass or Certificate in the time of Plague Page. 260

Poor.

  * A Warrant for the Overseers of the Poor to ac­count and name other fit Persons Page. 261
  * —for the making new Overseers of the Poor Page. 262
  * —to make Overseers of the Poor, impow­ring them and the Church-wardens to collect the Poors Tax, and upon non-payment to destrain Page. ibid.
  * A Confirmation of the Rates for the Poor Page. 263
  * A Warrant to levy the Arrears (due to the Parish) from the former Overseers Account, by Distress Page. 264
  * —against an Overseer of the Poor for not keeping of monthly Meetings Page. 265
  * —to destrain for the Poors Tax Page. 266
  * A Mittimus where there is not sufficient to destrain Page. 267
  * A Warrant for removing one come to a Parish Page. 268
  * [[Page 409]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=209)—to send a Wife and Child to her Husband in the Parish from whence they came Page. 269
  * —for apprehending one for returning to the Parish from whence he was removed Page. 270
  * —against those who come to work and re­turn not at the end of their work Page. 271
  * A Mittimus to the House of Correction of one that refuseth to be removed after his work finished Page. 272
  * A Warrant and Mittimus for one who▪ runs away, and leaves his Family upon the Parish Page. 273
  * A Mittimus on the foregoing Warrant Page. 274
  * A Warrant to the Overseers of the Poor to pay Arrears, and continue weekly relief to poor Persons Page. ibid.
  * —to levy Relief for the Poor Page. 275
  * A Bond and Condition to the Church-wardens and Overseers of the Poor to save a Town harmless upon inhabiting there Page. 276
  * A Release (from the Overseers of the Poor) to one that paid five pounds to be freed from keeping a Bastard-child Page. 277
  * The manner of se [...]ling and making up the Overseers Accompts in their Books Page. 370
  * Overseers Warrant Page. 380
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 387

Prisoner.

  * A Warrant to allow a poor Prisoner relief Page. 279
  * A Discharge of a Prisoner to a Gaoler Page. ibid.
  * Another Page. 280
  * A Warrant for a Prisoner to be bailed Page. ibid.
  * [[Page 410]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=210)A Warrant from a Judge to bring a Prisoner from a Gaol to give evidence Page. 281

Quakers.

  * A Mittimus of Quakers Page. 282

Rape.

  * A Warrant concerning Rape Page. 283

Rates for Hay, Oats, &c.

  * A Warrant to appoint Rates for Hay, Oats, &c. upon His Majestie's passing through any Place Page. 284
  * —for levying the Penalty forfeited for not observing the Rates aforesaid Page. 285

Recognizances.

  * Directions thereupon Page. 286
  * A Condition for the Peace Page. ibid.
  * The manner of entring the note of Recogni­zances in your book of Recognizances Page. 287
  * Directions for drawing Conditions of Recog­nizances Page. 288
  * A single Recognizance taken before Justices of the Peace Page. 289
  * Another single Recognizance Page. 290
  * A Recognizance to prefer an Indictment, or to prefer a Bill, and give evidence Page. ibid.
  * [[Page 411]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=210)—for two to give evidence Page. 291
  * —to give in evidence against a Pri­soner Page. ibid.
  * —for the Good behaviour Page. 292
  * Another Page. 293
  * A Recognizance to give in evidence against one that is suspected of Felony Page. ibid.
  * A Recognizance for keeping of a Tavern Page. 294
  * —for one that is bayle for a Boy that lay under a Bed in the night Page. 295
  * —for Bastardy where two are Manucap­ters for the man in custody Page. 296
  * —for a married Woman upon rescue Page. ibid.
  * —for one that hath hurt another, and on the Warrant of Behaviour Page. 297
  * —for the Peace Page. 298
  * —for Felony Page. 299
  * A Release of a Recognizance written under the Recognizance thus, by the same Iustice or by some other, &c. Page. ibid.
  * The Parties Release of the Peace Page. 300

Riot.

  * A Precept to the Sheriffs to return a Jury to enquire upon a Riot, Rout or unlawfull As­sembly Page. 301
  * The like Precept in Latine Page. 302
  * A Warrant for certain riotous Persons Page. 303
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 399

Rogues.

  * [[Page 412]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=211)A Warrant for apprehending and committing a dangerous Rogue Page. 304
  * A Mittimus of a dangerous Rogue Page. 305
  * Law-Cases thereon Page. 388

Sacrament.

  * A Certificate for receiving the Sacrament and Oath Page. 306
  * —for receiving the Sacrament according to the Act Page. 307
  * A Testimonial upon the receiving the Sacra­ment according to the Act Page. 308
  * A Declaration to be subscribed according to the Act Page. ibid.

Scavengers.

  * A Warrant for Scavengers to distrain Page. 309

Search.

  * A Warrant to search for stoln Goods Page. 310
  * —to make general search for Rogues, Vagabonds, &c Page. 311

Servants.

  * [[Page 413]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=211)A Warrant for sending a Servant to his Service to serve the time agreed to prevent charge on the Parish Page. 311
  * A Mittimus against one that returneth into a Parish after he was removed Page. 312
  * A Warrant to levy 40 s. on the Master for putting away his Servant before the end of his Term Page. 313
  * —for not paying wages Page. 314
  * —for relief of a Man-servant that is out of service Page. 315
  * A Warrant against one that departeth out of service before his time expired Page. 316
  * —to fetch back a Servant Page. ibid.
  * A Discharge of a Servant from his service within the time agreed, upon his absenting himself Page. 317
  * A Testimonial for the discharge of a Ser­vant Page. 318

Silk-Throsters.

  * An Order for the payment of moneys to a Silk-Throster by his Workman who im­bezils his Silk Page. 319
  * A Warrant against an Offender for not per­forming the Order beforementioned Page. 320

Souldiers.

  * A Warrant to warn in a Muster at a cer­tain day Page. 321
  * [[Page 414]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=212)A Certificate for a Trained-souldier Page. 322
  * A Warrant to order an Allowance to a poor Souldier out of the Stock for maimed Souldiers Page. ibid.
  * The like for Allowance to Wife or Orphan Page. 323
  * Law-cases thereon Page. 389

Swearing.

  * A Warrant to pay 1 s. for swearing in the presence of a Justice of the Peace Page. 324
  * —to levy moneys for prophane swearing Page. 325
  * A Certificate of Conviction for swearing Page. 326

Tax.

  * A Warrant to the Assessors to make a Tax upon an Act of Parliament for Royal Aid Page. 326
  * The Preamble of the Tax-book Page. 328
  * A Warrant to the Collectors of the Tax upon the Royal Aid Page. 329
  * A Warrant to levy 5 li. upon the Collectors for neglecting to collect their Assessment Page. 332

Testimonials.

  * A Testimonial for conveying a Rogue who hath been punished Page. 333
  * A Testimonial for one that hath suffered ship­wreck Page. 334

Tiling.

  * [[Page 415]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=212)A Deputation for Tile-searchers Page. 335

Trespass.

  * A Warrant upon Hedge-breaking, &c. where the Party's not able Page. 336
  * A Warrant or Order to pay where he is able Page. 337
  * —to whip where not paid according to Order Page. 338
  * —from the Justices at a Quarter-sessions for apprehending one indicted for a Tres­pass Page. 339

Uagrants.

  * A Warrant for apprehending Beggers and other idle Persons Page. 341
  * A Testimonial or Pass for him to the Place of his birth Page. 342
  * The like where the Place of his birth is not known Page. ibid.
  * The like where neither the Place of his birth nor last abode is known Page. 343
  * The like where the Vagrant is apprehended in a general privy search Page. 344
  * A Warrant to pay 2 s. for apprehending a Va­grant Page. ibid.
  * Upon non-payment of the same Page. 345
  * A Certificate of apprehending a Vagrant in the Confines of another County Page. 346
  * [[Page 416]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=213)A Warrant to pay two shillings thereupon Page. 347
  * —upon non-payment of the same Page. ibid.

Waggons and Carts.

  * An Affidavit to be made before a Warrant granted for destreining for 40 s. forfeited for drawing with six Horses in length in a Team, Cart or Waggon Page. 349
  * A Warrant to destrain upon such as travel with a Waggon or Cart drawn with six Horses at length Page. 350

Watch and Ward.

  * A Warrant to the High-constable for putting in Execution the Statute of 13 Car. 2\. (reciting the Statute) and for keeping good Watches (upon His Majestie's going to Oxford) Page. 351
  * Another Warrant upon the same Statute Page. 354
  * A Warrant for Watch and Ward, and to ap­prehend idle Persons Page. 355
  * —by order of Quarter-sessions to set Watch and Ward Page. 356

Weights and Measures.

  * A Warrant to warn in all Tradesmen and others to have their Weights and Measures examined by the Standard Page. 358
  * The Clerk of the Markets Warrant there­upon Page. 359

Whores.

  * [[Page 417]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=213)A Mittimus for Whores Page. 382

Witnesses.

  * A Warrant for Witnesses touching Felony Page. 360
  * —for a Witness to appear and give evidence at the Sessions Page. 361
  * The Information of a Witness when no Con­fession Page. 382

Wood.

  * A Warrant against one that stole Wood Page. 362
  * A general Warrant to search for stoln Wood Page. 363
  * A Warrant to search for stoln Wood, &c. upon a particular complaint Page. 364
  * An Order against a Person apprehended with Bundles of Wood, &c. to make satisfaction for the same to the Owner the first Offence Page. 365
  * A Warrant for not obeying that Order Page. 366
  * A Mittimus to the House of Correction for the second like Offence Page. 368
  * An Order against the buyer of stoln Wood, &c. to pay treble the value thereof Page. 369
  * A Warrant to distrain for non-payment of the money according to the foregoing Order Page. 370
  * A Mittimus against the buyer of stoln Wood, &c. for want of Distress Page. 371

Woollen.

  * [[Page 418]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=214)A Certificate for burying in Woollen Page. 372
  * Another Page. 373
  * The Minister's Certificate for burying in Wollen Page. 374
  * A Minister's Certificate of not bringing an Af­fidavit of a Corp's being buried in Wollen Page. ibid.
  * A Warrant to levy 5 li. for not burying in Wollen according to the Act Page. 375
  * The Return made by one Justice of Peace when he swears another Page. 380

THE END.

## Appendix B ADVERTISEMENT.

The Parson's Monitor, consisting of such Cases and Matters as principally
concern the Clergy. Collected from the Statute and Common Laws; as also the
Constitutions and Ca­nons Ecclesiastical: Confirmed 1o Jac. An­no Dom. 1603.
Together with the Articles of Religion, Authority of the Convocation,
Pri­vilege of Churches and Church-yards, Pay­ment of First-fruits and Tenths:
In whose Name and Style Ecclesiastical Courts are to be kept, and the Process
issuing out of the same are to run in, and with what Seal to be sealed. With
several other Matters (never before Extant) very material and necessary to be
known by the Cler­gy in general, and all persons concerned either as Patron o
[...] Incumbent. By G. Meriton, Gent.

Newly printed for R. Tonson. 1681.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=214)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=215)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=33319&page=215)

Notes

a

Is an idle, dissolute and disorderly fellow, one that will not keep his
Service, follow any honest course of Life: Sturdy Beggar: Idle and disorderly
Person: Of evil and disorderly Life and Conversation: Liveth idly out of
Service, (notwithstanding our command to the contrary:) Will not be reformed
of his said idle kind of Life, and evil and disorderly Conversation. Rogues,
Vagabonds, and other wandring and idle Persons. Idle Persons. Idle or
disorderly Persons.

a

Cut or taken away

  * Corn or Grain of

43 Eliz. cap. 7.

A. B. growing at, &c.

Robbed

  * Orchard,
  * Garden.
Break, Cut,

  * Hedge,
  * Pale,
  * Rale,
  * Fence.
Dig, pull up, take up,

  * Fruit-tree,
  * in Orchard,
  * Garden,
  * or elsewhere;
  * To the intent to take and carry the same away.
Cut, Spoile,

  * Woods, Standing.
  * Underwoods, Standing.
  * Poles, Standing.
  * Trees, Standing.

Not being Felony.

The Procurer or Receiver knowing the same.

[Home](/)

Kilburne, Richard, 1605-1678.. Date: 1681  

