## (unknown project)

# Letters and poems in honour of the incomparable princess, Margaret, Dutchess
of Newcastle.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=1)

William Cavendish DUKE OF NEWCASTLE AND HIS DUCHESS Engraved by J.  [...] From
a Rare Print by Clouet.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=1)

LETTERS AND POEMS In Honour of the Incomparable Princess, MARGARET, DUTCHESS
of NEWCASTLE.

In the SAVOY: Printed by THOMAS NEWCOMBE, M.DC.LXX.VI.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. LETTERS, &c.
    * 1.1. Hague, the 28th. of November, 1658.
    * 1.6. Excellentissimae Honoratissimaeque Dominae, Dominae Margaretae, Marchionissae Novo-Castrensi.
    * 1.7. To the Most Excellent and Most Honourable Lady, the Lady Margaret, Marchioness of Newcastle.
  * 2\. LECTOR IN ALMAE MATRIS Armario DUM LIBROS EXCUTIS, Hìc illìc ingenia pervestigans sedulò, Non potes non EXOSCULARI Foetum PUL CHERRIMUM INCOMPARABILIS Et (suprà quàm cuidam credibile est) PHILOSOPHANTIS HEROINAE, D. MARGARETAE, MARCHIONISSAE Novo-Castrensis, Cui Suada Linguam, Pallas animum imbuit. Sed, quoniam Ipsa (per ingenuae frontis molitiem) inter Viros Sententiam dicere non sustinet, in imagine saltèm, & hâc altae Mentis Effigie aeternis debet interesse Nominibus.
    * 2.1. Illustrissimo Excellentissimo Nobilissimóque Principi Gulielmo Marchioni, & Comiti de Newcastle, &c.
    * 2.4. Excellentissimae Nobilissimaeque Principi, Margaretae Novi-Castriae Ducissae.
    * 2.8. Eminentissimae, Celsissimaeque Principi D. Margaretae, Duci Novocastrensi.
    * 2.10. Illustrissimae Excellentissimaeque Principi Margaretae Novo-Castrensi Ducissa.
    * 2.13. To the most Illustrious and Excellent Prince, the Lord Duke of Newcastle, &c.
    * 2.15. Excellentissimo Honoratissimóque Domino, Domino Gulielmo Marchioni Novo-Castrensi, &c.
    * 2.21. Eminentissimo Illustrissimóque Principi, Gulielmo Duci, Marchioni, Comiti Novo-Castrensi, &c.
    * 2.22. Excellentissimo Invictissimóque Principi, Gulielmo Duci Novo-Castrensi, &c.
    * 2.53. To the worthily Honoured Dr. Charleton, Physitian in Ordinary to his MAJESTY.
    * 2.58. To the Incomparable Princess, MARGARET, Dutchess of NEW-CASTLE.
    * 2.72. To the Right Honourable, the Lady MARGARET, Marchioness, of New-Castle.
    * 2.73. To the most Illustrious, and most Excellent Princess, Margaret Dutchess of New-Castle.
  * 3\. POEMS, &c.
    * 3.1. To the most Illustrious and most Excellent Princess, The Marchioness of NEW-CASTLE. After the reading of her Incomparable POEMS.
    * 3.2. To her Excellency the Lady Marchioness of NewCastle, on Her Incomparable Works:
    * 3.3. On her Grace the Dutchess of New-Castles Closet.
    * 3.4. To the Illustrious Princess, Margaret, Dutchess of New-Castle, on Her Incomparable Works.
    * 3.5. To the most Accomplish'd and Incomparable Princess, The Dutchess of New Castle her Grace.
    * 3.6. To the Glory of her Sex, the most Illustrious Princess, the Lady Marchioness of New-Castle, upon her most admirable Works.
    * 3.7. On the Dutchess of New-Castle her Grace.
    * 3.8. An Elegy upon the death of the Incomparable Princess Margaret Dutchess of New-Castle.
    * 3.9. An Elegy on the Death of the Incomparable Dutchess of NEW-CASTLE.
    * 3.10. In Obitum Margaretae Ducissae Novo-Castrensis.
    * 3.11. Upon the Death of the Illustrious and Incomparable Lady, Margaret Dutchess of New Castle.
    * 3.12. On the Death of the most Illustrious Princess, the Lady Dutchess of NEW-CASTLE.
    * 3.13. Tumulus Nobilissimae, Illustrissimaeque Principis, Margaretae Ducissae Novi-Castri.
    * 3.14. In Illustrissimam Dominam Margaretam, NoviCastri Ducissam,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=2)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=2)

## 1\. LETTERS, &c.

### 1.1. Hague, the 28th. of November, 1658.

MADAM,

ACcording to your Excellencies com­mand, I have been of purpose at Leyden, and
there delivered your Present in­to the hands of the Rector Magni­ficus (as we
call him) of the University, who some days after hath made a so­lemn
exhibition of it to the Lords Curators, in a pub­lique meeting of the whole
Academical Senate, and, in their name, hath sent me the Letter here enclosed;
by which I hope the faithful discharge of my Am­bassage shall be testified,
and give your Excellency [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=3) occasion of
further Employment to bestow upon the unworthy person, This Letter came but
even now from Leiden, so that I hope your Excellency will not suspect any
negligence in me.

Madam, of Your Excellencies Humble and Obedient Servant,

Huygens de Zulichem.

### 1.2.

ILLUSTRISSIMA DOMINA,

OBtulit Bibliothecae publicae Zulichemi Dominus Divinum ingenii vestri foetûm,
qui sive pro sà sive Carmine omnem admirationem excedit. Princeps ingenii,
Princeps terrarum, Princeps foeminini sexus me­rito diceris. Abripitur
foecunda tua erudito, per coelos, ter­ras, maria, & quicquid in natura, vel
civili vita, ullove Scientiarum genere, nobile occurrit. Ipsa Pallas
Acade­miae nostrae praeses Tibi assurgit, gratiásque immensas pro vestro
munere agit, & cum Imaginem vestram aspicit, se ipsam veluti in speculo
intueri videtur. Vale

Datae Lugduni Batavorun XXVIII. Novem. MDCLVIII.

Illustrissima Domina Virtutum vestrarum Admirator & Cultor summus,

Anthonius Thysius, Academiae Rector.

### 1.3.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=3)

EXCELLENTISSIMA DUX,

ALter ferè mensis est quòd votis omnibus expetitum munus Epistolas tuas
accepimus: neque tamen intereà temporis ab officio cessavimus, sed vel in
honore Nuncupationis nos jactavimus, vel obstupuimus in admiratione Operis, in
quo multa tam acutè, tam aptè, tam elegantèr exponis, ne nec Venus, aut Lepor
aliquid addant. Scilicèt hoc demùm animi, hoc consilii, hoc ingenii tui, hoc
ejus est spei, quam annos aliquot jam sustines amplifican­dae Philosophiae.
Nam cave Te quaesumus, ne Canta­brigiae quenquam esse credas tam infacetum, &
à Gra­tiis alienum, quem non mirificè delectent Literarum ista­rum
amoenitates; Propterea, (quae felicissimè recludis) arcana Naturae non aliter
atque secretiores Sacro­rum ritus, & ceremonias Universi inspicimus, laudamus,
amplectimur, & inter legendum etiam per paginas dispen­samus oscula, sed ea
quae soli Philosophi dare, & acci­pere Vestales ipsae nequaquàm erubescerent.
Nondùm (quod scimus) Annalibus excidêre, neque certè per nos unquam excident
erudita nomina, Aspasia Periclis, Ode­nati Zenobia, Polla Lucani, Boethii
Rusticiana; quae tamen, si reviviscerent hodiè, adeò tecum (Inclyta Dux) de
eruàitionis palmâ non contenderent, at famae tuae potiùs ancillantes, solam
Margaretam, consummatissimam Prin­cipem & agnoscerent, & posito genu certatìm
adorarent. Illae namque pluvias tantùm hìc illìc aquas collegere: Tu perenni
gurgite passim exundas: Illis interdùm adspira­vêre Musae, quae suam in Te
potestatem omnem osten­dêre: Illae denique partitae sunt doctrinam: Tu
studio­rum omne genus versu, & prosâ non modò tetigisti, ve­rum etiam
tractâsti: nec alios tandèm indagationi tuae fi­nes proposuisti, quàm quos
ipsa rerum Natura admittit; quamobrèm, etsi (velut Aquila in nubibus) quicquid
ve­naris, [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=4)
capis, nusquam tamen major nobis, aut illustrior vi­dêre, quàm in nuperis
istis Sapientiae commissionibus et­enim invidendâ planè dexteritate vel
Tirones semitam ingressos reducis in viam; vel nitedulas è senticetis suis
extrahis; vel hostes veritatis destringis & defricas, He­roina monstris ex
orbe Scientiarum averruncandis genita. Perge (Dux invictissima) & (quo
incoepisti successu) in hâc immortalitatis Palaestrâ Te (si placet) diutiùs
exerce; Nos quidem ut antea semper, ita nunc quo­que tanto tibi studio ubique
favemus, ut majori non pos­simus.

> Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 3 Nonas Maii. 1665.

>

> Celsitudini tuae addictissimi Procancellarius, reliquusque Senatus Academ.
Cantabr.

### 1.4.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,

WE have lately with extraordinary joy re­ceived the two testimonies of Your
great mind and favor towards us, namely your Epistles and Poems, with which
your Grace hath been pleased to honor us, both which we em­brace with the same
mind with which we do all Sub­lime and Excellent things, which so long as
there is any Curtesy among men, do bring Fame to their Au­thors. In your Poesy
we praise that Life and native Verdure, every way consistent with it self,
Castalian like, it stands not still, nor boils over, but with a gen­tle Stream
doth touch our Ears, and slide into our minds. In your Philosophy we praise
that lightsome and piercing accuteness, nothing constrained, nothing obscure;
you render all things clear and genuine, in­deed [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=4) nature truly
natural: So difficult to men is nature and truth. Alas how do they vex and
pur­sue her fleeing from them; others suppose her to be swallowed in
Whirlepools, (as another Scylla or Charibdis) such a one indeed as they do
commonly find to be of report or opinion: others grope for her in a vain
Vacuity with the like success: yea, some there are which seek her among Ghosts
and Goblings, as if she were some Witch, or Sor­ceress; some offer violence to
her, and put her to the rack, and make her rather Lie then Confess. To your
Grace she doth freely open and unbowel her self, fearing to be branded with
incivility if she should deny; Your Grace only amongst Women owes nothing to
Nature: for how much soever she hath graced you with an incomparable lustre in
your Feature, or pregnancy of Wit, your Grace hath returned all of it in these
Elegancies of Phi­losophy and Poesie, with a most excellent retaliation.
Lastly, lest we should be further troublesome to your Grace, we wish we could
speak out and pub­lish to the World, what Thanks we conceive in our Minds for
this so genuine and proper a Gift, so fraught with sweetest Elegancies; Then,
though there be so vast a disproportion between your Gra­ces Favours and our
Merits, our distance would be so much the less: Farewel most Noble Princess,
long may your Grace live, who are an ornament to Learning, and a Patroness to
the Learned and us, who are,

> Your Graces most devoted Servants in all Duty and Reverence, The Master and
Fellows of the Colledge of St. John the Evangelist in the University of
Cambridge.

### 1.5.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=5)

ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,

LIbros tuos eximios illos opido & felicissimè In­genii partum excepit nostrum
hoc Collegium eâdem gaudii magnitudine, quâ olim Illustris­simi Principis
Conjugis Tui adventum nos hîc con­victu suo non dedignantis. In fatis est
scilicet, aut potiùs haereditarium quoddam jus est Tuae familiae de Collegio
nostro benè mereri. Dilatata Collegii Pomoeria, & pulcherrimo opere explicata
murorum facies testantur eximium in literas amorem nobilissimae Salopiensis
Co­mitissae, jam tunc virtutes tuas & Gentilitiam erga Musas bonitatem
praeludio quodam augurantis. Il­lustrissimus quoque Conjux Tuus nos hîc
Consortio suo cohonestavit, atque quantum gloriae nobis indè defluxisse putes,
quòd illa quae hîc posuit Virtutum rudimenta in tam inviolatam Majestati
Regiae etiam in adversis­simis fidelitatem omniumque artium tanto illo Ordine
dignarum scientiam excreverunt! Sed haec Tibi cum aliis Communis laus est,
favere literis. At quòd Tu, Foemina scilicet Illustrissima, Aulae deliciis
innutrita, non solùm faveas, sed & doceas qui sibi videntur eru­diti: quòd non
tantùm calleas omnes Tui Ordinis ele­gantias, sed etiam ingenuas nosiri
sermonis Veneres, & nihil insuper corum nescias quae scire laudi est; denique,
quòd prima omnium non solùm Philosophiae spinosissimos calles pervagata es,
sed emolliisti Sermo­nis Tui nitore, id quod doctissimis virorum minimâ ferè
cum laude pertentatum; hoc Tuum solius decus est, hoc praeteritorum seculorum
Foeminis, & praesèntis hu­jus Heroinis exprobabit hoc nostrum seculum: Unum
tantùm deest bellissimis Tuis scriptis, ut nimirum inter Cultissimas Orationes
Tuas inscribatur una, quae gau­dium nostrum ob honorem hunc à Te Collegio
nuperrimè [[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=5)
Praestitum satis dignè eloqui possit. Digna enim es sola, quae cùm
Philosophiam tantoperè exornâsti, Te­ipsam exprimas: nos certè non possumus,
quibus prae­ripuisti omnes Vernaculae linguae Elegantias, quôsque adeò
conjecisti in Latini sermonis antiquam, sed incul­tam Majestatem, ut Te, quam
coràm alloqui erubesci­mus, è longinquo tutò veneremur. Vivas ergò,
Illu­strissima Princeps, in hujus seculi gloriam, Tui Sexûs honorem, nostri
Invidiam, admirationem utriúsque; & felicissimos annos exigas etiam ultrà
spem, non vota.

> Dat. è Coll. D. Joan. Cantab. 14 Cal. Jul. 1663.

>

> Obsequentissimorum Illustrissimae Excellentiae Tuae Cultorum Magistri &
Sociorum Colleg. D. Joannis Evangelistae in Academia Cantabrigiensis.

### 1.6. Excellentissimae Honoratissimaeque Dominae, Do­minae Margaretae,
Marchionissae Novo-Castrensi.

EXCELLENTISSIMA DOMINA,

Qvanta sit, quámque severa nobis ex dignati­one Vestrâ concepta laetitia, si
non aliunde te­stando simus, liceat exinde potissimùm indicari, quòd in hoc
jucundissimo nobis officio gratitudinis ex­primendae, & seriùs aliquantò
versemur, & solliciti etiamnum simus. Ea siquidem est natura Beneficii, ut
remunerandi vices desideret, Vestri autem nec fortuna reposcit, nec patitur
Amplitudo. Quo fit, ut, muni­fici aliàs qui sumus, tantúmque honoris rependere
soliti, [[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=6)
quantum ipsi accipimus, eo quòd viros, caetera proba­tissimos, nostro
qualicunque testimonio auctiores redde­re videamur; Vestro tandem tam
praecellenti munere donati, tenuitatem ultro nostram fateamur. Hoc in­terim
gratulari nobis liceat felicitatis nostrae, eam esse Tibi cum Literis communem
causam, ut nemo laudare beneficia Vestra, aut etiam exprimere pro dignitate
possit, qui non & ipse commendatior exinde fuerit; adeò conjunctam habemus cum
officio laudem, ut nec testari quantum debemus, ingrati possimus, nec quanta
accepimus intelligere, nisi literati. Quae Tua singu­laris est bene merendi
ratio, non solùm Amplitudine Vestrâ digna largiris, sed & simul efficis, quo
tantis Tuis Auspiciis digni & nos aliquando simus: nec verò literis tantùm,
quod una potes, patrocinium praestas, sed & artes Ipsa illustras, & quantum
est ullibi scienti­arum promoves felicitèr, & exornas. Ignosce nobis
Illustrissima Marchionissa, si mirari identidem subeat, cui demum Tu, nósque
adeo debemus pulcherimas istas & Tuas dotes; quî factum fuerit, ut nullo
imbuente studiorum arbitrio, nullâ obstetricante Academiâ, in Foe­minâ tandem
conveniant, res caetera desjunctissimae, Eloquentia, Poesis, & Philosophia.
Sanè, qui anti­quos adeo miramur, eandem artium armorúmque prae­sidem Deam
veneratos, quid de Te tandem sentiemus, quae Ipsa Tibi Minerva es & Athenae
simul, Musae omnes juxta & Helicon, Aristoteles pariter ac Ly­caeum? Profectò,
ii sumus, qui felicitatem citiùs no­stram intelligere, quàm exponere Tuam
possumus, quae tam supra nostram est exprimendi copiam, quàm est praesens ista
qualiscunque adumbratio, extra fingen­di necessitatem. Quo magis nostrâ
referre credimus, quibus Te propriùs sentire datum est, testari aliquà, pro
genio nostro, locique hujus (quo non est alius Tui [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=6) studiosior) quo
tandem animo, quibus studiis, quibús­que amplexibus Clarissima Tua opera
excipimus & ex­osculamur. Quod quidem officii nostri tam sincerè prae­stamus,
quâm verè in amplissimam laudem cedit, mag­nae huic & florentissimae
Societati, Te nobis habere pro­pitiam, quam & tota commendat eruditio, &
litera­torum universus ordo suspicit, & veneratur. Tanti erat Excellentsssima
Domina, Te primam exemplo Tuo ostendere, posse & Foeminas Philosoaphri. Unum
illud reliquum, in auctiorem Nominis Vestri famam optamus, testatiorésque
virtutes Tuas, ut tot támque erudita Opera, tali aliquando idiomate donata
exeant, quali inter Romanos Tullium & Maronem, inter Graios Platonem, &
Demosthenem legimus, & mi­ramur. Quod si contigerit usquam, Te facili in vota
nostra, proventúmque literarum uberiorem, speramus, etiam & spondemus, brevi
fore, ut ex ipso scientiarum incremento sentiat orbis, quam consecuta es
Gloriae Aeternitatem.

Dat. è Coll. Sanctae & Individuae Trinitatis, 2 Cal. Feb. 1663.

Johan. Pearson, Magist. Coll.

Clem. Nevil.

Theod. Crosland.

Geo. Chamberlaine.

Fran. Barton.

Guliel. Lynnett.

Gualt. Catsby.

Richardus Stedman.

Robertus Scott.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=7)

### 1.7. To the Most Excellent and Most Honourable Lady, the Lady Margaret,
Marchioness of Newcastle.

MOST EXCELLENT LADY,

HOw great and serious a joy doth arise to us from Your Excellencies
Condescenti­on, though we cannot otherwise make it appear; yet hence chiefly
it may be shewed, be­cause in this most pleasing Duty of expressing our
Thankfulness, we have been somewhat tardy, and are yet solicitous; for such is
the nature of a good turne that it calls for a requital; but your
Excel­lencies Fortune and Greatness doth neither require nor brook it, whence
it comes to pass that we who are otherwise Bountiful, and are wont to return
as much as we have received, because we may seem to render persons in other
things most approved by our testemony, such as it is, more allowable; at
length being endowed with your most excellent Gift, we do freely acknowledge
our deficiency. In the mean time we may justly pride our selves in this, that
your Excellency, as well as our Learning, is so much the cause of our
Happiness, that none can commend your Gifts, or express their worth, but will
himself thereby grow more commendable: therefore have we Praise and Duty
joyned, that we may not avouch how much we owe being un­thankful, nor
understand what we have received unless Learned: Your Excellency doth not only
bestow Gifts worthy your Nobleness, but also there­by make way that we our
selves may, in time, be worthy of your so great Favors: which is a reason of
well-deserving, proper only to your self: neither [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=7) indeed doth your
Excellency only afford Patronage to Learning (which you only can do) but also
make Arts more famous; and whatsoever there is any where of Sciences you do
happily promote and adorne. Pardon us most Illustrious Marchioness if we often
wonder to whom, at length, your Excel­lency, and we our selves, do so much owe
those excellent Arts, and your Excellencies Endowments; how it came to pass
that Eloquence, Poetry, Phi­losophy, things otherwise most different, should
without the help of a Tutor, without the Mid­wifery of an University, at
length, agree in a Woman: Indeed we who wonder that the Antients should adore
the same tutelar Godess both of Arts and Arms, what shall we think of your
Excellency, who are both a Minerva and an Athens to your self, the Muses as
well as an Helicon, Aristotle as well as his Lycaeum? Indeed such is our
condition that we can sooner understand our own happiness then express yours,
which is so far beyond the high­est of our expressions, as this present
Description, such as it is, is beyond the necessity of a Fiction. We think it
concerns us very much (who have the happiness to understand so much of your
Excellency) some way to testify, according to our genius and that of this
place, then which none can admire you more, with what mind, withwhat desires,
with what real affections we do receive and em­brace your most Excellent
Works; which part of our duty we do as sincerely perform as it doth truly tend
to the great honour of this florishing So­citey, that we enjoy your
Excellencies undeserved favour, whom all Learning doth commend, and all
degrees of the Learned adore and honor. So much [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=8) beyond
Expectation it was (most Excellent Lady) that you the first of all, by your
own example, should make it appear that even Women may be Philo­sophers. One
thing we wish for, the enlargement of the fame of your Excellent name, and
more signal vertues, that your most learned Works may appear in such a
language in which we read and admire Tully and Maro amongst the Romans, Plato
and Demosthenes amongst the Grecians. Which if it ever come to pass, we hope
and also pro­mise (your Excellency being willing) accord­ing to our desires,
and the greater increase of Learn­ing, that in a short time, by the very
augmentation of Sciences the World may be sensible what Eternity of Glory your
Excellency hath obtained.

Given from the Colledge of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, the second of the
Calends of Febr. 1663.

John Pearson, Master.

Clem. Nevill.

Theod. Crosland.

George Chamberlaine.

Francis Barton.

William Lynnet.

Walter Catesby.

Richard Stedman.

Robert Scott.

### 1.8.

MADAM,

THe University of Cambridge, in their full Senate, have judged it a necessary
duty to make known their sense of the high Favour which they received in the
Present made to [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=8) them of your most
Excellent Volumes. This, ex­pressed by their publick Orator, approved by
them­selves, is committed to my care to convey, as being their unworthy
Vicechancellor: under which title, also as Master of a small Colledge, I stand
in a double obligation for the same Present, to be

Cambridge. S. M. Magd. Coll. July 13. 1663.

Your Excellencies most Humble and most Devoted Servant,

EDWARD RAINBOWE.

### 1.9.

ILLUSTRISSIMA MARCHIONISSA,

ETsi nobis in more familiarius nihil est, quàm ut homines omnes eruditionis, &
virtutis famâ florentes, curâ, studióque nusquàm non prosequa­mur: singulari
tamen, & praecipuo quodam impetu non modò gloriae tuae favemus, verumetiam
Excellentissimam Heroinam, tanquam Coelo delapsam Sibyllam venera­mur. Quippe
foemineae sortis egressa terminos, longè ultra mundum muliebrem sapis, &
quicquid uspiàm Egregium, aut Divinum est intra mortales, id tuo Tibi jure
vindicas. Sive stas in acie, sive exerces tribu­nalia, sive Carmen fundis,
sive nodos explicas, nusquàm haeres, nusquam succumbis, Dux, Miles, Senator;
Poeta, Philosophus, ac (ut verbo expediamus) Una om­nium instar. Tot igitur, &
tantas, & tam exquisitas animi dotes admirata Cantabrigia nec tacere facilè
nec ulteriùs se continere potest, quin exclamet.

O Soror, ô doctum quae sola es Foemina Nomen! (carmen enim effluit
imprudenti.) Quod nisi nolueris, interrogare Te porrò cupimus, Ista tam laetae
indolis, [[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=9)
tam felicis ingenii, tam excelsi judicii flamma quo prî­mùm incensa Numine,
quibus adjuta flatibus, aut e­nutrita fomitibus effulget? An virili veste
induta Marchionissa annos fortasse aliquot, idque Athenis inter Philosophos
delituisti? An Regina rerum Phi­sophia (quae virorum conspectum verecundè
fugit) soli Tibi se visendam exhibuit, virgineósque sinus omnes exposuit? An
denique tuis in Aedibus sedem posuêre Gratiae, ne dubitemus alibi jam in
Angliâ, quàm Can­tabrigiae, vel Oxonii tertiam vigere Academiam, ubi dictata,
instillatáque Tibi ab Apolline Oracula, quasi sitientibus auribus ebibamus?
Sed quoniam Te vel con­ditio Naturae, vel modestiae stola cohibet à Rostris, &
Cathedrâ, Libros edis, quos partìm nuncupas, par­tim dono Sororibus Academiis
mittis. Nos quidem de magnitudine & animi, & beneficii tui Nobis gra­tulamur,
geminúmque munus in Sacrario Sapientiae re­ponimus, ut in Sexûs honorem
evolvant Posteri, habe­ántque quod Socraticarum omnium, & Pythagorea­rum
Mulierum fragmentis praeferant.

> Dat. Cantab. è frequenti Senatu, quinto Idus Julii 1663.

>

> Amplitudinis, & honoris vestri studiosissimi Procancellarius, reliquus (que)
Senatus Acad. Cant.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=9)

## 2\. LECTOR IN ALMAE MATRIS Armario DUM LIBROS EXCUTIS, Hìc illìc ingenia
pervestigans sedulò, Non potes non EXOSCULARI Foetum PUL CHERRIMUM
INCOMPARABILIS Et (suprà quàm cuidam credibile est) PHILOSOPHANTIS HEROINAE,
D. MARGARETAE, MARCHIONISSAE Novo-Castrensis, Cui Suada Linguam, Pallas animum
imbuit. Sed, quoniam Ipsa (per ingenuae frontis molitiem) in­ter Viros
Sententiam dicere non sustinet, in imagine saltèm, & hâc altae Mentis Effigie
aeternis debet interesse Nominibus.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=10)

### 2.1. Illustrissimo Excellentissimo Nobilissimóque Principi Gulielmo
Marchioni, & Comiti de Newcastle, &c.

ILLUSTRISSIME PRINCEPS,

MEritò olim jactavimus, Te hasce aliquan­dò Aedes, atque haec Musarum sacra
co­luisse. Cúmque ea, ut par erat, longè maxi­ma, quae studiosis hominibus
contingere possit, gloria videretur; vicisti ultrò spei votorúmque nostrorum
fi­dem, & ad tantam superbiendi materiam amplius ali­quid adjicere voluisti.
Tibi utique parùmer at nos pri­ma praeludentis ingenii, & tenera adhùc
Virtutis incu­nabula ostentare potuisse; nisi ex Te etiam teneremus clarissima
adultae jam confirmataeque Indolis monumenta. Dedignata est Mens illustris &
generosa rebus argu­tis ac levibus nimium temporis absumere; quod facit tamen
hodiè maxima scribentium pars, in opprobrium (ut videtur) ac contumeliam
literarum: Tibi verò dis­plicuit otiosa sedulitas: Meditatus es aliquid viro
nobili ac strenuo non indignum, opúsque concinnâsti se­culis omnibus
profuturum. Opposuimus olim Gallis pe­ditatûs vim, ac virorum robora; nunc
Tuâ, Princeps Illustrissime, industriâ, equitandi etiam peritiâ superi­ores
sumus: Tuillos suas, quibus unicè sibi placebant, artes edocuisti. Nec tamen
aegrè fert Equestris na­tio Te hanc ei palmam praeripuisse; neque enim tan­tùm
se in certamine minorem profitetur, verumetiam suo ore atque Linguâ se victam
esse gloriatur. Et quidni illa Tibi ambo se cederet, qui nihil unquam mediocre
potes? Poëtarum miraculis fidem fecisti; Pri­mus utique Pegasum, alatósque
nobis Equos ostendisti, qui tandem humum spernunt, Tuáque pennâ in altum
levati, per Virorum ora, ac super astra volitârunt. [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=10) Vivent, atque in
omni Seculorum memoria vigebunt Excellentiae vestrae scripta nobilissima,
quantúmque ho­noris Platoni suo atque Aristoteli tribuunt homines umbratici,
tantum Tibi concedent, Reges, virique to­to orbe Illustrissimi. Gratissimis
nuper animis No­bilissimae Conjugis Tuae labores accepimus: nunc Tuos pari
ardore complectimur. Est hoc optandum maximè beneficiorum Conjugium; haec
summa est animorum Con­cordia, quibus unicum est de nobis benè merendi
Cer­tamen. Exultantes recipimus Illustres Libros, eósque inter Sacratiora
Bibliothecae Monumenta recondemus. Intereà, propter iterata benevolentiae ac
benignitatis indicia, Vobis gratias quas possumus maximas habe­mus, cunctáque
longè felicissima omni votorum Religi­one exoptamus.

> Dat. è Coll. D. Joan. Evang. Cantabr. 6 Idus Decemb. 1663.

>

> Illustrissimae Vestrae Excellentiae Humillimi ac Devotissimi Clientes,
Magister ac Socii Collegii D. Joannis Evang. Cantabr.

### 2.2.

ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,

DUo magnae mentis summaeque erga nos benevo­lentiae specimina Epistolas &
Poemata (qui­bus nos Excellentia vestra redhonestare dig­nata est) nuper pleni
gaudio accepimus: quae Utráque eo animo amplectimur, quo Sublimia solemus &
praeclara omnia, suis Auctoribus, donec inest homimbus humanitas meretissimam
famam reportatura; In Poesi spiritum il­lum [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=11) laudamus,
leporémque nativum undique & aequa­bilem; nec stagnat Castalis, neque
exaestuat, leni fluore lambit aures, atque animis illabitur. In Philosophia
lucidum & penetrans acumen nil coaclum, nihil mysti­cum liquida das omnia &
genuina; vere Naturalem Naturam. Difficilis vicis Natura, & Veritas: beu
quamvexant illi per sequuntúr (que) fugientem: Alii rapi eam fingunt in
vorticibus, Scyllam quasi; aut Charibdim alteram, qualem etiam revera esse
famae & existi­mationis non raro experiuntur: alii in vacuo palpunt & inani
parili fortuna: imo sunt qui inter Daemones querunt & Genios, quasi sagae
quaedam esset, aut ve­nifica: nonnulli vim tentant, in igne torquent,
cogunt­que seipsam mentiri potiùs, quam fateri: Tibi se ultro pandit & denud
at penitus, rusticitatis notam, si negaret, reverita, sola videns
(Illustrissima Domina) inter Foe­minas quae Naturae nihil debes: quantum
quantum enim Te decoravit, aut luce formae, aut indole ingenii id omne eidem
rependisti in hisce Philosophiae & Poeseos elegantiis, pulcherrimâ talione.
Denique Tibi porro molesti simus pro genuino hocce quo nos deceras pleno
Venerum & gratiarum pignore utinam eloqui possimus gratias, quas mente
concipimus; tunc ab ejus merito longo quamvis nihilo minùs intervallo, minori
tamen distaremus. Vale (Nobilissima Heroina) & vive diu quae literas ornes &
foveras literatos, & nos

> Illustrissima Excellentiae Vestrae Cultu omni & officio observantissimos
Magistrum & Socios Collegii D. Joannis Evangelistae in Academiâ
Cantabrigiensi.

### 2.3.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=11)

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS.

WE lately received, with abundance of de­light and Complacency, those two
tokens of your favour, with which your Grace hath been pleased, to honour us;
Your Poems, and Philosophical Letters, both which we entertain and embrace
with that careful respect, which is due to those high and noble undertakings,
which will procure in all ages (while men have any humanity) condigne fame and
renown to their Authors. In your Poems we admire that Life and Spirit, as also
that Native, and Even Fancie, which, every where, is Conspicuous. Your
Heli­con is neither Pond nor Sea, but like a fair and deep River gently
slides, and flow's in upon your Readers. In your Philosophy there appears,
every where, a clear and searching acuteness of Judge­ment, nothing forced, or
Mysterious: All is plain and genuine, meer and natural Nature. We men find
Nature and Truth very coy and sullen, alas how we vex, persecute, and chase
her, who yet still outruns us: Some imagine her to be in Whirl­pools and
Quick-sands, like another Scylla or Cha­rybdis, and they find Her so now and
then, in their shipwract Credit and Reputation. Some grope for her in Vacuums
and empty spaces, with a suc­cess not unlike their supposals. Some fancy her
among Daemons and Spirits, as if she were a Witch: Others torment her in the
Fire, or Rack her, and force her rather to Belie, then Con­fess her self. But
she willingly shews herself all bare and naked to your Grace; Madam, you are
one, if not the only one of your Sex, that owe Nature [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=12) nothing; for
whatever lustre and beauty of body or mind, she hath deckt and enriched you
withal, your Grace has largely recompensed her, and are per­fectly quit with
her in these your elegant Poems, and Philosophy. In a word, to be no longer
troublesom to your Grace, we would we could but express what thankful
acknowledgements we, in mind and thought, do conceive, for this twin-pledge of
your Love, full of all Muses and Graces; then we should fall less, though
still continually, short of so high a favour. May you live long, most
Virtu­ous and Heroick Lady, to adorn, maintain, and nourish Learning, and
Learned men, and Us, who are, in all offices of Honour and observance.

> Your Graces bounden Servants, The Master and Fellows of St. Johns Coll. in
Cambridge.

### 2.4. Excellentissimae Nobilissimaeque Principi, Marga­retae Novi-Castriae
Ducissae.

ILLUSTRISSIMA HEROINA,

PAllida & exanguis haec chartula Sacratissimos Tuos amplexus summâ eáque
debitâ venera­tione solicitat, unde Promethei ad instar vi­tam & vigorem (Quae
soles dare) ambitioso & lauda­bili furto surripiat: Quin haud vitio vertenda
erit pia nostŕa nec inhonesta fraus, Quum spirare, & vivere oportet eam
Epistolam, quae tanto Nomini in­scripta aeternitatis aemula, & particeps
affinitatis jure facta est. Nempe Tu Ea es divinior Artemisia, [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=12) Quae Mausolo tuo
non perpetuum certissimae mortis indicem, & monumentum solummodò extruere, sed
vitam ipsam aeternitati inserere Praeclaros Animi mo­tus sacri calami Impulsu
continuare, Limpidos Corporis humores, & nobilem sanguinem ex benignâ Ingenii
Tui venâ aeternum supplere, nec non eximia gesta & faci­nora ad vivum
exprimere, coram sistere, & denuò agere valuisti: Exhibuisti nobis talem
Principem qualis ipse solus est, Cujus Imaginem à Te unicâ vel effingi, vel
dignè delineari posse fateatur universus Philoso­phorum Chorus. Exbibuisti
gratissimum orbi munus, praesentis saeculi decus & ornamentum, faturi
Arche­typum & elaboratum exemplar. Insuper videre est quàm mirabili artificio
(Laudatissimi Phidiae jure) conjunctis­simo numini Illustrissimam Tuam
intexuisti Imaginem, usque adeò intemperanti mortis occursu fabricam fa­ciens,
ut perpetuum Vestrum conjugium ab ipsâ haud sejungi possit aut divelli. Quantâ
animi devotione Ornantissimae Heroinae egregium munus amplexamur, sentire
possumus, aptè exprimere (Quae Tua & pro­pria Laus est) neutiquam confidimus:
Digneris, quae­sumus, ut donum Tuum tanquam caelitùs delapsum an­cile
duraturae felicitatis augurium & tesseram silentio (uti par est) veneretur
Collegium nostrum, vel, quod majus, Vestrum.

Johan. Pearson, Magist. Coll

Geo. Chamberlaine. Vm

Clem. Nevil.

Anth. Marshall.

Guliel. Baylie.

Richardus Stedman.

Rob. Crane.

Guliel. Lynnet.

Rob. Scott.

### 2.5.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=13)

EXCELLENTISSIMA PRINCEPS,

HIstoriam Viri tui quantivis pretii, Geniique plenum opus non modò exertissimâ
manu ac­cepimus, verum etiam à capite ad calcem incredibili voluptate, uti
omnia tua jamdudùm evol­vimus. Inter legendum verò non semel hìc, illìc circa
numeros, periodósque substitimus, nunc stili, nunc ar­gumenti, nunc denique
compositionis elegantiâ detenti: ac quia togatis hominibus tuam illam tam
artificem dex­tram tetigisse non licet, quod proximum est, audemus: hoc est
Theatrum honoris, bipaténsque pugillar (in quo paginam utrámque facit Heros
Novo-Castrensis) plus millies amplexamur. Neque tamen Chartae saepiùs
imprimimus oscula, quàm omnibus illa, singulìsque Mu­sis ingeminare nos
existimamus. Nullum enim ingenii tui faetum exponere potes, quem non in usus
suos, de­liciàsque & tollet Alma Cantabrigia, & (ut in par­tem quoque muneris
admittat posteros) 'Bibliothecae Publicae tholo suspendet. Vivet igitur domi,
militiae­que clarissimus Imperator, Tèque (dum literis honor constabit) non
impar gloria sequetur: ità raro, singu­larique exemplo facta dictis ubique
aequas, & invictissimi Ducis res tanto scribis Spiritu, quanto pridem ab ipso
gestae fuerunt. Quodsi forsan Bellatores in arce Pal­lados olim quaerent (tàm
ad Historiae sidem, quàm ad exempli norman) consummatissimi Imperatoris
imaginem, adumbratam illam invenient non in Cyro Xenophontis, sed in
MARGARETAE GULIELMO. Hoc nomine Tibi nos debemus plurimum Eruditissima
foe­minarum; at non hoc uno nomine. Etenim in Stu­diis ubicunque jam nobis
haeret aqua, praesentissimum Numen occurris: in Oratione si laboramus, verba
dictas: si Poëticas fores pulsamus, recludis: Si condi­mus [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=13) Historiam, à
memoriâ es: Si Philosophos inter ambigimus, & involvimur, extricas: postremò,
si stu­demus modò, fers opem supra verticem semper adstans Mulier divini
admodum vultus, atque inexhausti vigoris. Hoc autem totum quid aliud est, quàm
mo­dis omnibus addictam Tibi Cantabrigiam non solùm exercere, sed obruere
beneficiis? Tot ergo magnifi­centiae tuae radios (quibus illustramur) quâ Nos
un­quam gratiarum actione, quibus Musarum opibus redimemus? Nisi forte quae D.
Margaretae pectus, mentémque illam homine sublimiorem nunc habitant, hùc bonâ
tuâ cum veniâ remigrent Veneres, Gratiae­que. Id si principali indulgentiâ
concedas (Heroina) tuis vestigiis pro modulo insistemus, nervos omnes
in­tendemus, totúmque Helicona ciebimus, ne Mars ille tuus sine vate, ac
virtutum tantarum Latino praecone pugnâsse videatur.

> Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 14 Cal. Januar. 1667.

>

> Eminentiae tuae addictissimi PROCANCELLARIUS reliquusque Senat. Acad.
Cantab.

### 2.6.

MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESS,

THat incomparable and most desired Book of your Grace's, containing the
History of his Grace's Actions, in the late War, we have not only readily
received but also perused and read over, as we are wont to do with whatso­ever
you write; yet in reading it we must acknow­ledge that we stop'd often,
because we could not but admire, every where, both the lostiness of the
argument, and elegancy, and spruceness of the Stile, [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=14) and Composition;
and in regard that at so great a distance we could not be admitted to the
favour of kissing your Hand, we cease not to bestow ten thou­sand embraces
upon every page of that Book, which hath so noble and immortal a subject as is
his Grace the Duke of Newcastle; although your Grace can neither dictate nor
publish any Work which the University of Cambridge will not own, and esteem,
yet for this last Essay of your Graces we retain a most singular affection,
and, in testimony thereof, lodge it in the richest Cabinet that we have, our
publick Liberary; for the perusal of the present, and succeeding generation,
long therefore shall the most valiant, and renowned General live, and your
Grace too with him, seeing you have written his enterprises with as great a
spirit as he himself per­form'd them; hereafter if generous and high born men;
if men of War search our Library for a Model of a most accomplished General,
they shall find it expressed to the life, not in Xenophon's Cyrus, but in the
Dutchess of Newcastle's William. Most Excellent Princess, you have unspeakably
obliged us all, but not in this respect alone, for whensoever we find our
selves non-plus'd in our Studies we repair to you, as to our Oracle, if we be
to speak you dictate to us; if we knock at Apollo's doore, you alone open to
us; if we compose an History you are the Remembrancer; if we be confounded and
puzled among the Philosophers, you disentangle us, and assoil all our
difficulties: in a word, whatsoe­ver we attempt your Grace now vouchsafe's to
stand by us, and suggest as a Lady of a most Princely per­sonage, and of an
inexhaustible vigor; and thus you do not only exercise, but oppress us with
your noble­ness; [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=14) nor can we
devise what returne of thanks to make, unless those Muses and Graces (which
have taken up their residence in your Breast) may, with your Graces leave,
retreat for a while to us. If your Grace think good so to favour us, we shall
all of us, jointly and severally endeavour that here­after his Excellency the
great Duke of Newcastle may not want a Latine Poet, for the perpetuating of
his Honour, and your Graces in forreign Coun­tries,

> Cambridge Dec. 16. 1667.

>

> Most renowned Princess, Your Graces most devoted Servants, The
VICECHANCELLOR and the whole Senate of the University of CAMBRIDGE

### 2.7.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,

WE have received your Excellencies in­comparable and most beneficial books
with such grandure and reverence of mind, as it is very fit we should, as a
pledge and warant of our future security; for seeing we are to Contend in a
bruitish world for life, much more for honour, with the reproaches of an
illiterate age, as it were now desparing of attaining to any per­fection in
our weighty affairs, lest Cambridge, and Philosophy, and Learning should grow
infamous, Your Excellency hath only brought it to pass, that we have hopes yet
to live; the memory of our name being perpetuated in your Excellencies Books,
which [[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=15)
will not only survive our Universities, but hold date even with Time it self;
and doubtless we shall live, for as much as it pleaseth you, most Excellent
Prin­cess, so long as either Name or Honour remains, either to Virtue or
Books; and incontinently this age, by the reading of your Books, will loose
its barbarity and rudeness, being made tame by the Ele­gancy both of your
stile and matter: and moreover it will not judge us to be no-bodies whom such
an accomplish'd Princess hath not refused to make not only the Perusers, but
even the Moderators, and Judges of her Works. So as the very worth of your
Excellencies Books, hath brought us, being willing, altogether perswaded and
convinced into a just admiration of your Excellency. However your Grace may
see how much your Praises are impaired, not so much by the default of our Wit
(though that be very great) as because you have the hap to live in such an
unfortunate age. Antient Greece it self, the sole Governness of all just
merits and re­wards, in the cause of such unparallel'd vertues, would have
spent her self in ten years Panegyricks; neither would there be any cause why
Isocrates should prefer his Athenians (though they were Minerva's Scholars)
before Cambridge; to whom your Excel­lency (for such honour doth your Grace
procure) doth kindle a new, yet never perishing, Light: An­tient Rome it self
would have resolved all your Praises into Statues and Monuments of your name,
by which there might arise continually Cornelia's, and if there were any
other, therefore the Glory of their Age, and the Honour of your Sex, because
your Excellency had not then a being, but reserved by the Author of all
things, and born in after times [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=15) for the honour,
and ornament of this age in which we live. The Titles and Triumphs are long
since obsolete, and worn out, the honour of Greece and Rome lives only in a
little slender fame, and those Marbles inscribed with the names of so many of
the Learned, are mouldered into dust, and yet all these live, and flourish in
their due Praises, and are the survivors of all their admirers, and this Glory
is only common to your Excellency, with those fa­mous Worthies, that as
neither the famous Statues, nor the applause of their admirers, nor the
popu­lar vote, but the solid Grace of their Works, and Virtue which is its own
best Herauld, doth declare their merits: So your Excellencies most
unparal­leld worth, and our thankful acknowlegment with­out the furniture of
tumultuous applauses, hath set apart a place in our Library, that faithful
Deposi­tory of Wits, for your Grace, where, according to our slender
provision, which also the Custome of our Ancestors, by whom we are the better
enabled, and our own ingenious confession, we do with great earnestness
desire; we henceforth with acclamations that such an Illustrious Princess
(reason being now restored, Philosophy confirmed, Envy conquered) doth esteem
that in others which she honours in her own person; We will therefore that
this, whatsoever it is, be the argument of a Grateful mind.

> Dated from our Coll. Octob. 6. 1667.

>

> Most Illustrious Princess, Your Excellencies most humble Servants, devoted
to your Clemency and Honour, The Master and Fellows of St. Johns Coll. in
Cambridge.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=16)

### 2.8. Eminentissimae, Celsissimaeque Principi D. Marga­retae, Duci
Novocastrensi.

NOn mutamus Excellentissima Princeps; de Lucubrationibus tuis universis idem
senti­mus, quod de singulis; Singulas autem quan­toperè miremur, ut Quamque
beneficio tuo vidimus, aut perlegimus, neque Ipsa nescis, & nos aliàs
judi­ciis certis non modo notum fecimus, verùm etiam in omnem occasionem
intenti porrò faciemus. Hoc in Li­teras voluntas, hoc (quae tam latè se jam
diffundit) Eruditio tua singularis à togatis Hominibus dudum ex­egit: Hoc
Orationes, hoc Epistolae, hoc Numeri, Salesque, hoc Fundamenta; hoc postremò
(quae Canta­brigiae tuae inscribis) subacti judicii, & lectionis penè
infinitae Pericula meruêre. Quamvis enim ubique viget, & dum (humanitati locus
ullus erit) vigebit Cantabrigia, tamen Illius perpetuitati multum adji­ciet
Librorum tuorum Aeternitas. Non igitur im­meritò Te (doctissima foeminarum) de
scriptis editis & amamus, & suspicimus, in illà Contemplationum Arce nos
jactamus, quam Tu Posteritati stupendis ope­ribus extruxisti. Clarissimè
quidem inter Cives ad al­tissimum honoris apicem evecta micas; Sed (quod
ad­huc augustius est) omnem illam fortunae magnitudinem immortalis ingenii
felicitate ità superas, ut quae versa­re solemus exemplaria Graeca, Latináque
miss a jam facere, & tuâ Unius sapientiâ contenti esse possimus. Quotiès enim
in Philosophiam secedis, sola Magistri nullius in verba juras, sed in omni
Doctorum familiâ laborans & subtilitèr expendis, & acutè discernis, & ad
unguem castigas quicquid aut risit Democritus, aut flevit Hereclitus, aut
deliravit Epicurus, aut tacuit Pythagoras, aut intellexit Aristoteles, aut
ignoravit [[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=16)
Arcesilas, nec omittis siquid Majorum inventis addi­dêre novi homines,
Verulamius, Harvaeus, Cartesi­us, Galilaeus. Hoc (Eminentissima Dux) hoc
de­mùm est heroicè Philosophari. Sed quò Nos Tecum rapis? Nam Principatum in
Literis, tenes, nullis finibus circumscriptum; nec usquam Tibi desinit Na­tura
rerum: at ultra Oceanum Mundus alter exurgit. Mundum illum flamantem loquimur,
quem & luce tuâ incendis, & accuratiùs multò, quàm olim, in Critia, Plato,
describis. Ad eum modum in omni scientiarum genere si pergas sapere, certè mox
id consequére, ut in posterum Margareta non ampliùs Heroinae, sed ipsius
Philosophiae nomen habeatur. Sic, velut in anteces­sum audent sperare.

> Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 5 Idus Octobr. 1668.

>

> Eminentiae tuae addictissimi PROCANCELLARIUS reliquusque Senat. Acad.
Cantab.

### 2.9.

MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESS:

OUr opinion is not in any wise altered; of all your Books in general we judge,
as in rea­son and equity we must of every one of them: and what unspeakable
esteem we have for every one of them, neither are you ignorant, nor may we (as
we did, or hereafter shall receive any of them severally) forbear to publish
to the World. This we think, and this, upon every oc­casion, we profess to be
a return, that your Graces affection to the Commonwealth of learning
(to­gether with your Personal advancement in all man­ner [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=17) of Knowledge)
hath, long ago, called for from all ingenious Scholars: This is a debt, which
men of several professions pay you daily, in consideration of the pleasure and
profit they reap from your O­rations, your Epistles, your Comoedies, and your
Grounds: but especially we of Cambridge remem­ber, and, with exceeding
delight, peruse (the great­est Honour that of late hath been done by a
De­dication to this Community) your most judicious and elaborate Observations
upon Experimental Philosophy. For although we nothing doubt, but the
University of Cambridge will flourish, whilest there is any regard in the
World had to Learning, and Modesty, yet to the Perpetuity of so famous, and
antient a Corporation, we cannot but hope for an addition from the Eternity of
your Labours. It is not therefore for nothing (most learned Princess) that far
beyond what we can express, we renown and admire your Grace, looking ever and
anon upon, and glorying in that immortall stately Fa­bric of Contemplation,
which you have erected for the Wonder, as well as for Instruction of
Poste­rity. It's true, our eyes are almost dazled, when we presume to look up
to that height of National honour, wherein you shine above most of your Sex.
But (which is yet far more noble and Prince­ly) the lustre of your Wit hath so
surpassed the greatness of your Fortune, in glory, that we may now very
plausibly throw away our other Greek, and Latine Authors, and be content to
learn only, what you teach in proper and good English. For, when you retire to
Study, you take (as we see) nothing at all upon trust; you sit down at no
Phi­losophers Feet, but enquiring into the Mysteries of [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=17) every Sect, you
most exactly weigh, distinguish; and correct whatsoever Democritus laughed at,
or Heraclitus wept, or Epicurus raved, or Pythagoras con­cealed, or Aristotle
understood, or Arcesilas was ig­norant of. Nor do you neglect, or omit, in
case the Lord Verulam, or Harvey, or Des Cartes, or Ga­lilaeus hath pretended
to add to the atchievements of the Antients. This indeed, this it is (most
emi­nent Dutchess) to study, to resolve, to determine, like a Royal and
Impartial Professor: But whither on the sudden have you transported us: For
that Principality (which is yours) in Learning admits (it should seem) of no
bounds, but in your happy and pregnant imagination alone. Nature is infinite;
and you your self, having nothing further to know in this, first discover, and
then travel into another, World. we mean your Blazing World, which you
enlighten with your own lustre, and describe to us far more accurately, then
ever Plato in his Critias attempted. After this manner in all sorts of
Scien­ces, if your Eminency proceed, Margaret will shortly pass, not only for
the name of the Dutchess of New­castle, but also for the Cognizance of
Philosophy. So we dare, as it were, before hand, hope, and pro­mise our
selves, who study continually to be more and more (if it be possible) then we
are already.

> Cambridge Oct. 10. 1668.

>

> Most renowned Princess, Your most humble and devoted Servants, The
VICECHANCELLOR and the rest of the Senate of the University of CAMBRIDGE.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=18)

### 2.10. Illustrissimae Excellentissimaeque Principi Marga­retae Novo-
Castrensi Ducissa.

ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,

CUm jampridem nobis explorata penitusque perspecta, sit singular is
Amplitudinis Tuae na­tura quae sic est & multiplici eruditione or­nata &
insitâ humanitate imbuta, ut & possit propter maximam facultatem, & soleat
propter summam be­nevolentiam de Literarum Cultoribus optimè mereri,
committere certè noluimus quin utróque nomine obstricti alacriores hasce
literas sempiternae observantiae indices Celsitudini Tuae offeremus; cujus
eximia bonitas prae­clar um hoc & peculiare habet, quòd nec ab amicis
so­licitando, nec precibus nostris rogando evocata est, sed suâ sponte effusa
& ex se tota: rapitur nimirum ad quamvis sui similitudinem excellens quaeque
indoles, & quicquid aliqualis praestantiae opinionem sustinet, veluti cognatum
sibi, invitat, amplectitur, tuetur. Quàm magnificum hoc atque Tuum quòd
disciplinas nostras Tuae jam venerationis exemplo augustiores reddidisti?
Quanto illud cunctis titulis speciosius ibit in secula, quòd in ea generis
claritate fortunaeque opulentiâ stu­dia fic amas, ut pauperes solent? In
quibus tam fe­liciter versaris, ut nemo ità literaturae vel deservire vel
sufficere videatur, ut quotidie novi aliquid mira­culi parias, ut Foemina
Viris, Aulica Academicis doctri­nae palmam praeripueris, ut singulis denique
in sua cu­jusque laude praestantior evaseris. Ignosce obsecramus, si minum
aliquem, ne Principem quidem nostram ipsa naturâ tantopere valere, aut
propriis viribus in mul­tiformes istas altissimásque cogitationes excitari
atque [[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=18)
erigi non credamus: amplissimam, illam mentem, per omnigenae disciplinae
seriem latissimè patentem, necesse est divinitùs illustrari, docet nos ea tot
tantarúmque rerum penè infinita comprehensio quantus Te coelestis spiritus
habitator intrârit, & quàm non simplex numen uni­cum hoc pectus ad universa
scientiarum spatia laxave­rit. Cúmque his auspitiis quicquid unquam volueris
in artibus consecuta sis, cùm liquidae veritatis notionem melior aliquis
genius Principis nostrae beneficium forè decrevit, cúmque Tuum fuerit non
argumentari, sed pronuntiare oracula; nihilominus (quae est Amplitudi­nis tuae
verecundia) exquisitis rationibus asserere Tua placita & confirmare dignaris
tanquam Tibi fides non debeatur, quasi assensum nostrum non aliqua religio
constringat. Posthac certè nobis in isto genere vigili­arum ferias destinamus,
& Philosophiae tandem metam prehendimus, cùm Celsitudo Tua speculationem istam
dignam existimaverit, cujus le curis imbueret, sibique propiùs addiceret:
Etenim nihil non investigat um ple­néque comprehensum dabit istius accuminis
felix per­spicatia, nihil non inventum cum Cantabrigiensibus suis communicabit
istius candoris par atissima propensio. Ne tamen ignobilem interim quietem
agere, aut de­sidiae litare videamur, reliquisti nobis difficillimam sanè
Provinciam, gratulationem. Quippe divinum quiddam Literarum Alumnis quod certò
sequantur nunc adeptis lucubrationes Tuae jamdudum praestiterunt, in studiis
scilicet tranquilitatem; ideóque nec cuiquam veterum Regum aut Imperatorum
honestiorem unquam titulum erectum fuisse opinamur quàm nos hìc Gratiae Tuae
ponendum cogitamus,

MARGARETAE I. PHILOSOPHORUM PRINCIPI. [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=19) Ob profligatos
errores, sublata dogmatum dissidia & pacem reipublicae literariae restitutum.

Dat.è Coll. S. S. & Individuae Trin. 3 Non. Octob. 1668.

Johan. Pearson, Magist. Coll.

Anth. Marshall.

Guliel. Lynnet.

Richardus Stedman.

Rob. Scott.

Isaac Barrow.

Joannes Hawkins.

Robertus Moyle.

Guliel. Corker.

### 2.11.

ILLUSTRISSIMA PRINCEPS,

ACcepimus, eâ, quâ par fuit animi reverentiâ & honore tam grandis beneficii,
Libros Tuos, id est, Incolumitatis nostrae archas & argu­mentum. Nam, quum in
hâc ultimâ obrutescentis mundi barbarie dimicandum sit nobis de Vitâ, nedum de
Honore, cum tot illiteratis seculi dehonestamentis; ac quasi desperandum esset
de summâ rerum nostrarum; nè vilissimi nominis forent Cantabrigia,
Philosophia, Eruditio; Effecisti Unica, ut putemus nos etiam porrò posse
vivere, consignatâ nostri nominis memoriâ in Li­bris Tuis, etiam ultra
Academias, & cum tempore aequabilitèr duraturis. Vivemus certè, quandoquidem
ita Tibi placuerit, Illustrissima Princeps, quamdiu Virtuti & Libris constabit
Honos; & simul ac Libros Tuos legendo Feritatem exuerit Isthoc seculum, tantâ
rerum verborúmque elegantiâ cicuratum; aestimabit in­super, [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=19) neque nihili
prorsùs nos fuisse, quos ut Ope­rum suorum Arbitros non recusaverit,
Ornatissima Princeps, Ita ipsa Librorum dignitas volentes, per­suasos
omnimodò, victos bonâ fide traduxit in Justis­simam Tui admirationem. Utcunque
tamen vides quantum laudum Tuarum deterendum sit, non tam in­genii nostris
culpâ (licet nimiùm buc! & immane quantum tanta Dignitati imparit) quàm quòd
Nata sis in infelici hoc seculo Tantae Virtutis ergô exiliisset Graeciae
antiqua illa, justissima meritorum aestimatrix in Panegyrica decennalia; neque
esset cur Athenas suas, licet Minervae alumnas, praeponeret Isocrates
Cantabrigiae, cui Tu tantum quippè bonorem concilias, cui novem nec evenidam
lucem accendis. Omnia sua Elogia Roma illa vetus explicâsset in statuas & Tui
nominis Titulos, quibus assurgerent quotidiè Corneliae Liviae, & si quae aliae
tunc fuerunt ideò seculi sui Decus, & sexûs Tui Gloria, quoniam Tu tunc
tem­poris nec dum nata eras, sed Reservata à summo re­rum Authore, & quasi
comperendi nata in aetatis no­stra felicitatem & ornamentum. Sed obsoleverunt
dudum Tituli & Triumphi: periit quicquid fuit Grae­cia & Romae, nisi tenuis
quaedam Fama: etiam ipsa quae magis durare putantur marmora, tot doctorum
no­minibus inscripta, dilapsa sunt in vagùm pulverem, Vivunt tamem adhuc
vigéntque ipsi Authores debitis­simis suis laudibus superstites, &
admiratoribus suis vivaciores. Et communis haec Tibi cum celeberimis illis
mortuis constabit Gloria; quòd, ut illos non jam demonstrant statuarum elogia,
admirantium applausus, & secunda populi admurmuratio; sed solidum doctri­nae
decus, & virtus ipsa suîmet Nomenclatrix: sic & meritissimum Decus Tuum &
gratissima animi nostri attestatio, absque operoso illo gratulationum & [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=20) applausuum
apparatu, seliget Tibi locum in Bibliothecâ nostrâ, fidissimâ illâ ingeniorum
custodiâ, & deposi­taria, ubi, quod tenuis res nostra nobis permittit, quod &
mos majorum & per quos profecimus ingenua Con­fessio deposcit, nos subindè
acclamabimus, Quod & (restitulâ in integrum Ratione, firmatâ Philosophiâ,
victâ Insidiâ) Literas in aliorum aestimet, in suâ Personâ nobilitet
Illustrissima Heroina. Hoc igitur non ingrati animi indicium qualecunque esse
voluimus.

> Cantabrigiae Eid. Octob. 6. 1668

>

> Illustrissima Princeps, Clementiae Tuae & Honori Devotissimi Clientuli,
Praefectus Sociique Collegii D. Joannis Evangelistae.

### 2.12.

MADAM,

BY the Bounty of several Benefactors, our Liberary is furnished with many
large Vo­lumes; yet we have none we so highly e­steem, and are more proud of,
then those written & given us by your Graces own hand. Jewels have their value
crowded in a little room. The Sybills Leaves as they became fewer advanced
their price. Among pieces all so perfectly excellent, we dare not otherwise
offer at a Comparison, then as the Subject leads and determins us. The
Greatness and Miracle which hath appeared in the Life of the most Incomparable
Duke of Newcastle, could not but raise, in your Grace thoughts answerable to
so glorious a Theame, and give us at the same [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=20) time, both
Wonder and Delight, to read the Hi­story of that full-blown Vertue and Glory,
which with us appeared first in their bud and Blossome. The next Glory to that
of having done such Won­ders, is to have writ them so well and exactly. And,
had the Sex allowed it, Your Grace had done the same Actions, and left Despair
to any other Pen to have reached, their height. A grateful mind, which we
desire to Express, is the Prologue to our new Request: but our chief Trust and
Con­fidence is in your own ready and natural inclinati­ons to all Acts of
Bounty and Charity. They that are cunning in the Art of Begging, are so well
versed and studied in Faces, that among an hun­dred, they know which to let
pass, and where to fix: they read at first sight the Characters and
Dispositions of a ready and willing Goodness: and will sometimes pitty them
they Beg of, as carrying Faces apt to undo them into as low poverty as they
themselves suffer. Though perhaps we have not so particular knowledge af those
outward Linea­ments which might encourage this confident ad­dress; yet the
general Fame, besides our own know­ledge, will not suffer us to be ignorant,
of those of your great and generous Soul, which stayes not for opportunities
offered, but seeks them, and to know where it is wanting, is all the argument
necessary to your noble Bounty. We are so unhappily en­gaged in Building, that
we can neither leave off, nor go on without the help and assistance of others.
Yet we could be content to change our designe, and wholly leave what we have
in hand, to erect a Statue to your Graces Name and Memory. That as one
Margaret stands with us famous to Poste­rity [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=21) for her Zeal to
promote the growth of Know­ledge, which was then upon its recovery from a long
and dark ignorance: so now your Grace ap­pears with fairer advantage, being
your self, to the shame and reproach of our Sex, the great pattern and example
of Learning. We despair of raising any more lasting Monument to your Name,
then what already your Grace hath left with us. But, you will oblige here very
many Beads-men and Votaries, who will make it a great part of their study,
that the famous Acts of your Charity and Bounty, may be read not only in
Stones, but Men, who shall for ever bless your Memory, and pray for your
Happiness. In which number your Grace will find at present

> Feb. 28. 1671.

>

> MADAM, Your Graces most obliged and devoted Servants, The Master, Fellows,
and Scholars of St. Johns Coll. in the University of CAMBRIDGE.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=21)

### 2.13. To the most Illustrious and Excellent Prince, the Lord Duke of
Newcastle, &c.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE,

THat your Grace Might not want fresh oc­casions to oblige us, our Colledge was
not hitherto a finisht Building, and we owe the perfection of our Colledge to
the late ge­nerous obligements of your Grace, when you ho­noured us with the
Picture of the late Right Ho­nourable Mary Countess of Shrewsbury, your most
noble Aunt, and our second Found'ress. 'Tis true, we here have lodged hitherto
with Conveniences, enough to attest the Generosity of your thrice noble
Family, above as well our Expectations as Merits; and beyond what Learning
durst promise it self from this Barbarous Age. Our Colledge Walls are as
strong, as our Noble Foundresses Designes were generous: and the Sun looks
upon us still, but as he should, through no Crevices or Chinks, nor makes more
day than we permit him to our melancholy Retirements. Nor would your Grace's
Illustrious Aunt be now ashamed of that fair addition she made our Colledge,
if the durable­ness of the work can reflect any honour upon that generous
Effort of her Charity. But we wanted the last advantage our present Buildings
could re­reive: the Effigies of the Noble Countess of Shrews­bury, which would
at once, ennoble her Foundation, and our acknowledgements; and remind the
curi­osity of Strangers, that this Age hath not been bar­ren of Illustrious
Instances of Charity, and of our thankful resentments of so great
Encouragements to [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=22) Learning. Yea,
my Lord, your Grace hath now instructed us, and may undeceive-others: and the
Statue of your Illustrious Aunt shall now encou­rage our Studies, and
superintend over our Profi­ciency as her own Deputy: and we shall be ashamed
to have lived unprofitably, and unanswerably to so noble a Benefaction; or
that the Illustrious Countess of Shrewsbury should, amidst the Joys, wherein
She is surrounded by a blessed Immortality, have the dissatis­faction to have
loved Learning in vain, and have built us a Synagogue, and so nobly seconded
the designes of the late most Serene Mother of K. Henry the seventh: 'Tis true
we ought to have owned the Honour to have set up ere now the Statue of the
most Noble Countess of Shrewsbury, but that which excuses all Immoralities,
that which involved Kings, and King­doms, your most noble Family, and
Learning, in one Common Desolation, the late Rebellion, hindred us till now:
We could only look on with Sorrow, the place designed for the Effigies of your
Grace's most Noble Aunt, and sigh that the barbarous wickedness of the times,
which allowed no visible remembrance of Saints or Kings, should be able to
defeat our Designe, to perpetuate, in this nature, Her Memory, and our
Acknowledgements: But, we dare be bold humbly to conceive, this our late
thankfulness will be no disadvantage to her happy Memory, and that the
Inscription of St. John's Col­ledge upon her Statue, will hold even with the
latest Date of time: and that it may not be the only miraculous Priviledge of
some Rivers, after they have enricht their neighbouring Banks, to dive
suddenly into the Earth, for the space of some miles, and rise again into
their former greatness, [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=22) and acquire a
newer, and more lasting glory, by being, so long, undiscovered: thus shall the
most Noble Countess of Shrewsbury be not disadvantaged (as far as our weak
pretences can reach) by this our post fact Acknowledgements, but, like
Majesty, by this distance of Years, command a greater Veneration. But if we
dare pretend so much to honour the Memory of the Blessed now in Heaven, how
shall we pay the Living, those that by so great Obligations have deserved all
that we can pre­tend to of Gratitude and Esteem, amongst which, your Grace's
Favours to our Colledge hath entitled you the Principal. My Lord, to such we
are poor in every thing but Prayers: and that your Grace may long live to be
(as you are) the honour of this Age, your most Noble Family, and (which we
take the boldness to be proud in) this Colledge: that, by that Civility,
whereby you have made even your misfortunes Illustrious, and Crown'd Heads
your Admirers, you may long unteach this Barba­rous Age that bruitish
disaffection to Learning; that you may survive that envy which your Grace's
Excellent Accomplishments as well as our little Learning hath attracted, is
the Desire of

> May it please your Grace, Your Graces most Devoted, Obliged, and humble
Servants, The Master and Fellows of St. John's Colledge.

### 2.14.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=23)

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE,

IT would be a matter of great difficulty to re­count your great Praises, but
it would be an endless undertaking to set forth your Merits; how great your
Graces worth is in all parts of the World, especially this of England, may be
con­jectured, even from hence, in that although we may endeavour to reckon up
your Graces particular Fa­vours towards us, yet are we no way able to express
them: And yet to pass by your Graces benificence in silence, because we are
altogether unable to an­swer the worth of it, would be to excuse our selves
from a less, and incurr upon our selves the gilt of a greater Crime; and so
lest we should betray our ignorance in speaking or writing to be professedly
ungrateful, something we must offer to your Grace though we fall never so much
short of the great­ness of your Merits; our devotion in attempting, may in
part excuse our inability in performing, what we owe to your Grace: Pardon us
great Sir if we devoutly admire those singular perfections, for the knowledge
of which we are beholding to your Grace alone, whom when we admire for your
Excel­lency in other Arts, we find that you alone are able to make your Horses
if not altogether equal, yet but little inferiour to their Keepers, we are
convinced that your Industry together with your Skill is so a­vailable, that
they almost seem worthy of the society of Men, and if they could but speak, as
men do, we should hear them complaining that they are in­jured in not being
accounted rational Creatures; when being taught by your Grace they are a
safeguard in War and the greatest ornament of a Common-wealth [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=23) in Peace. Go on
therefore Great Sir who only art able to bring such great things to
perfection: Long may your Grace live like your self, that you may grace the
World with your Inventions, assist the King with your Counsel, preserve your
Countrey by your aid and Valor, and continue to honour us your most humble
Servants with your Patron­age.

Given from our Colledge of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, the fifth of the
Calends of April 1663.

John Pearson Master of the Coll.

Geo. Chamberlaine Vice-Master.

Clem. Nevill.

Robert Boreman.

William Baylie

Robert Crane.

Humphrey Babington.

Richard Stedman.

Robert Scott.

### 2.15. Excellentissimo Honoratissimóque Domino, Domi­no Gulielmo Marchioni
Novo-Castrensi, &c.

EXCELLENTISSIME DOMINE,

PUlchrè & prudenter Reges Clarissimos, solns qui referre potes, imitaris, cûm
eodem op­timè merendi studio, tum nec minore largiendi sacultate: Illis utique
debemus amplissima haec Mu­sarum sacraria, & reditus quibus fruimur,
amplis­simos: Quod optandum erat reliquum, Tunobilissimâ nos arte donâsti, &
humanis usibus longè commodis­simâ. Eximiam proinde Nominis gloriam, utrique
[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=24) & meriti
estis, & consequuti, & transmittendam in posteros felicissimam memoriam, in
quantum durabunt marmora & eruditio. Patere, Vir Illustrissime, quan­tum
Vestra potest insignis Humanitas, ut in laudes tam cumulatas, hoc insuper
accedat debitissimum Tibi, quòd inter Heroas omnes, quos ab interitu certior
Histori­corum fides, aut Poetarum vindicat ingenium, vix Tibi unum in arte Tuâ
imitandum habueris, neminem omnino conferendum habeas. Sanè, inter Deos,
An­tiqui celebrant Apollinem, ob isthanc fortè peritiam, praepositum Equis
Solaribus custodem juxta ac modera­torem; At ille demum is erat, à quo
perperam edoctus Phaethon tristissimas imprudentiae poenas dedit; quanto
feliciorem habiturus exitum, si in Tua tempora incidis­set. At etiam Apolline
prior Neptunus, tutelaris idem Oceani & Equorum Deus, magno cum dedecore
istius artis, praelatam sibi Pallada dolebat, & postha­bitum oleae Pegasum
suum, scilicet uno victus suffra­gio, clarissimam Athenas Urbem, Minervae
reliquit insigniendam. Quàm Tu Marino Numine dignior es, à quo, si contigisses
medius, magnâ suâ cum gloria tulissent, & insignem Pallas repulsam, & felicius
no­men Athenienses. Nec verò est, cur imperitos pror­sus hâc in re fuisse
Veteres, aut minus industrios, creda­mus; magna quidem ea sunt, quae de
Pegaso, Cyllaro, Bucephalo, aliique, non oppidò multis, accepimus: Verùm illi
solùm perficienda fuit res Equestris, qui effi­cere primus potuit, id quod Tu
facis, ut nobilislimum animal, & post homines, omnium sagacissimum, rati­onis
quodammodò particeps esset, & tantùm non huma­nâ dignum societate: Quod, si
Poetarum Princeps nu­dum Equitis epitheton, consultissimo fortissimóque Vi­ro
dignum decus, & Nestori suo par crediderit, quo Te nomine insigniemus,
Clarissime Marchio, eosdem & [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=24) annos meritum
quos  [...] transegit, & melio­rem, si contigerit usquam, famae Tuae
praeconem. Quod solum nostrae opis est, magnos inter scientiarum
instau­ratores Te merito suspicimus, & post divinam illam sanctissimi Regis,
proximè reponimus Icones Tuas; Optimo quidem jure, ut, qui strenuus olim
Regiae Ma­jestatis assertor eras & vindex, eidem esses cum Rege Tuo, quantum
in nobis est, aeternitati sacer: Id insu­per vovemus alacres, magna nos &
amplitudini Vestrae devotissima Societas; Ita Tu nobis usque faveas,
Il­lustrissime Heros Apollinaris. & Musae omnes Mar­chionissa Tua.

Dat.è Coll. S. S. & Individuae Trin. 4 Cal. Febr. 1663.

Johan. Pearson, Magist. Coll.

Clem. Nevil.

Theod. Crosland.

Anth. Marshall.

Georgius Chamberlaine.

Franciscus Barton.

Robertus Crane.

Guliel. Lynnet.

Gualterus Catsby.

### 2.16.

MY LORD,

BEsides the publick acknowledgement of the great honour done to the
University, in a­dorning their Library with your Excellen­cies own most exact,
and renowned Works; The Duty of my place calls upon me to let your Honor know,
that as this singular Grace, and Favour is [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=25) highly resented
by all; so by none more particu­larly acknowledged, and admired then, by

K. C. C. Jan. 16. 1663.

My LORD Your Excellencies most observant Servant

James Fletewood.

### 2.17.

ILLUSTRISSIME MARCHIO,

MIrificè tenemur immensae laudis & Artis o­pere, quod nupèr imputâsti seculo,
& Al­mae Cantabrigiae, dono dedisti; tantum e­nim, ac tam certum eruditionis
argumentum & Acade­miae pergratum, & gloriâ tuâ dignum uno omnes ore
ag­noscimus: Nec alio fortasse Nobis, Posterisve opus erit Theatro, quo summâ
cum veneratione tam Fortunae, quàm Animi tui magnitudinem intueamur. Nomen
quidem aliquod, decúsque olim in hoc studio fuit Xeno­phontis, & Balbi, &
Simonis Atheniensis; cete­rùm ex quo luculentissima res, Novo-Castrensis
Me­thodus in lucem prodiit, Autores istos nec miramur ad­modum, nec
desideramus, ne Veterum faeces cum ho­dierno flore miscere videamur. Si verò
merito suo ce­lebretur Thessalia, quòd Marti sacrum Animal effudit, Vlláne
unquam Oratio Excellentissimo Marchioni par esse poterit, cujus ingenio non
Equum jam aliquem singularem, sed Equestrem Scientiam totam debemus? Nondùm
nobis (Invictissime Domine) nondùm ex­cidere discrimina, quae totiès in acie
Regiarum copia­rum Ductor subiisti: Verùm quià virtutem, & fidem, & triumphos
tuos abundè loquuntur, quotquot Heroas, [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=25) & arma
frequentant, nos Academicis spaciis innutriti, ac literarum omnium amantes in
Equestri Apparatu toti sumus, ubi cuncta subtilitèr accuratè, expresseque
arbitraris: Appellamus Aelios, ac Persios nostrates; appellamus etiam (si
placet) Exteros, qui posthabitis ubique suis Magistris, Unum Te consulunt,
unum au­diunt, unum versant, & suum quisque Quadrupedem ad nutum, obrussámque
tuam castigant. Quantum ad Alumnos togae, & si ferè (quae fortunae nostrae
maligni­tas est) vix ultra jumentum sapimus meritorium; ta­men extremum
Discipulorum tuorum agmen claudere non erubescimus, ab Hipparcho longè omnium
huma­nissimo moniti, hodiè primùm in alieno foro peregrina­mur, Circum
ingredimur, in quatuordecim sedemus, equiria spectamus; neque tamen aut
Xanthum, aut Cyllarum, aut Incitatum, aut Pegasum ipsum am­pliùs, sed quem Tu
seligis, alis, instruis, absolvis, Caballum admiramur,

> Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 9 Cal. Februar. 1663.

>

> Excellentiae tuae addictissimi PROCANCELLARIUS reliquusque Senat. Acad.
Cantab.

### 2.18.

ILLUSTRISSIME PRINCEPS,

UT Tibi usque suppetat nova nobis benefaci­endi materia, deerat quippe
Collegio nostro necdum absoluto & ad fastigium bonâ fide perducto ultima
manus, & exacti probè operis Comple­mentum. Habitavimus quidem hucúsque,
maximâ cum Tuae Illustrissimae Familiae Gloriâ, eleganter & splen­didè satis,
quantum è re nostrâ esset, & liceret per temporum Literis infensorum incuriam.
Sustinent se [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=26) fortiter satis
muri nostri, nec ruinam minitantur, aut admittunt (nisi quà decet) solem: nec
dispuderet Il­lustrissimam Comitissam Salopiensem sui Operis, cujus firmitati
in tam grande Collegii nostri Ornamentum tot anni suffragantur. Sed deerat
adhùc, quae transeun­tibus memoriam tanti beneficii refricaret;
Honoratissi­mae Principis Effigies, & quasi Vicaria Inspectrix tanti
aedificii, nostraeque in bonis studiis profectionis. Et no­strî nos puduit
vesci frugibus, nec arborem suspicere, unde tanta nobis beneficia decidebant.
Ergo per Te li­cuit, Illustrissime Princeps, nobis non jure impingi posse
Ingratitudinis notam: & jam ex voto collocata in Collegii nostri tholo
nobilissimae Amitae tuae Effi­gies, nos animabit indies, quasi novus loci
Genius, & tantae praesentiae Conscientia urgebit nos porrò in hoc li­terarum
certamine, ne inutiles vixisse videamur, aut poeniteret olim Illustrissimam
Heroinam, inter tot gau­dia, quibus in Coelo jam fruitur, fecisse nobis haec
otia, hanc Domum, alterámque à Serenisimâ P. M. Prin­cipe Margareta Fundatrice
nostra habuisse hujus Col­legii Procurationem. Et quidem, ne fecerimus hoc
an­te, & obsignatum Testati simus tanti beneficii grati­tudinisque nostrae
nomen, obstitit bellorum rabies infensa Principibus, Familiae Tuae, Literisque
(Heu nimis) in universum omnibus. Licuit nobis tantùm inspicere defossum sat
alte in sacris hisce aedibus locum Illustris­simae Mariae Salopiensis Statuae
destinatum, & ingemis­cere, tantum potuisse delirans in rabiem usque isthoc
se­culum in pientissimam Nobilissimae Foeminae memo­riam, in Literas bonas
nostrámque omnium Gratitudi­nem. Nec tamen deteretur aliquid de Illustrissimae
Comitissae Gloria, dum nobis (serò licèt) detur esse Gratis, dum perennaverit
Collegium nostrum, Hono­ratissimae Principis Statuae inscriptum: Et ne sola
sint [[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=26)
Fluviorum quorundam miracula, discurrere scilicet lato alveo in lascivientem
riparum viriditatem, deindè subducere se ex oculis, & acto per oculta
aliquorum mil­lium cursu emergere rursùs, & vindicare sese in su­periorem
magnitudinem: emicabit meliùs post tot an­norum intervallum Illustrissimae
Comitissae fama, & quantum licet per gratissimam nostram beneficii in nos Ejus
Commemorationem, majorem sibi conciliabit èlon­ginquo Reverentiam. Si audeamus
haec tantáque spon­dere in Mortuorum memoriam, quo ergò Tibi, Illustris­sime
Princeps, superstiti adhuc (bono cum Deo) sa­tisfiet à nobis, cui tam solenne
est, & haereditarium tot beneficiis Collegii nostri vota, & omnia Honoris
suffra­gia demereri? Ut autem serum sit Lacrymosum illud alterum defuncti olim
Herois celebrandi, & posteros nostros potiùs maneat officium; ut diù faveas
nostro nomini; dedoceátque haec tempora immanem illam in Literas feritatem
summa illa Comitas Tua, quâ tot exteros Principes Tibi conciliâsti, expugnâsti
Invidiam, nullum Tibi infensum reddidisti, nisi communem om­nium hostem, in
votis summè est,

> Illustrissime Princeps, Clementiae Tuae devotissimis Clientibus Magistro &
Sociis Collegii D. Joannis Evangelistae in Academiâ Cantabrigiensi.

### 2.19.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=27)

MOST EMINENT PRINCE,

ON whom to father the rare, and admirable Method of Horsmanship, that
singular, and useful Invention, which hitherto so many Nations, and so many
several Societies of men, and so many Commanders in chief, have earnestly
desired, though Strangers peradventure may, yet of all men a­live We of the
University cannot be to seek; because every single line, that Apelles draws,
serves us for a sufficient Character, and Cognizance of the Ar­tificer: But in
regard of our unfeigned, and un­alterable Zeal for the Duke of Newcastles
honour, We did heretofore (if your Highness remember) now and then entreat,
and beseech you not to sup­press any longer (than necessity required) so
learned, and useful, and compleat a Work. In that humble petition of ours
whether we did as became us, or no, we determine not: only (with leave) we
sup­pose that the reasonableness alone of our importu­nity prevailed at length
with, and overcame a Ge­neral otherwise absolute, and altogether invincible.
Whereupon at this day (by your Princely favour) we see and with exceeding
delight (as occasion is) peruse a second demonstration of your abilities,
ex­posed now to publick view, for the benefit of all generous and high-
spirited men in Europe, so that no man hereafter may dream of any Person in
any Place whatsoever, more Noble, or (in what part of Learning you please)
more an accomplished Master, than your most Excellent self: for, as if in the
former Volume you had only vouchsafed us a tast to whet our Stomachs, you now
spread, and furnish a Royal Table with all sorts of Delicacies; [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=27) you now gratify
the appetite of your Countrey-men; you now encounter, and answer the enquiry
of Cambridge Philosophers, in whose judgement your last adventure seems always
to be the most Glori­ous. If they will enter the Lists, and compare, we
challenge not only these old Professors, Bellerophon, Sesostris, and Sarmenes,
but also the later Authors of greatest account in France, and Italy,
Pignatel­lus, Labrovius, and Grison. Let them altogether appear, and either
they must immediately vanish, or else ingenuously blush that they are but once
na­med in the same day with matchless Cavendish. And although they may seem,
at first, somewhat more than ordinarily concerned, to be thus at length
re­duced, yet as soon as ever they hear the Name of Duke William, they bow to
your Sovereignty, and falling infinitely short of your Glory, they confess you
the most absolute and only Master, and them­selves your Pupils. But why do we
mention these several Dressers, when as (if we look abroad) we may daily see
both Kings and Princes resorting to your Palace, condescending to sit at your
Feet, and intreating you as their Oracle to declare unto them, first where and
of what Race to chuse a Horse for the Mannage, and then how to Feed, and
Order, and Mount, and to Work, and Raise, and Stay, and Ride in all Voltoes,
and Corvetts, Forward, Backward, Side-ways, on both hands, just as the Rider
directs. For this same purpose, and in or­der only to be Matriculated into the
Duke of Newcastle's Academy, the renowned Cavaleers of all Orders attend,
whether they be Knights of the Golden Fleece, in Burgundy, or the Knights of
of St. Michael, in France, or the Knights of the [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=28) Annunciation in
Savoy, or the Knights Batchelors, the Knights of the Bath, and the Knights of
the Garter, in England: for all agree to learn of you, to Back, to Sit, and
Ride, as you direct; and whensoever at a loss, or puzled, or in dispute to
acknowledge you the only Governour, and Dictator, and Um­pire, and such a
Master of Horse, as can (when you please) infuse sense, and reason not only
into Men, but also into Brutes. Most deservedly there­fore shall you (Great
Sir) in your Book entertain, and exercise the Studies not only of this, but
like­wise of succeeding Generations, as we confidently presage, and promise
our selves, who are

> Cambridge, March. 13. 1667.

>

> Your Graces most Humble and most Devoted Servants, The VICE-CHANCELLOR and
the whole Senate of the University of Cambridge.

### 2.20.

EMINENTISSIME PRINCEPS,

UNde sit equestris Methodus, Illa tot Gen­tibus, tot hominum contuberniis, tot
Impera­toribus expetita Gaza, minimè omnium mi­ramur; nam Apellem statìm ex
lineae subtilitate. Ve­rùm, quia Te singularitèr adamamus, quod elucubra­tus
es, laboriosum, & doctum Opus ne semper intra Vestae penetralia concluderes,
saepè (si meministi) plu­ribúsque verbis interpellavimus: recténe, an per
peràm, Ipse videris; certè postulationis nostrae aequitate victus es, &
expugnatus tandèm Dux aliàs insuperabilis; [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=28) hinc alterum
videmus, & beneficio tuo obtinemus excellentis ingenii periculum, quod in
Europae totius Theatro facere dignaris, Ne quis in posterum imagi­netur Uno Te
quicquam esse uspiàm aut generosius, aut (quâ parte velis) eruditius. Etenim
quasi supe­riori Volumine salivam tantùm nobis movisses, Mensam nunc instruis
aberiorem, nunc Civium quoque desideri­um exples, nostraeque Philosophorum
expectationi satis­facis, quibus proxima quaeque tua non possunt non vi­deri
consummatissima. Conferant se (neque enim re­pugnamus) non modò Veteres illi
Bellerophon, Se­sostris, Sarmenes; sed hesterni (si placet) Domito­res Itali,
Gallive, Pignatellus, Labrovicus, Grison; quid? Velut Umbrae diffugiunt; &
quamvis in ar­gumento nobili dolent sibi palmam praeripi, tamen, ubi Nomen
audiunt Gulielmi Ducis, agnoscunt numen, longéque infra Cavendishi laudes
jacentes, summum Illum, unicunque Magistrum, se verò contrà faten­tur. Sed
quorsùm tergeminos, Agitatores loquimur? Cùm Reges etiam, & Terrarum Domino
cernamus ad Te convolantes, Te (praestantissime Moderator) affectantes, Te
consulentes, interrogantésque, ut ab Ori­gine primâ repetas, discernas,
expendas quâ Regione, stirpéque veniat Bellator Sonipes, quomodo parandus,
alendus, erudiendus, curandus, insiliendus, erigendus, admittendus,
compescendus, & in omnem partem pro arbitrio flectendus; nec alio fine, quàm
ut in tuam Unius Academiam adscribantur, limen jam tuum obsident sa­cri
(quotquot in honore) Collegae, sive Aurei Velleris apud Burgundos, sive S.
Michaelis apud Gallos, sive Annuntiationis apud Sabaudos, sive denique
Perisce­lidis, aut Balnei, aut Ordinis Aurati in Patriâ: Nam tuum ad nutum se
componunt, tuis auspiciis inscendunt, & equitant, & quotiescunque vel
delirant, vel abdi­tum [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=29) aliquid,
abstrusúmque quaerunt, omnibus, & sin­gulis Tu Rector, Tu Thesaurus, Tu
Dictator es, & Princeps juventutis, qui non hominibus jam ampliùs, sed Brutis
ipfis mentem, animúmque inspiras. Quo­circa tuis laboribus non solùm hujus
seculi, verum eti­am omnis aevi studia exercebis, quemadmodum in ante­cessum
sibi pollicentur.

> Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 3 Id. Martias 1667.

>

> Eminentiae tuae cupientissimi PROCANCELLARIUS reliquusque Senat. Acad.
Cantab.

### 2.21. Eminentissimo Illustrissimóque Principi, Gulielmo Duci, Marchioni,
Comiti Novo-Castrensi, &c.

EMINENTISSIME PRINCEPS,

REcensere singulos quos nactus es Titulos operae res esset difficilioris, quos
autem merer is pror­sus infinitae; Publica Tua in Universum Orbem merita hunc
nostrum praecipuè Britannicum quanta sint vel hinc licet conjicere, quòd
privata in nos Tua pro dignitate exprimere soliciti etiamnùm si­mus neutiquam
valeamus: Silentio tamen praeterire beneficia satis quia laudare non possumus,
à leviori nos esset culpâ expedire majorisque criminis reatum contra­here,
ingratos palàm profiteri, ne in dicendo rudes vi­deamur. Tentandum igitur est
aliquid etsi parum suc­cedat, in magnis utique voluisse sat est; Voluntati
licet impar sit potentia, impotentiam officiosa excusabit vo­luntas. Ignoscas
itaque, Princeps Illustrissime, side­voti suspiciamus virtutes Tuas, quas vel
novisse tibi uni omnes acceptum referimus; si mirari subeat tuae in [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=29) caeteris
potentiae praestantiam, qui vel Equos potis es reddere ipsorum custodibus si
non omnino pares, parùm saltem inferiores; Tua in ipsos usque adeo cùm arte
valet industria quod tantùm non efficias ut humana societate digni videantur,
quos nisi sola deficeret lo­quela, conquerentes audiremus se injuriâ rationis
parti­cipes non haberi, quùm à Te edocti maximum in Re­publica sint Belli
praesidium, maximum ibidem Pacis ornamentum. Solus ergò qui potes, tanta
pergas per­ficere, Vive diu, tibimetipsi soli diúque similis, Ornes inventis
Orbem, Consilio Regem juves, Patriam auxi­lio incolumen praestes, & nos Tui
studiosissimos Tuo usque Patricinio tuearis.

Dat. è Coll. S. S. & Individuae Trin. 5 Cal. April. 1668.

Johan. Pearson, Magist. Coll.

Georgius Chamberlaine, Vm.

Clem. Nevil.

Rich. Boreman.

Guliel. Baylie.

Robertus Crane.

Humph. Babington.

Rich. Stedman.

Robertus Scott.

### 2.22. Excellentissimo Invictissimóque Principi, Gulielmo Duci Novo-
Castrensi, &c.

ILLUSTRISSME CELSISSIMEQUE PRINCEPS,

QUàm gratum animi cultum affectúmque, cùm universa togatorum gens, tum Musae
preser­tim DEO Triuni sacrae, Familiae Tuae de­beant & enixè devovent, ut non
tam ex verbis, quae [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=30) longo post
linquis intervallo, quàm ex caufis, quarum Ipse Author es aestimare velis, à
Clementia Tua demisse obsecramus. Enimvero, ut taceamus ingentia dona in
literatos jugiter collata, tum praeclara ista, quibus, und cum forulis nostris
tantùm non succumbimus, volumi­na, novis nos urges & oner as gratiaum
argumentis, beneficia beneficiis pertegis, & quo majus plenè exco­gitando non
poteras, Teipsum donas. Quo quidem in­troeunte, videtur Bibliotheca nostra,
Vestrae veluti Magnitudinis aemula, augustiorem multò speciem in­ducere; & ne
quid adventûs defit solennitati, sponte sedibus suis se movent minorum gentium
Heroes, cer­tatìm ad unum omnes assurgunt, & facto agmine in angustias ruunt,
ut Tibi locum officiose cedant. Quos inter Antesignanus CAESAR, Britannorum
olim hostis acerrimus, herbam Tibi promptissimè porrigit, priorem lubens
agnoscit, & serò tandem intelligit difficilem fuisse de Insula nostra
victoriam, utpote quae Tui si­miles, & Te tulerit. Sed defunctorum istae
gratu­lationes, & superstiti etiamdum Principi minùs ac­commodatae: Quòd verò
per or a hominum domi forisque volitas, quòd celebria Tua dicta, & res palàm
gestae, omnium oculos aurésque trahant, & tanquam syderum influxus ubique
praestò sint, id imprimis Excellentissi­mae Heroinae MARGARETAE Tuae, tum
fidelissimo Il­lius Interpreti meritissimò ferimus acceptum. O factum bene ut
quae posteris aeternum profutura sunt, ab oculatâ teste, & individuâ rerum
Tuarum Sociâ exarata transmitterentur; ut quae orbe Terrarum con­scio
perpetrata sunt, linguâ gentibus communi celebren­tur; ut totius denuò Europae
Magnates Novo-Ca­strii Vitam tanquam virtutis omnigenae Exemplum, legant,
suspiciant, imitentur. Quod nostrum est inter­ea, DEUM Opt. Max. suppliciter
oramus, Ut aetati [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=30) Tuae quàm
plurimos porrò annos propitius adjiciat, quibus veneranda Principis Senectus,
quasi redditâ ju­ventute, revirescat, & uberrimam novae insuper Hi­storiae
materiem posteris suppeditet.

Ità vovere indies non desinimus,

Dat. Cantab. à Coll. S. S. atque Individ. Trin. Junii 19. 1669.

Celsitudini Vestrae devotissimi

Joann. Pearson, Magist. Coll.

Geo. Chamberlaine, V. M.

Clem. Nevill.

Guliel. Baylie.

Rob. Crane.

Humph. Babington.

Guliel. Lynnet.

Rich. Stedman.

Jo. Hawkins.

### 2.23.

QUod usque adeò inclarescas, Illustrissime Prin­ceps, quaeque dudum Nominis
Vestri celebri­tas meritò videbatur summa, major quotidiē fiat, seriò illud
Tibi, illud & nobis, si per Te liceat, Collegium nos Vestrum Superbè
gratulamur. Quin pa­teris, Heros Amplissime, otia Vestra nunquam non
oc­cupatissima & à nobis interpellari, inque tantâ omni­um adeundi vos
salutandique contentione, ne Tuorum, ne domesticos, humiles licèt, applausus
dedigneris. Dum famam Vestram omnes ubique praedicant rapiúntque suas ad
partes Nominis Vestri gloriam, dum Britan­nia sibi Te dum Academia vendicat,
quidni & nos, quibus, utpote minoribus, tantum Patrocinium & de­esse [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=31) & deberi
videatur, Te nostrum (quale nobis De­cus & Ornamentum!) gloriemur? At nec fas
est credere Amplitudinem Vestram ablatam nobis velle tam justam gloriandi
Ansam, quumillud solum summis Ve­stris in nos Beneficiis egisse hucusque
videaris, ne Tan­tus è nobis prodiisse Heros difficulter nimis olim
crede­retur. Versabamus manu animóque sedulo quae apud nos sui Ingenii
Vestraeque vitae Gestorum Elegantissi­ma Monumenta deposuer at, Serenissima
Princeps Con­sors Vestra Praeclarissima, moramur singulis Paginis, Summa
quaeque, hoc est, omnia notamus, haurimus ocu­lis quae olim famâ nobis
plurimum, non tamen satis innotuerant, dumque vivi vivum legimus, placidè
per­fruimur, & nostro & posterorum bono; & cum illâ in Re toti sumus opportuné
supervenit Praestantissimum Tui Testimonium Egregium illud hodiè Bibliothecae
no­strae, imo Vestrae, Ornamentum. Accepimus Clarissi­me Ducum, hoc honoris &
amoris Vestri Argumentum eâ, quâ par erat & reverentiâ & gratitudine.
Re­posuimus Librum Illum inter reliquam Musarum su­pellectilem; nec erit in
posterum qùod malè audiamus quasi ex literis emollescerent nimium hominum
animi, & non è nobis prodiret quis quam nisi rebus gerendis in­eptior, cum Tu,
Fortissime Dux, ducis Musarum Cho­ros, exerces juventutem Academicam, excitas
animos, regulásque ponis, quibus ad ardua quaeque obeunda vel interlegendum
assuefiant. Profuisti hucusque Patriae populóque Vestro factis usúque rerum,
quod cum ulterius nec licet nec opus est, ea Tu inter Pacis otia documenta
tradis, quibus transeunt ad posteros Utiles artes; & ad quae hujus Saeculi
homines per Exemplum, ad ea posteri ex praecepto vestro instituantur: nec
ullum pro­fectò magno Principe Immortalitatem merituro dignius benefaciendi
genus quam quod in posteros erogatur:

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=31) Nondum
Senuisti Praestantissime Dux, etsi emeritus, mereris tamen: Aciem instruis,
disponis militem, ex­ercitum ducis, & quicquid ad Victoriam docti Equi
for­tésque equites valuerunt unquam, & valuerunt pluri­mùm, illud. Tu vel
inter otia & ludos meditaris: fir­masti imperium hominum, Animalque nobis
impar & Potentissimum ad usus nostros Amplitudo vestra feli­citer efformavit.
Quin macte virtute Vestra Dux Optime; instrue Tu tua tempora, ut deponant
hodiè homines omnem morum feritatem, vel se fateantur ul­trò ipsis Brutis
immaniores. Haec sunt otia Vestra; fruaris itaque Pace & Recessu illo, Serus
in Coelum redeas, Sisque diu quod hodiè experimur, Ingens Bri­tanniae decus,
literarum praesidium, & perillustre anti­quae virtutis exemplum pariter &
firmamentum: Illa, prosperáque omnia Amplitudini Vestrae precamur.

> Dat. è Collegio praedicto 3 Cal. Aprilis, 1668.

>

> Devotissimi Tibi Magister & Socii Collegii D. Joannis Evangelistae in
Academiâ Contabrigiense.

### 2.24.

VEstris imprimis auxiliis debemus, Illustrissime Princeps, quòd Nobilissima
Domina, Sa­lopiae Camitissa, justis suis apud nos hono­ribus, quibus diù
fraudata est, gaudeat jam tandem, & triumphet. Te autem, cui meritò in Bello
maximi, in pace optimi contigit titulus, apud Reges, summósque Principes
Equestris statuae manet sedes, & expectat gloria. Tam magna praestitit
Celsitudo Tua, ut in solâ virtute sperari possint praemia, & contenta sit
tantùm meruisse. Nulli autem rectiùs sciunt, aut digniores [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=32) sunt, qui
respublicas administrent, quàm qui vehemen­tiùs aversantur & minimè volunt.
Perduellium in Angliâ nullibi fiet mentio sine vestri nominis virtute & summâ
laude, nec vel in dissitissimis terris tam horri­ficum belli fulmen latere
potuit. Non mediocris nos honoris & superbiae tangit sensus, cum cogitemus ea
apud nos olim scientiqe, prudentiae, & invicti animi se prodidisse specimina,
quae bodiè pleno elucescunt ju­bare. Magnus ex Illustrissimâ Familiâ contigit
honos, qui autem è propriâ virtute sequitur longè adhuc ma­jor est. Clarum
virtutis & gloriae facem, quam Cel­situdini Tuae Parentes praetulerunt,
lucidiorem tradet posteris. Superiores nostri ad nos detulerunt, quo animo &
studio nos simul & bonas literas, dum hîc moram traheres, prosequebaris; id
insuper nos in posterum uni­cè curabimus, ut ea, quae hodiè de Te habetur
opinio, incorrupta ad seros usque nepotos descendat, & diutis­simè vivat. Ut
autem egregia illa, quâ maximè gau­des et fulges inclarescat indies
benefaciendi indoles, eam ipsis parietibus nostris inscribi obnixè petimus,
utpotè quae hac ratione ultra mortalitatis fatum sit duratura. Eo­rum in
numero nos sumus, quibus stultitiae nota inuri­tur, quód aedificare caeperint,
nesciunt autem perficere. Utinam non ita verum esset infortunium, quod vetat
quo minùs hoc in nos quadret insame dedecus. Nobis enim non contemnendam
pecuniae summam testamento suo legavit vir quidam Optimus, quam huic usui
de­stinavimus, ille autem, cujus fidei commissa erat fatis nuper cessit, & an
cum illo sepulta prorsùs sit, non­dum satis intellegimus. In luto igitur
relicti, à Te, aliisque quibus propentior ad benignitatem animus est, ostiatim
emendicare cogimur, ut miserè claudicanti jam operi aliquale saltem praestetis
auxilium. Non magna meditamur, non invidiosa arte extructa, non [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=32) excelsis &
variegatis columnis suffulta, non caelatis la­quearibus elaborata, nec marmore
fulgentia designamus tecta. Quod aggredimur, non superbiae aut luxûs, sed
necessitatis opus est. Extremi enim Collegii parietes miserè nutant, & hianti
ore ruinas minantur, ita ut hoc quod novum est quasi fulcrum & pulvinar sibi
po­stulâsse videantur. At angustiores insuper sedes nostrae sunt quàm ut
succrescenti Musarum soboli sufficiant. Quare, si benevolentia Vestra lapides
cum Deucalione post tergum jaectt, numerosiores exurgent juvenes, atque adcò
plures vestri Cultores. Det Deus integrum semper, quo jam gaudes, animum,
corpus agile & vividum, senectutem tardam, vel quae nihil habeat senectutis
prae­ter ipsam prudentiam. Sic Precantur,

> Cal. Mart. 1671.

>

> Celsitudinis Vestrae humillimi Oratores, Magister, Socii & Scholares
Collegii Divi Johannis Evangelistae in Academià CANTABRIGIENSI.

### 2.25.

EMINENTISSIME PRINCEPS,

NOn ubique locorum negliguntur, aut algent Musae; nam Tu foves indiès, & Almae
Parenti studes adhuc: imò verò, constantèr adeo, prolixéque studes, ut quò
voluntatem istam egre­giam in aevum retineres, propter incredibilem naturae
tuae benignitatem ne quidem (is admonendus; etenim sponte tuâ ruis in amplexus
Academiae, nec ullum of­ficii genus omittendum tibi censes. At in Literis
ho­nestandis, in exornandâ Virtute dum ita tempus omne tuum traducis, ad
summam profectò laudem, gloriámque [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=33) contendis:
contendis autem (ut soles) magnis itine­ribus, & expedito planè cursu, quoniam
Armarium Cantabrigiae non Hipparcho jam ampliùs, aut Effigie tuâ vernaculâ
solùm, verùm etiam Latinis Commentariis locupletas: Commentarios illos
intelligimus (si placet) accuratos, & sanè quàm venustos, in quibus
excellen­tissima Margareta perpetuam Rerum gestarum, Even­torumque tuorum
Historiam condit. Quanti verò apud nos ponderis sit exquisitissima Lucubratio,
noli quaerere Dux eximie; neque enim Ipse nescis, & nos certè Ora­tione nostrâ
nequimus explicare. Id potiùs nunc agi­mus, ut Theatrum illud Honoris eadem
operâ Can­tabrigiae, Tibi Seculóque gratulamur: Cantabri­giae primùm, nihil
jucundius esse potest, quàm Pe­ricula & Labores evolvere Imperatoris tanti,
quantus Ipse non Unius jam Britanniae, Sed omnium consensu gentium & es, &
haberis: deinde. Tibi benè omi­namur, quia Tibi (quod nec Achilli Homerico,
nec Hectori Naeviano, contigit) ad memoriae dignitatem abundè sufficit à
laudatissimâ Principe laudari, Quae Te non ita tamen Immortalitati
commendavit, ut non ipsa quoque in Te commendando propriam Ingenii gra­tiam
sit consecuta: postremò, gratulamur huic Seculo, quod penè solus illustras,
qui vel solus (consummatis­sime Dux) quodlibet seculum illustrare posses.

> Cantabrigiae è frequenti Senatu 10 Cal. Junii 1669.

>

> Eminentiae tuae addictissimi PROCANCELLARIUS reliquusque Senat. Acad.
Cantab.

### 2.26.

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=33)

MOST EMINENT PRINCE,

THat Scholars are not every where, nor al­together neglected, your Grace is
one of our greatest Instances; for as occasion serves you condescend, and
vouchsafe both to countenance, and encourage us. And this you do, as with all
imaginable success, so likewise with such wonderful obligingness, and
constancy, that for a continual instigation thereto (we see) you need not the
least item from us; for that purpose the goodness of your own Nature, and the
nobleness of your Spirit is abundantly sufficient. But whilest in this manner
you regard Learning, and embellish Virtue, you give the World to know, that
you are neither a Stranger to, nor unacquainted with the direct Road to
Honour, and Glory; And thither indeed only you march with such expedition and
conduct, that you have already (beyond what an University can write) enriched
our publick Treasury with some last­ing Monuments of your Skill and Gallantry.
Shall we beg leave to remember your Book of Horsmanship, which we love to
peruse and boast of to Strangers? Or will you permit us, with all
thankfulness, to name your last Favour, that accurate and faithful History
(which the most Excellent Margaret hath writ) of your Life, and Actions? In
what esteem the for­mer Work is among us all, we have already decla­red; and
what we think of the letter, ask us not (we pray you) most incomparable Duke;
for you know very well, and we cannot, in any words of ours, suf­ficiently
express. Only we presume at present to congratulate so fair a Theatre of
Honour to the University of Cambridge, and to your self, and to [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=34) this whole
Generation of men altogether: First, to the University, which cannot but with
exceeding satis­faction read over the Atchivements, and Hazards of so famous a
General, as you are, and as all Brave Men acknowledge you to be: for your own
sake in the next place we rejoyce, because (which neither Homer's Achilles,
nor Xenophon's Cyrus, nor Naevius his Hector attained to) your Actions are
registred by an unparrelled Princels, who yet hath not so transcribed your
image, as not therein to interline, and insert a very legible Portraiture of
her own Wit, and Parts: Last of all, we must needs be glad for the lustre, and
advantage of this pre­sent Generation, which now almost shines alone in You,
most accomplished Prince, who of your self alone are sufficient to have
ennobled any other Ge­neration of men whatsoever. Long therefore may you live
in this reputation. So we Pray, and re­main,

> Cambridge, May 22. 1669.

>

> Most Excellent Prince, Your Graces most Humble and most Affectionate
Servants, The VICE-CHANCELLOR and the whole Senate of the University of
Cambridge.

### 2.27.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=34)

MADAM,

THe worthy present which your Excellency hath been pleased to make me by Mr.
Slaughter, hath strucken me into new ad­miration of your goodness and
knowledge. The first, that you are pleased to retain so obliging a me­mory of
a Person that can no ways merit so huge a Favour: And for the second, every
Page in your excellent Book, affordeth abundant matter. I think my self
exceeding happy that I live in the age which is blessed with the presence of
so brave a Person as you are, Madam; who as you are the Ornament of this, will
be the Envy of all future ones. But your Excellency loveth as little to hear
your own Praises, as you do much to deserve the greatest. Therefore I will not
adventure upon that impossible task, but shall reduce my self into my own Orbe
of Humility and thankfulness, for this great Honour you have been pleased to
do me, assuring your Ex­cellency with all, that you could not have deigned it
to any man living, who is more than I am,

Paris, June 9. 1657.

MADAM, Your Excellencies most Humble and most Obedient Servant,

Kenelme Digby.

> I Crave leave of your Excellency, that I may present here my most humble and
obliged Respects, to my Noble Lord, my Lord Marquis your Husband.

### 2.28.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=35)

MADAM,

I received your Honours Letter, and the Books according to your Command, and
had not a fatal Sickness for a long time confined me to my Chamber, and made
me unfit for any business, (and much more to Write to so Illustrious a
per­son) I had long e're this returned my most humble, and hearty Thanks for
that infinite Honour you were pleased to do me (a poor impertinent thing in
Black) in deigning to write, and trust me with the distribu­tion of your
Favours (or magnificence rather) to the University. Your Books were received
(as in­deed they ought) with very much respect, and gra­titude, and I am
commanded by the several Col­ledges to returne their humblest Thanks to your
Honour. I inscribed every Book before I gave it to the respective Colledges,
with such an Inscription as Posterity might know who was their Benefactor. For
instance, that to Magdalene Colledge, thus,

. . . . Liber Collegii Divae Magdalenae, ex Dono Il­lustrissimae Heroinae
Margaretae Novo-Castrensis Marchionissae, Authoris.

What this signifies your Honour may easily know. I humbly beg your Honours
Pardon for this con­fident, and (I fear) impertinent Scrible of,

Q. Coll. OXON. Mar. 24. 1655.

MADAM, Your Honours most Obliged Humble Servant,

Thomas Barlow.

### 2.29.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=35)

MADAM,

YOur Honour pleased to Command two Books (lately composed by your Excel­lency)
to be sent to Cambridge, one to be placed in the Publick Library there, and
the other to be bestowed upon my self, your Honours mean­est Servant; It is
and shall be my Care that this, together with that other formerly sent, may
remain a Monument to Posterity of your Excellencies great worth and singular
affection to our University, which I doubt not but will, for ever, be most
grate­fully acknowledged, by such as shall frequent the Common Library, and
especially by him whom this great Favour hath rendered

Cambr. Octob. 22. 1656.

Your Excellencies most Humble and Thankful Servant,

William Moore.

### 2.30.

MADAM,

I have received, from your Excellence, the Book you sent me by Mr. Benoist;
which obliges me to trouble you with a short expression of my thanks, and of
the sense I have of your extra­ordinary Favour. For tokens of this kind are
not ordinarily sent but to such as pretend to the title as well as to the mind
of Friends. I have already read so much of it (in that Book which my Lord of
Devonshire has) as to give your Excellence an accout of it thus far, That it
is filled throughout with more [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=36) and truer Idea's
of Virtue and Honour than any Book of morality I have read. And if some
Co­mique Writer, by conversation with ill People, have been able to present
Vices upon the Stage moreri­diculously and immodestly, by which they take
their rabble, I reckon that amongst your Praises. For that which most pleases
lewd Spectators is nothing but subtile Cheating or Filch, which a high and
noble mind endued with Virtue from it's Infancy can never come to the
knowledge of. I Rest

Febr. 9. 1661.

Your Excellencies most humble Servant

Thomas Hobbes.

### 2.31.

ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,

I Received (by the hand of your ingenious Ser­vant) that most noble Present,
(those excel­lent Books) you were pleased to send our Colledge, and (the
meanest of your most obliged and thankful Servants) my self. I confess I am
(and for ever should be) amazed at your Excel­lencies condescention, your
great charity and mag­nificence to things so far below you, did I not well
know that the greatest goodness is most diffusive; that those Glorious
Heavenly Bodies (even the Sun it self) dispence their Rayes and benign
Influences to Vallies and little Villages, to Shrubs and Mole­hills, as well
as Mountains, or the tallest Cedars. I shall not call your Excellencies Books
an addition to our private Library, but this a little accession to [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=36) them; they being
(like their Illustrious Author) a far greater Library of Arts and Ingenuity.
Sure I am, even Bodlies Library cannot boast of any such Donation, since King
James sent his Royal Works, and those of his late Martyr'd Majesty were placed
there, nor is like to do, till Kings and your Excellen­cy, write and send
again: whose parts are not (in a tedious way acquired, but infused; not got by
Study, or a laborious industry, but given by the immediate and propitious Hand
of Heaven, and therefore more Divine, like that first principle from whence
they flow. We have a Manuscript Author in Bodlies Library, who endeavors to
shew, That Women excell Men: your Excellency has proved what he proposed, has
done what he indeavored, and given a demonstrative argument to convince the
otherwise unbelieving World. Your Works will be a just foundation of a lasting
and immortal Honour to your self; (but I fear) a reproach to our Sex and us,
when Posterity shall consider, how little we have done with all our Reading
and Industry, and how much your Excellency without them. I shall not indeavor
(what this and after ages will) to commend your Writings (they are their own
best Panegyrique) he that would do this well, should have the genious and
elocution of their great Au­thor. My onely aim is, humbly to acknowledge a
Debt I can never pay, and return the unfeigned thanks and gratitude of

Q. Coll. OXON. May 21. 1663.

(Most Illustrious Princess) Your Excellencies most devoted and most humble
Servant,

Thomas Barlow.

### 2.32.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=37)

MADAM,

I received (a fortnight ago) your Honours Letter, and the Books you sent; one
to the University Library, one to the Vice Chancel­lor, and another to my
self. Mr. Vice-Chancel­lor received your Book (as indeed he ought) with very
much thankfulness, and sense of the great Civility you had done him, and
commanded me to return his respects, and hearty Thanks, which he would have
done himself, but that both he and his Family hath been fore visited with
Sickness (for almost a whole year) so that he has not been (nor now is) in a
condition to write. The like thanks, and (if possible) infinitely more, I must
re­turn in behalf of the University, and my self; being amazed at your
goodness, and undeserved Kindness, that a person so Illustrious, and (for
place and parts so) Eminent, should look upon so unconsiderable, and
impertinent a thing in black, as I am, but that I know the Sun doth shine on
Shrubs, as well as Cedars, and Princes many times cast their Favours upon
persons infinitely below them; whence they can expect no return but gratitude;
and when I fail to pay that Tribute (so justly due to your Honour) may I have
your hate, which will be the greatest curse I am capable of. I have as yet
only read one Story in your Book, and the Language, and In­genuity of it, to
me seems such, that I am perswa­ded the famous Monsieur Scudeny would wish
him­self the Author of it. If I mistake not I think I told you in my last,
that I had a Manuscript Book in my keeping (for it was never yet Printed)
which the Author intitles thus — Womens Worth, or a Trea­tise [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=37) proving by
sundry reasons that Women excell Men. Many of my Sex will hardly believe it,
yet I be­lieve your Honour may prove the best Argument in the World to
convince them of their infidelity. I humbly beg pardon for this rude and
impertinent Scrible. That God Almighty would be pleased to bless you and all
yours, is, and shall be, the constant Prayer, of

Q. Coll. Oxon. Sept. 3. 1656.

MADAM, Your Honours most Obliged, Humble Beadsman

Thomas Barlow.

### 2.33.

MADAM,

THat I have not long e're this made at least some slender return of the
meanest Gra­titude, a verbal acknowledgement, I take the greater boldness now
at length to Apologize; for that it is in no small measure justly chargeable
upon the Chain of those grand Favours, where­with (as the Roman Lady of old,
with Bracelets and Jewels) I have been, by your Excellency, over­whelmed into
an Extasy. The truth of which is too much evidenced by an undeniable argument,
that like such as are newly rowsed out of a Trance, not yet fully returned to
my self, I now begin to talk Idly. Indeed I could not but deplore my own
unhappiness; as equally rack'd between two hate­ful extreams, Ingratitude and
Presumption, that can neither be silently grateful to so Noble a
Bene­factress, [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=38) without too
palpable and disingenuous un­worthiness, nor verbally thankful to so
Illustrious a Princess without a Solaecism; but that I am well assured your
Excellencies Heroick Candor will at least connive at the most rude, if cordial
and humble, expressions of a most devoted mind. And such (Madam) is that, I
here with all submission pre­sent unto you, loaded with such various Instances
of your signal Favours, as never can (except we could suppose your Illustrious
self may) find out a Parrallel. That so mean, so obscure a Person should have
the Honour of receiving first into his custody so rich a Treasure, as the
genuine Product and Issue of so Noble a Mind; and then be commanded to divulge
this his Glory, by presenting them to a whole University in so Glorious a
Name; that this Honour (a high Reward it self) should yet be fur­ther
enhaunced by a splendid Gift, truly wor­thy the Grandure of the Donor, and
that trans­mitted by that Golden Pen, which hath enricht the World with such
excellent variety of inimitable Writings; that a poor scanty Study should
swell into a Library, and become a Repository for such rich Volumes; — Pardon
me (Madam) if at these reflections I wax proud, and be transported beyond the
narrow compass of my contracted self. Your Ex­cellencies Bounty (a true
Transcript of the Divine) creates, what it cannot find, a worthiness in the
Re­ceiver, and ennobles him, whom it makes the ob­ject of generous
Beneficence.

What Honourable reception your Excellencies former Works (in the possession
whereof each pri­vate Colledge-Library, as well as that publick one of the
University, justly prides it self, and boasts its [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=38) riches) found
amongst us, as (indeed) by very few Acknowledgements then signified: How much
more acceptable these latter Volumes are, silence alone can best tell. Few
durst before adventure upon so difficult a Task: and the Reason since that is
more apparent and confirmed (if I may without prophanation make use of the
most Illustrious Lord Marquess his Expression) — None now dares write a
Letter. —

What concernes my most unworthy self, is, that I shall, in Testimony of my
thankfulness, and as a perpetual monument of your Excellencies munifi­cence to
me when I die, transmit your noble Gift as a sacred Heyre-loom to my Family,
and whilest I live, shew your Princely Hand as the Letters­Patents of my
greatest Honour, which is to have this leave of wholly devoting my self ever
to be

Illustrious Madam, Your Excellencies most Humble most Obedient, Obliged, and
Unworthy Servant, and Vassall

David Morton.

### 2.34.

Madam,

SInce my last, I received by the hands of (your Grace's faithful Servant, and
my worthy Friend) Dr. Mayne, two Copies of my Lord Duke's life, (writ by your
Grace) one for our Colledge, and another for my self. I cannot [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=39) but admire your
Graces great goodness and con­descention, your continued munificence and
charity to us (excellent Virtues which I wish in all, but find in very few)
which with all humility, and a deep sense of the very many Obligations laid
upon us, we thankfully acknowledge. He who thinks to requite, undervalues your
Grace's Favours; which (like your eminent parts and place) are too great to
admitt any proportionable returnes from us, besides our constant Prayers and
Gratitude; which (as in duty we stand bound) we shall duely pay. I have read
your Graces Book, which is writ with so much evenness and prospicuity of
Stile, so much truth and generous impartiallity, as well becomes the
(Illustrious persons most concerned, the) great Subject and Author of it. His
Grace's high Birth and Fortune, his unstained Royalty to his Prince, his great
Courage, and prudent Conduct, and such other his Graces eminent Virtues have
deserved, and your Grace's Hand has built him a lasting Mo­nument, which (when
Pyramids of Brass and Marble perish, or, being Sacrilegiously removed and
stoln, disappear) will transfer both your Names and Honours to all Posterity.
That the good pro­vidence of Heaven would long preserve and pros­per your
Grace (the honour of your Sex, and by your unparalel'd Virtues the reproach of
ours) is the Prayer of

Q. Coll. Oxon. Feb. 2. 1667.

MADAM, Your Grace's most Obliged, Faithful and Humble Servant,

Thomas Barlow.

### 2.35.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=39)

MADAME,

JE ne puis attribuer l'honneur que Vous m'avez. fait de m'envoyer Vos oeuures,
qu'a ceque vous avez sceu qu'autres fois j'avois apporté icy d Angleterre que
ce qu'il y en avoit d'eja de publié. C'est, Madame, que j'honore infiniment la
Vertu par­tout où je la descouvre, & qu'elle est encore plus a admirer en
Vostre Sexe & dans les Personnes de Vo­stre qualité, que dans le nostre, &
parmis les scavants; Je la propose en exemple à toutes les Dames dont ja'y
l'honneur de m'pprocher, & je prens maintenant la liberté, Madame, de vous
feliciter du plaisir que vous avez d'eslever si fort vostre ame par dessus les
autres, & de vous mesler si avant dans toutes les in­trigues de l'Univers.
C'est bien autre chose que de n'studier que celles d'une Cour, & que de ne
choisir des ornamens que surune toileté. Dieu veuille, Madame, qu'un si noble
divertissement vous occup'e tousjours, & que vous croyez ausi tousjours que je
suis,

A Paris le 3 d'Octob. 1669.

MADAME, Vostre tres Humble & tres Obeissant Serviteur

SORBIERE.

### 2.36.

Tres Haut & Puissant Prince

CRoiroiton qu'il est possible que vostre tres-Il­lustre Altesse se pouvoit
encore souvenir d'une si inutille creature que moy? depuis 25 ans que je suis
retir'ee de Paris, & parmis les plus rudes [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=40) attaques de la
Fortune qu'avoient agitée vostre Altesse comme les tonneres & les Vents qui
taschoient debray­ler les forts Cedars du Lebanon, en maintenant la sainte
cause, d'un des plus justes Rois que jamais a estés ou que jamais y sera. En
li sant ceste histcire veri­table de la vie de vostre Altesse faite par ceste
Tres­illustre, & Tres-verteus Princesse, Madame la Du­chesse, j'avois de la
peyne a retenir mes larmes, ayant este moy mesme une triste spectateur de
toute ce que passa à Paris & fidel intelligencier de tout ce que passoit en
Flandre & la Holland jusques au retour de vostre Altesse en Angleterre; & je
veu que toute ces travers de la Fortune, ne consista en autre chose qu'a une
perpetuel combat, entre le voulloir & le pouvoir de vostre Altesse; L'une
combattant pour l'esta­blishement du Roy, par le depence inevitable qu'il
fal­loit pour maintenir la juste cause, presque aux abois, non seulement, par
le sequestration des immenses re­venues des biens de vostre Altesse, mais par
le constraint qu'on vous fit de vous retirer, a fin pour ensuitte de rui­ner
la cause du Roy par le ruine qu'on vous fit le pre­mier; mais Dieu vous a
suscitée des amys, & vous avez un pouvoir plus ample qu'auparavant, & il a
faite de vostre Altesse come Dieu fait à Job en re­stituant le decouple son
saint nom soit louée & vous con­tinue sa paix, & sa sainte Grace. Je leu aussy
la Phi­losophie de la Haute & verteuse Princesse Madame la 'Duchesse,
veritablement Tres-curieuse; & en estate de faire honte à nostre miserable
Philosophie de l'ecol­le que n'est autre chose qu'un vray jeu des Cartes;
consistantes en Sophismes & Authorites mal citées, la quelle a perdue la
Theologie, & rendue la Medi­cine la Risée du Monde, et pire que l'Emperice: Et
quoy que je n'entend pas l'exercise du manage des chevaux [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=40) non plus que le
haut Almand; toutefois ces precepts me semble si Majesteux que touts les
maistres du monde en doibt prendre example. C'est pour quoy je metteray ces
Divines escrites dans le frontispiece de ma 'Bibliotheque, a fin que les
enfants des mes enfants profiteroient de tout ces riches enseignments. Il
reste maintenant que je remercie Tres-humblement vostre Tres-Illustre Altesse
de la souvenance qu'elle volut avoir de moy, qui n'est pas tant triste de me
voir reduittê a une si age que me devroit donner craint a mourir citô, come de
me voir approchant à un age si grand qui me pourroit faire incapable de rendre
a vostre Altesse les services dignes de la memoire que je dois conserver dans
mon ame pour demeurer eternellement,

De Vostre Tres. Illustre Altesse le Tres-humble & Tres-obeissant Serviteur,

D. AUISSONE.

### 2.37.

MADAM,

WHen, in the Book which your Lady­ship hath been pleased, by Mr. Benoist, to
honour me with, I read so many Orations, upon so many several occasions,
appro­priated to so many several Persons, my admiration rises to so great a
height, that I know not how to express it, yet when I consider that you,
Madam, are the Author of them all, my Wonder then abates, the fight which I
have had of your former Works, ha­ving raised my thoughts to anexpectation of
as great [[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=41)
a product, from your Ladyship's Pen, as this is: but when I think what thanks
to return, for so great a Favour, I am quite at a stand, for were I as good a
Poet, or Orator, as ever was, it were impossible, either in Prose or Poem, to
set forth a sufficient gra­titude. I find my self therefore, who have no Skill
in either, obliged to say no more, but only to beg your Ladyship's acceptance
of the Humble Thanks of,

Bridgewater-house, Dec. 30. 1662.

MADAM, Your Ladyship's most humble Servant

J. BRIDGEWATER.

### 2.38.

MADAM,

YOu have convinced the World, that your Sex can as well propagate Learning as
our Species, and taught us justly to own all, from our Mother-Wit; 'Tis
without the help of Classick Authors, Schools, or Languages, that you Madam,
have composed your most excellent Poems, Playes, Fables, The World's Olio,
Opinions Philosophical and Physical, which are the greatest Prize the
Invention of Printing can boast of: That Admiration and Praise, which your
Excellency merits, must be the study of Ages to come; which, by your Works,
may be made more knowing. Hi­therto the stolen Tales of Learning, which
Scholars, painfully disingenious, have, in several Ages, Trans­lated from lost
Languages, and entitled themselves [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=41) the Authors, are
not Rules to try the truth of your notions, nor means to clear them to us, but
skreen them from our captivated Apprehensions. Who means to Improve, Madam, by
your discoveries, must study them alone, and freeing themselves of the Pains
of Grammar Rules, tedious Methods, and the Fallacies of unproved Maxims, may
arive early at Truths, may know and be able to discourse things, not senceless
Distinctions; and Philosopha­ting, your way, from the visible effects of
Nature, may soon know more than the Schools, make their Learning useful, and
Bankrupt the Trade of Pedan­try: That you have received, Madam, a Tribute of
Applause from the Persons of most fame this Age affords; that Universities
have done you Ho­mage as the Queen of Sciences, will be the least of your
Glory, whilest you instruct not them, but the Universe, not this alone, but
succeeding Ages; and will have your Fame as oft renewed, as fresh Generations
come to spy this World, by the light you leave them; which cannot be traduced,
for it's Parentage, being sprung from your Rational Soul alone, that borrowing
nought from others, can have no Rivall in Renown, but may challenge that
sin­gular Honour which all Ingenious Persons publish, and will be made Sacred
to your memory, by the most learned, while I among the meanest shall live and
dye,

Chelsey, Sept. 4. 1662.

MADAM, Your Excellencies Highest Honourer and Humblest Servant

CHARLES CHEYNE.

### 2.39.

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=42)

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,

I have, according to your commands, read your Excellencies Orations, and will
not disobey your Excellence, in concealing my Opinion of them. Was it to
condemn any thing, either in matter or the language, having your Excellencies
Warrant for it, I would freely express it, and if it be otherwise, I beg your
Excellencies Favour, that Truth may not pass for Courtship, as being to so
great a Lady from so mean a man, it is in danger to be suspected, which your
Excellence hath been pleased to foresee and forbid. I am, I confess, no great
reader, of late, of new Books, having tried formerly, that to find in them the
least Jewel it must be sifted out of a great deal of Rubbish, and the worst
is, that their Authors take up Errors upon trust one from another, which the
better they adorn with new dresses, the greater injury they do to man­kind. To
make up such Volumes out of Collecti­ons, as Bees gather Hony from this and
that Flower, is rather laborious Industry than fine Wit; But to spin out of
one's own Bowels, not Cobwebs as Spiders do, but rich Tissues of Gold and
Silver, ex­presses a great Fancy well improved, with much thinking. As every
man is not capable of so extra­ordinary Productions, so is not every Woman;
but that Women are naturally as capable of it as Men, if not more, may easily
be proved by making an exact comparison of both their Temperaments and Organs,
which would be a discourse too long to be inserted in a Letter, and your
Excellence hath so clearly decided that Question by your unimitable Works,
that it saves sufficiently that trouble. The [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=42) greatest Masters
in Oratory having been necessitated to acknowledge, that the best art consists
in hiding of it, it may be inferred, that it is yet better to have none at
all, as a natural Amble is to be preferred to that which is got with Tramells,
or the grace­ful Walking of a Gentleman more esteemed than the affected
Demarch of a Dancer: and it is truly a very rare thing to be a great Scholar
without be­ing acquainted with the Universities, and Learned without the help
of Teachers. As there is variety of Sciences, so there are several sorts of
Capacities to acquire them, some proving excellent in one kind, some in
another; but to be capable of all, as well Philosophy as Playes, and Poems as
Orations, be­longs only to a very few, whose Statues should be erected in all
the eminent Places in the World, for their Glory, and our Admiration. I can
hardly stop my Pen from describing what I have marked in ge­neral; for to set
down my particular Observations, they are of so many extraordinary Things,
that or­dinary Terms (and I am capable of no other) can­not make them to be
understood, and I am extreme sensible, that even what is commonly called
Defect, here becomes comly, like some Moles in a beautiful Face, and that what
seemes strange at first, because it crosses the usual Methods of our Studies,
gives at last occasion of amazement, to see your Excel­lency go so far in the
way of knowledge, with stand­ing still, in a manner, and that others should
run continually like Squerils in a Cage, without advan­cing forwards; which
happens, I believe because they dare not, or cannot go one step without
Stilts, and your Excellence trusts to the goodness of your Legs, having been
pleased to allow me the [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=43) honour to read
your Manuscript, I make no doubt but your Excellency will afford the patience
to read this tedious Letter, which though it makes a very small sound, and a
weak clapping of Hands, is a part of that great Applause the whole World gives
to your Excellency, and a certain testimony, that I am out of Inclination, as
well as Duty,

London, Sept 4. 1662.

MADAM, Your Excellencies most Humble most Obedient and most Faithful Servant,

BENOIST.

### 2.40.

MADAM,

HAd I returned you this Letter of Thanks, for the great Honour you did me in
send­ing me your Plays, before I had read them, it would have lookt like a
peece of Flattery, and my Praise of you would have made me like a Blind man,
who fell in love with a Beauty which he ne­ver saw. But having taken time to
read them all over, and some of them more than once, I can now upon a clear
Judgement assure your Ladyship, that my entertainment was so great, that I
know not whether I read them or saw them Acted. For though the Plots, Acts,
and Scenes, be drest in several shapes, and have that which is the life of
Pleasure, a musical variety, yet the Wit, and rich Compo­sure of them is so
much every where the same, that I fancied my self a Spectator in the perusal,
and was [[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=43)
doubtful, whether your Ladyship with your Book had not sent me the new Theater
too. I never in any Dramatick Writings met with more Honour and Virtue matcht
with more Sharpness and delight. Which had it come from such a Pen as Ben
Jonson's, who was always powring Oyle into his Lamp, and owed most of his
Excellencies to his laborious Industry and Art, I should the less wonder. But
coming from a Quill held by a Ladys Hand, who made it not her Toyl but
Recreation to do rarely, confirms me in an Opinion which I have long held,
That the best Art is nothing but the best Imitation of Nature; and that your
Books are the true face, and others but the painted. Madam, as I look upon you
as a great Princess, (for you are so) so that which renders you to be the
Glory and happiest of your Sex, is that you can bring forth such Children of
your Mind in a Wilderness, and in your Coun­trey Walks can chuse all the Muses
to be your Maids of Honour. And, truly, when I consider one part of your
happiness more, which is, That you have a Noble Lord to be your Fellow-Poet,
whose Harmonious Soul and Wit, is exactly tuned to yours, I have nothing left
to wish, but to be al­lowed to remain

Oxford, May 6, 1662.

Your Ladyships true Honourer,

Jasper Mayne.

### 2.41.

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=44)

MOST HONOURED,

I have waited long for a convenience to return my very humble gratitude to
your Excellency, that the poor Church of Litchfield hath some hope in due time
to receive some furtherance in it's Reparation, from your noble munificence. I
am one of those many, that are perswaded, that your Ex­cellency spent more
Treasure to maintain the Royal Cause, in the late Warrs, besides the hazard of
your Person, than any Subject in the three Realms; and am at wonder that it is
not most eminently rewarded and repayed. My gratious Lord; I having been one
from my youth addicted to the ingenuity of Poetry, whereof your Honour hath
been a great Patron, did betake my self, thirteen years since, to write three
Books in Verse, Latine and Heroick, to bewail the most barbarous murther
committed upon the person of King Charles the Martyr. The work is long­since
finisht, and shall in due time be publisht; In the third Book thereof, mention
being made of his Majesties most Heroick Champions, these Verses fol­lowing,
set forth your Excellency as I was able;

Quid Neo-Castrensis parat, audentissimus Heros, Musarum, Martisque decus,
Mensaeque benignae? Cogit ab egelidis Boreae regionibus agmen Intrepidum,
laethúmque volens pro Rege pacisci.

Receive this Testimony, my very gratious Lord, from him that is willing to
embalm your memory with due praise.

Litchfield, Feb. 10. 1663.

Your Excellencies Most Devoted Servant,

Joh. Lich. & Coven.

### 2.42.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=44)

MADAM,

I Gave your Grace not long since the trouble of a very large Letter, and know
not whether I may wish it came safe, being affraid there was some kind of
rudeness in so tedious a Scrible. I now send this to crave Pardon for the bold
im­portunity of that; and to desire another addition to your Graces Favours,
which is, to honour the last Edition of my Witchcraft with your Illustrious
Eye, and Acceptance. I suppose I have in it an­swered some of your Graces
Objections, and have added a Relation or two, which I am well assured of, and
believe them good evidence of Fact. I have ordered that Book I have so long
spoken of to be sent with it, if it can yet be procured; and implore your
Graces ingenious Candor in judging the faults of both. For that of
Preexistence I have many things to say more about it, which I think not fit
publickly to expose; your Grace may com­mand my inmost sentiments of those
matters which I shall be proud to impart to a Person of so great Honour and
Judgement, being really

Bath, Dec. 22.

MADAM, Your Grace's Most Humbly Devoted Servant,

Jos. Glanvill.

### 2.43.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=45)

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR,

I held a long dispute within my self (most Noble, and most Honourable Madam)
whe­ther I should not incurr the just censure of Condemnation, by this bold
presumption of writing to your Ladyship, a person so noble, so courted, so
admired, and I so obscure, that I could never brag of the happiness once to
have seen, much less of being known to your Honour: my low condition on this
hand, deterred me much, and on that your Illustrious Place, balanced with a
gallantry of Spi­rit, well becoming your true Nobility, in birth and match:
yet when I considered, in my mind, that your Honour was pleased to appear now
in ano­ther dress, under the Veil of Books, I thought my self unworthy that
exceeding Honour you have vouchsafed me, if I should not, at least,
acknowledge, what I could never retaliate or express: And who can express the
merit of that noble favour? The Heavenly Raptures of your Soul, composed with
that elaborate skill, and beams of pure Wit, that your lines pass admiration?
Were those Antients now alive, who first discoursed of Atomes, Matter, Form,
and other Ingredients of the Worlds Fabrick, they would hang their Heads,
confounded to see a Lady of most Honourable Extraction, in Prime of youth,
amidst a thousand fasheries of greatness, say more of their own Mysteries,
than they with all their worldly contempts, long Lives, Cells, and So­litary
Retirements. Gteat Souls in the light of con­versation, gain far more
Knowledge, than mewed up Cloysterers, and shew more to the World; their
Inventions shine more Orient, their Illuminations [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=45) more Refulgent,
though cloathed in vulgar termes, their own peoples Dialect: Few mount Fames
Cha­riot with borrowed Wings: and those old Philoso­phers too knew only their
own Tongue Greek, as your Honour complains you only speak your Native English.
Wherein they had some advantage of you, a Language more copious, round, and
full, though the English can want no Elegance, Propriety, or Sweetness, when
it flows from such a Mouth as yours, or drops from such a Pen. Go on then
(most Honourable Madam) to bless the World, with these noble Infants of your
Brain; give Po­sterity an example for after Ages, since former have given you
none, but what you have outstript: It were Impiety, to wish you less great,
that Court­ships might not defraud us of your Immortal mo­numents: No, be
great still, Diminutions would but cool those Heroick Fires within you; let
For­tune confer all her Gifts on you as Nature hath all her endowments,

That you may raise your Muse to such a Pitch As all shall Gaze and Wonder at,
none reach.

And I assure you (most Noble Madam) you can never stand higher, or greater in
the whole Worlds esteem than you now are, and ever shall be in the most
deserved Veneration, of him who glorieth, to subscribe himself,

Utrecht, Dec. 2. 1653.

Most Honourable, and most Virtuous Lady Your Honours most Humble and most
Devoted Servant

Robert Creyghtone.

### 2.44.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=46)

May it please your Excellence, My ever Honoured, Most Noble Lord.

WHen I last had the honour to kiss your Excellencies Hands at Antwerp, you
were pleased to bestow on me, The Passions of the Soul, Written by the Noble
Du Cartes, in Token of your singular Love and Re­spect to me: The Work
Learned, the Author Re­nowned, rendered the Gift Eminent, but much more,
conferred by so Honorable a Peer, upon so unconsi­derable a creature, as my
self: and all ought to have been vehement incentives to a thankful
acknow­ledgement: yet hitherto your splendor, even in this your Eclipse, hath
so prevailed over my modesty, that I buried your Favour not in Oblivion but
Si­lence; thinking it well became my condition, rather to hold my peace, than
speak below the merit, or flat the sublime dignity of the Person to whom I
should speak. But now your Excellencies late ac­cumulation of excessive
Charity, in sending me by Dr. Morley, the Works of your most Honourable,
Vertuous, and Learned Consort, hath chidd my Ingratitude unto a Blush beyond
Confusion; and made me feel some of Du Cartes Passions, transfer­red from your
first gift to your second: I should have consecrated all my pains, to your
never dying Fame, as to a prime Patron of Learning, and I re­ceive Books from
you; Books rare and transcen­dent, distilled from the Brain of a most Noble
Mi­nerva, a Lady, your own Lady, whom delicacy of Education, height of Birth
and Place, might well have exempted from such inferiour employments: [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=46) yet composed
with so curious art, quick stile, refined airy notions, Words so proper
elegant and de­lightful both in Verse and Prose, that I must ever admire the
Harmony of her inspiring Soul: And thence reffecting on my felf, blame my own
un­worthiness, who have spent more time a Univer­sities, without any benefit
to Posterity, than her Honour hath lived years in the World: so fresh and
vigorous is her Fancy, so dull and superan­nuated mine: yet in this dejection
of Mind, I am much refreshed, that your Excellence accounts me worthy to read
her lines; you cast me down, and raise me up; cast me down by her Writings,
which as I never expected, so I never hope to parallel, and you raise me, by
the uncancelled estimation, which you still bear in memory of my mean self. It
is your goodness (my ever Honoured Noble Lord) to peruse low things with Grace
and Mer­cy, and the method of all Honourable Souls, to shine on Shrubs, that
their Favours may higher ad­vance in Prospect. You subjugate my Affections, as
you do great Horses to your Managery. Na­poli gli putedri, Roma scozzona gli
huomini, the Italian Proverb goes; Naples tames Horses, and Rome Men: The
Virtues of both reign in you: In the rare art of taming Horses you excell all
mor­tals, and subdue Men by a no less wonderful Af­fability: that he must be
out of the light of repu­tation, whom you have not particularly obliged, or
pointed out with some mark of Honour: I triumph much in your respect of me,
not that I have deserved it, but that you have vouchsafed it; and shall wish
no longer to be blest, then I [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=47) shall evermore
endeavour to express my self in all things.

Utrecht, Dec. 2. 1653.

My ever Honoured most noble Lord, Your Excellencies most Obliged, and most
affectionate Servant, and Beadsman.

Robert Creyghton.

### 2.45.

MADAM,

I was very much surprized when your Servant saluted me from so Illustrious a
personage; but when he produced those noble Volumes as an intended Testimony
of your Ladyships respect, the unexpectedness of so great an honour made me
suspect the Messenger of a mistake, and that he pre­sented me with what was
meant fitter for the Colledge, or at least to some more worthy and
considerable per­son than my self. But he persisting still in the same story,
my doubts were swallowed up into admira­tion of your Ladyship's singular and
unparalleld goodness; which seems to me to be Corrival with the excellency of
your Wit, and to seek an equal share of Glory in searching out Objects of such
con­descending Acts of Civility, and Bounty, in these obscure corners of
Academical Retirement, as the other in piercing into the greatest difficulties
and the most dark and obstruce Recesses of Philosophy. Madam I humbly crave
Pardon for my boldness, and impatience that I offer so hastily to return
thanks for so eminent a Favour, before I have well compu­ted [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=47) the value
thereof, nor as yet fitly polished and adorned my Stile, by a longer converse
with your Ladyships most Elegant and Ingenious Writings. But the cause of
defects in this kind being so freely confessed, your noble candor will be
pleased to ac­cept the rude reality of those speedy acknowledge­ments made by

C. C. C. June 9.

Thrice-Excellent Madam, Your Ladyships most Humble and Thankful Admirer,

Henry More.

### 2.46.

MADAM,

IN you, the World hath an Illustrious Example of the truth of their Opinion,
who hold, that no Virtue is single, but alwayes accompanied with some (if not
all) of its Fellows. For (to omit those many other Virtues, which seem to
contend each with other, which shall render you conspicuous) to that general
Charity of yours, whereby you dayly oblige all mankind, in supplying the
poverty of their Understandings with the Spiritual Almes of Know­ledge; you
have added an extraordinary Genero­sity, by enriching with your choice
Volumes, the Libraries of some particular Persons, whom you are pleased to
think capable of comprehending your curious Speculations therein contained.
And in the number of these your Bouuty hath given me a right to account my
self. For which eminent Grace and Favour while I strive to shew my self
Grateful, I find [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=48) my Faculties
wholly taken up with Admiration: and that Reason I should make use of, to help
me express my sentiments decently, is dimmed with the Glories of the Person to
whom I address, If, there­fore, I am not able to acquit my self of that Duty,
as I ought; you are to reflect on the exceeding difficulty of it. Justice
requires, you should pardon the Effects of that Transport and Astonishment, of
which your Excellencies are the cause: and when I cannot advance the due
Tribute of Thanks, you ought to admit my Homage of Acknowledge­ments.

Your Wit, Madam, is above all Commenda­tions; your Industry above Belief; your
Labours, in Writing, above humane patience; your Curio­sity above Imitation;
your Notions above any, but your own Subtlety; and all above your Sex. Your
Collections by the improvement they receive from your fertile Brain, become
your own Productions: and those obscure Hints delivered to you in the
Discourses of others, by passing through your lightsome Imagination, are
turned into bright and full Discoveries. You solve Pro­blems with more ease
than others have proposed them: and your Pen hath this particular advantage,
that it leaves no Darkness on the Paper besides that of the Ink. Where you
treat of Arguments for­merly handled by others, you either give them more
light, or contract what they had before into a narrower and more familiar
Compass; and upon all occasions you either produce new things, or speak old
ones after a new manner; so that you stagger the truth of that saying of the
wise Man, That nothing is new under the Sun. Your Expres­sions [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=48) for the most
part are Natural, yet Select; at once explaining and adorning your Matter: and
they who read your Books with design to be in­formed in points of Philosophy,
find themselves at the same time introduced also in Rhetorique. In a word;
while you bring Reasons for the most ad­mirable Works of Nature, you shew your
self to be her greatest Miracle: and your prodigious Sa­gacity inclines even
the Envious to believe, that all you need do to comprehend the most obstruse
things, is only to think on them.

This Language, Madam, is but the imperfect Echo of your merits; nor can any
thing, but your modesty, hinder you from owning it so to be. How­ever, I most
humbly beseech you to hear it, as most proper to that high Honour and
Veneration due to you from,

London, May 3. 1663.

Most incomparable Madam, Your Excellencies most humble Servant,

Walt. Charleton.

### 2.47.

MADAM,

YOur Books have here had a very honou­rable, and publick Reception, and are
not only placed in the private Libraries of every single Colledge, but in the
publick also. Not without the Applause and Admiration of the Learned men of
this Place, that one of your Sex, a great Princess, and not bred to the Arts
with [[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=49)
labour, and toil, as they are, should with so much excellent variety appear
among us. And truly Ma­dam when I consider the various Subjects you have past
through, it would pose me something to find a proper place in any Library for
your Works to stand in, whether among the Orators, Poets, Philosophers,
States-men, or Polititians, since every one of these may be ambitious to stand
next you. Nor can I forbear to let your Ladyship know, that the two last Books
which you were pleased to send to me, added to the former, which I had the
honour to re­ceive from you, are for their number my lesser Li­brary, but for
the value which I put upon the Noble Hand which drew the Li [...]es, far the
greater. Your Servant tells me you would willingly have some of them
translated into the Catholick Language. Though it will be hard to make them
speak so good Latine as they now do English, yet I have prevailed with an
Ingenious Person of this Colledge to under­take the Work when ever you shall
please to assign his Task, whereby your Writings will be enabled to travel
beyond the Seas, and spread themselves, both to your Honour, and the Honour of
your Na­tion, as far as the Commonwealth of Learning reaches. How far your
Ladiship will be served in this particular, when you are come to a resolution
with your own Noble Thoughts, you may please to signify to

Christ Church in Oxford, May 20, 1663.

MADAM, Your Ladyships real Honourer, And most Obliged Servant,

Jasper Mayne.

### 2.48.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=49)

MADAM,

I Have the ill Fortune when I am bound to ac­knowledge a very high Obligation
to your Excellence, at the same time also to stand in need of your Pardon,
that I have done it no sooner. However, I wish. I had the Skill to perform the
one part as answerable to your merit and my duty, as I am confident of your
goodness to give success un­to the other. The Books you condescended to
be­stow upon me have turned a sorry Study into a rich Library, which are so
much their own commenda­tions (besides the gloss your Honourable Name must
give them) that mine I fear may look like Injury and Rebatement to their
Worth. I must not, Madam, be too bold with your hours, which you have devoted
to better uses than the reading of such Papers; but with the tender of my
hum­blest Thanks to your Excellence for the high Ho­nour you have vouchsafed
me, wishing you all the happiness of this, and the better life to come, I
Rest,

Edm. Hall, Oxon. June 30. 1663.

MADAM, Your most humble Servant,

Thomas Tully.

### 2.49.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=50)

MADAM,

IN obedience to your Commands sent me by your Servant in his last Letter, I
have put your Book of Tales into the Hand of a fit person to translate them
into Latine as I think either Uni­versity can afford. Being an exact Master of
both Languages, and enabled with a Genius fit for such an undertaking. I have
also read as much of your Poetry translated by a young Scholars as hath
hither­to past his Pen. In some parts where of I find him happy enough. But
your Excellent Fancy expres­sing it self sometimes in Terms of Art, and Words
only known to Philosophy, he tells me the hardest part of his Task will be how
to find out current Roman Words to match them. To remove which difficulty, I
have directed him to read Lucretius be­fore he proceed farther; who having
softned the most stubborn parts of Natural Philosophy, by ma­king them run
smoothly in his tunable Verses, by an easy Imitation will teach him to do the
like. Ha­ving in these two particulars most readily served you, I should
return you my Studied Thanks, for the se­veral Books you are pleased to send
me, if they did not make me unhappy, by conversing with the Children of your
Mind at so great a distance from the incomparable Parent. For I do assure your
Excellency, I look upon Welbek, as long as you are there, not as a Noble House
seated among solitary Groves, but as a perfect Court of Wit and Learning,
where you have all the Muses for your Maids of Honour; and the best
Philosophers, Statesmen, Orators, and Historians for your Counsellors: And all
these for the Glory of your Sex, created from [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=50) your self. Had I
the Art, like some here, to teach Birds to Speak, All the Fowls which fly in
your Woods should presently be transformed to Nigh­tingales, and taught Musick
enough to sing the praises of so great a Mistress. To whose Vertues I shall
always remain,

London, April 21. 1664.

A most real Honourer And Devoted Servant;

Jasper Maine.

### 2.50.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,

HAving received a Copy of your Works, for the use of the Library of Christ-
Church, and another as a particular favour to my self; I hasten to make my
acknowledgments for both: and must beg leave to say that your Excel­lency has
found the way to make the Arts truly libe­ral, while you not only adorn them
by your Cul­ture, but propagate them by your munificent distri­bution. So that
it will rest a Problem not easily to be resolved, whether you appear greater
in your acquisitions or obligings: whether you instruct the World, or enrich
it more? But it were an envious piece of curiosity, to labour in the Heraldry
of your Virtues which are all greatest, because Yours: and are not to be the
Subject of Contest, but Argument of Praise and Admiration: In particular
manner they are such, to

Your Excellencies Most Humble and Obliged Servant

Jo. Fell.

### 2.51.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=51)

MADAM,

I Am very sorry that my unhappy Fate hath necessitated an unbecoming Slowness
in ac­knowledging a Favour, that requires all possi­bilities of Gratitude, and
exceeds them. But yet, had I nothing else to say in excuse of my no ear­lier
return to the last Noble effects of your Graces goodness, it were sufficient;
That my sence of that mighty Honour was too big for my Pen; and when I began
to speak my resentments of it, I found my self as unable to express them, as
to deserve their oc­casion. Bet yet, Madam, this is not all the reason, for I
was from home when your Grace's Present came, and have been so almost ever
since; other­wise I had not added to my want of merit on other accounts, that
also of appearing insensible, and de­fective in endeavours of acknowledgment;
I must say endeavours, for my Gratitude can rise no higher. Since my receipt
of your Grace's ingenious Works, I have, as my occasions would permit, cast my
Eyes again into them, and I am sorry they cannot dwell there, where I find so
pleasing, and so in­structive an entertainment. And though I must crave your
Pardon for dissenting from your Grace's Opinion in some things, I admire the
quickness, and vigor of your Conceptions, in all: In which your Grace hath
this peculiar among Authors that they are, in the strictest sense, your own,
your Grace being indebted to nothing for them, but your own happy Wit, and
Genius; a thing so uncommon even among the most celebrated Writers of our Sex,
that it ought to be acknowledged with wonder in yours. And really, Madam, your
Grace hath set [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=51) us a patern,
that we ought to admire, but cannot imitate. And whereas you are pleased
sometimes to mention your being no Scholar, as an excuse of de­fects, your
modesty supposeth; By that acknow­ledgment you shew our imperfections that
pretend we are so, rather than discover any of your own.

As for the last Trifle I was bold to present to your Graces Eye, it is much
indebted to the ob­liging reception you were pleased to afford it; and the re
is nothing that sets such a lustre on your Graces great Wit, and Intellectual
Perfections, as that sweet candor of your Spirit that renders you so
accessible, even to your meanest admirers. Where­as your Grace is pleased to
object against some part of the design of my Discourse, that it sets the
per­fection of the sense higher than that of Ratiocination; I humbly desire
that your Grace would consider, that there are two sorts of Reasoning, viz.
Those that the Mind advanceth from its own imbred Idaea's and native Store,
such are all Metaphysical Contemplations. And those natural researches which
are raised from experiment, and the objects of sense. The former are indeed
most perfect when they are most abstracted from the grosness of things
sensible, but the others are then most compleat when they are most accomodated
to them; and when they are not, they are Aery, and Phantastick. Now what I
have said about those matters is to tie down the mind in Physical things, to
consider Nature as it is, to lay a Foundation in sensible collections, and
from thence to proceed to general Propositions, and Discourses. So that my aim
is, that we may arise according to the order of nature by degrees from the
exercise of our Senses, to that of our Reasons; [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=52) which indeed is
most noble and most perfect when it concludes aright, but not so when 'tis
mistaken: And that it may so conclude and arrive to that per­fection, it must
begin in sense: And the more ex­periments our reasons have to work on, by so
much they are the more likely to be certain in their con­clusions, and
consequently more perfect in their actings. But Madam, I doubt I begin to be
tedi­ous, and therefore, at present dare add no more, but that I am,

Illustrious Madam, Your Grace's most Humble and most devoted Servant,

Jos. Glanvill.

### 2.52.

MADAM,

I Had not thus long deferred my dutiful Ac­knowledgments to your Ladyship for
the Ho­nour which I received, with your Ingenious Book of Orations; if I had
not been in hopes to recommend my Gratitude by presenting your Lady­ship with
this Poem, lately Printed; and though it ought not to be ranked amongst those
pollished Pieces, which are derived to the World from your fair hands; yet,
Madam, I cannot doubt of your candid Reception of it; since in that shining
Circle of Graces, which Illustrates your Character, there is not any one more
conspicuous, than your Ge­nerous Humility; which I am confident, will ob­tain
my Pardon of your Ladyship for presuming [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=52) to return you
such a worthless Present, and Divert­ing you from those solid Entertainments,
by which you so improve your Heroick Spirit, and honour the Commonwealth of
Letters.

Norwich, May 12. 1663.

MADAM, I am with profound Respect Your Ladyships most Humble and most Obedient
Servant

S. Tuke.

### 2.53. To the worthily Honoured Dr. Charleton, Physitian in Ordinary to his
MAJESTY.

HONOURED SIR,

HAving received the noble Present from Dr. Yerbury's hand, which you were
pleased to recommend to his care; and with it, the very signal Favour of your
obliging Letter; I hereby hasten to render my acknowledg­ments in reference to
both, which yet must needs fall short, of being in any degree, a just return
to either. I have in the inclosed attempted to speak mine, and the
Universities Duties, and most grate­ful recognitions to my Lord Duke: but can
only hope they may become acceptable from the advan­tage your Hand and
Recommendation will give them: and indeed I shall the more need your
Friend­ship herein, because I understand some Persons have, according to the
method of ill Nature, pleased themselves in doing me unhandsome Offices, with
[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=53) the
Excellent Princess her Grace. Whose great and piercing Understanding will, I
hope, unravel their vile Arts, who can only recommend themselves by traducing
others. Sir you will speak a great Truth, and do no less an Obligation both to
this Place and me, if you shall be pleased to assure my Lord Duke and his
incomparable Princess, that this University and my self have all imaginable
gratitude for their Favours, and Veneration for their Persons: I shall with
the same sincerity make profession of the just regard I bear your self, and
desire to be esteemed

Dec. 26.

SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant,

J. FELL.

### 2.54.

MADAM,

I Received the Honour of your Graces last Let­ter; but have not time now for
so large a return, as so ingenious a Discourse might just­ly require, only I
cannot forbear intimating to your Grace, that I am not so fond a mechanist, as
to sup­pose all the Phoenomena of the World to be raised meerly by those Laws;
but most of them perhaps by a Principle that is vital; And the Anima Mundi I
take to be a very likely, and convenient Hypothe­sis. Of this I am ready to
give your Grace an ac­count, that you shall be pleased to permit it. But the
business of this is somewhat of another nature, being to implore a Favour from
your Grace, not [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=53) upon mine own,
but a publick account. There is in this Place a Library erected, chiefly for
the diversion of Gentlemen that come hither upon the occasion of the Bath.
There are in it several worthy Authors, but it wants the great Honour and
Ornament of the Illustrious Dutchess of New-Castle's Works. I know, Madam,
your Grace hath alwayes writ out of a Principle of Noble Generosity, and
Charity towards Mankind; and are very ready to dispense your Influence to
those that need your Informations: To this I understand most of the
considerable Li­braries of England can bear a Testimony; and there­fore I am
bold upon the confidence I have in your Grace's goodness, to become an humble
Solicitor in the behalf of ours, which will be very much en­nobled by so
glorious an Instance of your Grace's Favour, if you shall please to Honour it
with those Ingenious Works, by which your Grace doth so much outshine your
Sex, and many, that would be thought the greatest Wits, of ours. You see,
Ma­dam, what an apprehension I have of your Grace's Benignity and Candor, in
that I can appear before your Grace in a request for a Favour to others, when
I am my self so infinite a Debtor to those many ob­ligations your Grace hath
been pleased to lay upon me, for all which I have nothing to return, but the
most humble and devout Acknowledgments, of,

Bath, Octob. 13.

Illustrious Madam, Your Grace's most Obedient And most Obliged Servant,

Jos. Glanvill.

### 2.55.

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=54)

MADAM,

I Received a fresh obligation from your Grace in the excellent History you
were pleased to order for me. In which your Grace hath done right to one of
the most Illustrious Hero's of our Age, and erected a lasting Monument to his
Virtue. And in it, Madam, your Grace hath sweet­ly and wonderfully twisted the
Faithfulness of an Historian, with the Affections of a Wife; And your
Illustrious Lord hath in this an Honour beyond the other great Subjects of
History, That his Grace hath not only as much deserved to be Celebrated as
they, But hath moreover the happiness of the nearest Re­lation to an Heroine,
whose Pen is as Glorious as his Sword. And 'tis not easy to say which is
really the greater Wonder, the Famous Loyalty of that great Person, or the
uncommon Excellence of the Pen that described it. But I must take up from a
Sub­ject, in which, when I have said all I can, I shall be defective; and
return to the last Letter wherewith your Grace was pleased to Honour me. For
the business of Witches upon which your Grace reflects again in this, I have
spoken many things more a­bout it in some Additions to my Considerations,
which I am now sending to the Press. As soon as that Discourse is extant, I
shall beg your Graces acceptance of it. In the interim those things may be
superseded.

By Lower Nature in my last, Madam, I meant, the meer Animal, and Plastick
Faculties, whose vio­lent Impetus is the cause of many of our irregularities
and vices. As to the rest, I acquiesce in your Grace's Determinations; And
whereas your Grace is pleased [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=54) to Excuse the
liberty of Arguings; 'tis Madam with me that which least of all things needs
to be excused. For I profess the largest freedom of Discourse and Inquiry. As
for violent and captious Disputes and Oppositions, I indeed much dislike the
immodesty, and immoralities of them; But for free and ingenious exchange of
the Reasons of our particular Senti­ments, 'tis that which discovers Truth,
improves Knowledge, and may be so managed as to be no disinterest to Charity.
Your Grace Madam, I know is a Person of so much Honour and Judgement, as not
to take any thing amiss from my liberty in ex­pressing my apprehensions, which
I use not to ob­trude upon any, but to propose to their Considera­tion and
Enquiries; and for my self there is nothing obligeth me more than the
knowledge of variety of Conceptions. There is a Discourse of mine ex­tant upon
a Subject not very ordinary, which con­tains Notions which some excellent
Persons have not despised, and are not usually met with in other Writings. I
am inquiring after it for your Grace, and as soon as I can procure one (which
is not very easy, that being out of Print) I shall submit it to your Grace's
Judgement. I never saw that Book of Experimental Philosophy, which your Grace
men­tions. And to this, Madam, I have no more to add at present, but that I am

Bath, Aug. 25.

Your Grace's most Humble Honourer and Servant,

Jos. Glanvill.

### 2.56.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=55)

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE,

IT was most fit and equal that as your great Name and Merit transcends the
glories of o­ther Persons; it should be also as singular in its Description;
and have an Historian some way proportioned both in Honour and unparallel'd
Ca­pacities to its self: which just felicity having hap­pened to your Grace,
by the Pen of your Illustri­ous Princess, it remained that one narrow dialect,
should not confine that Relation to this our Island, which was to give Example
to the Heroes of all Nations. And now that in this respect also, your Name is
happily Consecrated to Eternity, We of this Place, are to look upon it as a
signal Honour, to be made Sacrists to it: and to think it a particular Reward
of our suffering in that cause, which you so gloriously asserted, and
accompanied in its fall, to be judged a proper repository, for the Noblest
History of its greatest and most busy transactions, and of the Person most
gloriously concerned in them. And certainly while Oxford is an University of
Loyalty, as well as Learning, which I hope it will never for­get to be, your
Graces virtues and atchievements, will be their equal argument of Study, and
Imitati­on: as now your Favours are of their most grate­ful recognition and
acknowledgment: which in their behalf, with all possible Devotion, are laid at
your Graces Feet, by

Dec. 26.

Your Grace's Most Obedient most Humble, And most Faithful Servant,

J. Fell.

### 2.57.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=55)

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE,

IT was my misfortune to be abroad in Kent when the Letter wherewith your Grace
vouch­safed to Honour me, came to London. And therefore as I came late to
taste the Pleasure of so high a Favour, I hope your Grace will permit me to
plead that delay in excuse of this slow return of my most humble
Acknowledgments and Thanks for it. My most Noble Lord (were it not known by
experience that great Persons, and great Minds, are most apt to stoop from
their own height, and own mean and inconsiderable services offered to them) I
should say it was too low a Condescension in your Grace, to take notice of my
readiness to comply with your Desires: Wherein (beside the discharge of my
Duty) I did likewise serve the ends of my Ambition; it having ever been the
Vanity of Soul­diers to think themselves dignified by the Honours done to
their General. This made me with great Delight employ my self in Designing
that for your Grace, which I should be sorry to live to accom­plish, being
already unhappy enough, in Burying too many Princes. For the thing it self I
am glad to see the King do that which is so decent and wor­thy of him, as to
order your Grace a Tomb among the Kings, who have always been so near to him,
and who stood up so close to his Father in extremity of Danger, and so
bravely, that had not God designed to restore the Crown, in his own Miraculous
way, it had certainly been done before by your Hand. However your Grace hath
prepared for your self a more Noble, and more lasting Monument, in the Fame of
your Heroick Actions, of some of them I [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=56) had the
happiness to be an Eye-witness, upon which pretence I humbly beg the Honour to
retain unto your Grace in the Quality of

Bromley in Kent, July 2. 1671

My LORD, Your Grace's most Obedient Souldier and Servant,

Joh. Roffen.

### 2.58. To the Incomparable Princess, MARGARET, Dutchess of NEW-CASTLE.

MADAM,

AMong many other things, by which your Grace is pleased to distinguish your
self from other Writers, this seems to be not the least remarkable; that
whereas they imploy only their wit, labour, and time, in composing Books, You
bestow also great summs of Money in Print­ing Yours: and not content to enrich
our Heads alone, with your rare Notions, you go higher, and adorn our
Libraries, with your elegant Volumes. To that general Charity, which disposeth
you to benefit all Mankind, you have added a singular Bounty, whereby you
oblige particular Persons: and out of a Nobleness peculiar to your Nature, you
cause your Munificence to Rival your Indu­stry.

This, Madam, among many other your Ex­cellencies, Gratitude commands me to
acknowledge; Your Grace having been pleased to number me a­mong [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=56) those, whom you
vouchsased to honour with such extraordinary Presents. For which I know not
how to shew my self duely thankful, otherwise than by celebrating your
Generosity, and return­ing you some account of the good effects they wrought
in me, while I perused them. Which con­sidering the Noble End for which you
wrote them, and my inability to make you a more proportionate retribution;
will not, I hope, be unacceptable to you. To this purpose, therefore, I am
bold to send your Grace this rude Paper. Which yet I design, not as a
Panegyric of your worth (for what affects us with admiration, strikes us also
with dumbness: and Stars are best discerned by their own lustre) but as a
short Scheme of my own grateful Sentiments. And if I be not so happy, to
deliver them in Language agreeable to the dignity of the Subject, I humbly
beseech you to consider, that such occasions offer themselves very rarely; and
that nothing is more difficult, than to make the Pen observe Decorum, where
Reason is put into disorder, Justice, Ma­dam, requires you should pardon the
effects of that astonishment, whereof your Wonders are the cause.

They tell us, that the End of all Books is either profit, or pleasure: but I
think that distinction (as many other in the Schools) might well be spared:
because, in truth, profit supposeth pleasure; and pleasure is the greatest
profit; nor am I ashamed to profess, that in all my reading I have no other
aim but pleasure. It will not then, I hope, Madam, be thought derogatory to
the Profitableness of your Grace's Books, If I acknowledge my self to have
received very great pleasure in reading them. And [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=57) this pleasure
was so charming, it so far transported me, as often to make me wish, you might
never entertain a resolution of causing your works to be Translated into any
other Language: that so all Ingenious Forreigners, invited by the Fame of your
most delightful Writings, might be brought to do Honour to the English Tongue,
by learning it on purpose to understand them. For I am zealous for the
Reputation of my native Language, and of so communicative a temper, as to
desire all men should participate of what I find delectable. Besides, I could
not but remember, that I had known a great Man of our Nation, who studied
Italian, only to acquaint himself with the Mathematiques of Galileo, in his
Del Movimento, and Saggiatore; and Spa­nish, meerly out of love to the
Incomparable History of Don Quixot: and was thereupon the more apt to promise
my self that your Grace's Works, no less admirable in their kind, than either
of those, would have the like influence upon some of the Bons Esprits beyond
Sea. But this, Madam, was only my Wish: it is not now my Counsel. Should I
here particularly recount to you, what the things were, that raised this so
great delight in me, I should both offend by prolixity, and tacitly cast
disparage­ment upon the rest. For,

Pauperis est, numerare Pecus,

He is but poor, who can account his Wealth:

And what the witty Roman Stoic said of the excel­lent sayings of Zeno,
Cleanthes, Chrysippus and other Princes of that Sect, may be conveniently
accommo­dated to the delightful Remarks every where occur­ring in your Books,
viz. That no choice can be made, [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=57) where all
things are equally Eminent. However, be­cause there is no satisfaction in
Generals, and that Order is necessary to plainness: give me leave to divide my
Text into three parts, your Natural Philosophy, your Morals, and your Poctry.

For your NATURAL Philosophy; it is in­genious and free, and may be, for ought
I know, Excellent: but give me leave, Madam, to confess, I have not yet been
so happy, as to discover much therein that's Apodictical, or wherein I think
my self much obliged to acquiesce. But, that may be the the fault of my own
dull Brain: and Oracles have been after found true, that were at first Dark
and Enigmatical. Again I am somewhat slow of be­lief also; a continual seeker:
as conceiving, I have too much cause to be of Seneca's opinion, that Men may,
indeed enquire and determine what is most pro­bable, but God alone knows
what's true, in the things of Nature. Nor am I single in this Sceptical
Judge­ment. The ROYAL SOCIETY it self (the Tribunal of Philosophical
Doctrines) is of a con­stitution exceedingly strict and rigid in the
exami­nation of Theories concerning Nature; no respecter of Persons or
Authorities, where Verity is concerned; seldom, or never yielding assent
without full con­viction: and that's the Reason why it made choice of these
three Words for its Motto, Nullius in verba.

This Madam, can be no discredit to your Philosophy in particular, because
common to all others: and he is a bold Man, who dares to exempt the Physics of
Aristotle himself, or of Democritus, or Epi­curus, or Des Cartes, or Mr.
Hobbs, or any other hither­to known. For my part, Seriously, I should be loath
[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=58) to
affirm, that they are any other but ingenious Comments of Mens Wits upon the
dark and inex­plicable Text of the World; plausible Conjectures at best; and
no less different, perhaps, from the true History of Nature, than Romances are
from the true actions of Heroes. Nor will I adventure to determine, which of
the two, Aristotle or your Grace, hath given us the best definition of the
Hu­mane Soul: He, when he calls it Entelechia; or you when you say, it is a
Supernatural something, &c. So difficult is it to make a judgement of what
seems incomprehensible.

Nor are you to be discouraged, Madam, If your Philosophy have not the fate to
be publickly read in all Universities of Europe, as your Grace, doubt­less out
of amost Heroic ambition to benefit Man­kind, desires it should. For, while
Men are Men, there will be different Interests, and consequently different
Opinions: nor is the multitude of Follow­ers a certain sign of the Soundness,
but of the Gain­fulness of any Doctrine. If, therefore, the World, which is
obstinate (you know) and governed by pre­judice, will not be induced to
esteem, what you think useful; the blame lyes not at your Door, and you ought
to consolate your self with this reflexion; that you have sufficiently
testified your good inten­tions, and done more than your Duty, in publishing
your Conceptions. Befides, the Virtuosi of our English Universities have, of
late years, proclamed open War against the tyranny of Dogmatizing in any Art
or Science: and as for those of the Roman Religion; there is, I fear me, but
little hope, of ma­king them your Proselites. Because those canting
Polititians, called School-men, having made a new and [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=58) party-colour'd
Vest for the Church, of a kind of Drugget, consisting of the Thrums of
Peripatetic Philosophy, cunningly interwoven among the Gol­den threads of the
Christian Faith; and prevailed, upon Princes to make it Piacular for any
Scholar to appear with his Judgement clad in any other Livery: it is not very
unlikely, the Professors there will soon be brought to offend their Superiors,
by laying aside the defence of Aristotle's Maxims, to assume the Patronage of
New. So that in my silly conceipt, as the Cabbage is observed to starve the
Vine, if set too near: so the Philosophy of Thomas Aquinas and others of the
same mystical Tribe, will hinder the growth of yours, in the same Ground.

For your MORAL Philosophy (for so I take liberty to call your occasional
Reflections upon the Actions, Manners, and Fortunes of Men) Your Grace has
not, indeed tied up your Pen to the la­borious rules of Method, or the
formality of a new Systeme in Ethics: but (what is as well) you have
opportunely, and under various heads, dispersed many useful remarks,
concerning Prudence, as well Civil, as Domestic, in most of your Writings. And
this, it may be presumed, you were pleased to do, not for want of Skill to
reduce your rules of life into the order of dependence and connexion; but with
de­sign, to shew your plenty, and surprize your Readers with good counsel even
where they least expect it. You chose rather to regale us with delicate
Fictions, under the veil whereof wholesom instructions are neatly contrived,
than to embarass and tire us with the observation ofa long train of Precepts,
which are never so effectual, as when naturally flowing from agreeable
Instances and Examples. Your very in­terludes [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=59) contain
adviso's, and your digressions are seasonably instructive: like wise
Husbandmen, you plant Fruit-Trees in your Hedge-rows, and set Straw­berries
and Rasberries among your Roses and Lil­lies. This, Madam, is a piece of no
small art, though not obvious to common Eyes: and if any dislike the course
you have taken in thus scattering and disguising your Morals; I would have him
asked this Question, Whether or no it be folly for a man to refuse to gather
Oranges and Citrons, only be­cause the trees that offer them, are not ranged
in the Order of Cyrus's Quincunx? or whether a Nosegay be less fragrant,
because pluck'd from Flowers grow­ing dispersedly? To all who have read your
Comi­cal Tales, with the same purity of Mind, with which you wrote them; and
are withal qualified to search into the Mythology of all your imaginary
Dialogues: to all such, I say, it is evident, that you have drawn the Images
of all the Virtues, on one hand, and their opposite Vices, on the other, so
much to the life; that men, beholding them, must be, by grateful violence,
compelled to love the Pulchritude of those, and abhor the deformity of these.
Now, this, Ma­dam, you could not have done had you not first had the Idea's of
all Virtues within your self: it being absolutely necessary for a Painter,
first to conceive the form or similitude of the thing he intends to
re­present, in his own Imagination; and then to make the resemblance according
to that form. So that in strictness of truth, those Pictures we call
Originals, are but Copies, yea Copies of Copies: as being first drawn from the
life in the Phantasy, and after pourtrai'd upon Tables. Besides this, your
Grace is further happy, in that the Morals of your Pen are [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=59) clearly
exemplified in those of your Life; in which I have never heard any thing
blamed, any thing di­sputed, unless whether it hath been more Innocent, or
more Obliging. In fine, the Documents of both your Pen and Life seem to be so
good, that who­ever is able to moderate his Passions, and regulate his Actions
by them, needs not to seek further af­ter Happiness: nor need I fear to
pronounce him ar­rived at such perfection, that it will not be easy for him to
be brought to do ill, either out of Weakness, or out of Design.

For your POETRY; therein your Grace hath more than a single advantage above
others.

First, Your Vein appears equally facile, equally free, and copious upon all
occasions, in all sorts of arguments. The Buskin and the Sock are equally fit
for your Muses Legs. Your Phansy is too ge­nerous to be restrained: Your
Invention too nimble to be fettered. Hence it is, that you do not always
confine your Sense to Verse; nor your Verses to Rhythme; nor your Rhythme to
the quantity and sounds of Sillables. Your Descriptions, Expressions,
Similies, Allegories, Metaphors, Epithets, Num­bers, all flow in upon you of
their own accord, and in full Tides: and Verses stand ready minted in the
Treasury of your Brain, as Tears in some Womens Eyes, waiting to be called
forth. So that in you is verified the Doctrine of Plato, in his Dialogue
in­titled Io; that Poesy is not a faculty proceeding from judgement, or
acquired by labour and industry; but a certain divine Fury, or Enthusiasm,
which scorning the controle of Reason, transports the Spirit in Rap­tures, as
Jove's Eagle did Ganymed, or as Witches are said to be wafted above the Clouds
on the wings [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=60) of their
Familiars. Which is, perhaps, the ground of that old saying, nemo fit Poeta,
no Poet is made, but born so: as the rage and liberty of a Poetic Ge­nius gave
occasion to paint Pegasus with Wings, in a flying posture, and without a
Bridle.

Secondly, In your whole Oglio of Poems, I find nothing which is not intirely
Your own. Like good Housewifes in the Countrey, you, make a Feast wholly of
your own provisions: yea, even the Dressing, Sawces, and Garniture of the
Dishes are Your own. And were Perilius Faustinus revived (he, who out of envy
to the Glory of Virgil, made and published a large Catalogue of his Thefts
from Homer and Hesiod) he could hardly discover so much as a single Verse
borrowed, by you, from any Poet, antient or modern. So circumspect you are to
avoid being thought a Plagiary, that you walk not in beaten Paths, but decline
even the rules and methods of your Predecessors, and scorn Imitation, as a
kind of Theft. A commendation, Madam, due to very few, perhaps to none besides
your self. As your Grace, therefore, owes all your Poesy to the inspi­ration
of your own happy Genius alone; so we owe all the Pleasure we are sensible of
in reading your Poems, to you alone. I may have many rivals in these my
thankful acknowledgements, you can have no Competitor in the Glory of their
occasi­ons.

This double Felicity is augmented by the accession of two others, no less
worthy admiration. One is, that as you have made your self an Original, so are
you likewise secure from being Copied. You have indeed, given the world an
illustrious Example; but you have given what it cannot take, the Example
[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=60) being of
that height, that it is hardly attainable. You provoke our Emulation, and at
the same time cast us into despair. Your Poetical Fancies rather brave, than
instruct our capacities: and by setting before our Eyes things inimitable, you
vex our ambition, and oblige us to an unprofitable trouble.

Another is, that you exceed all of your delicate Sex, not only in this age,
but in all ages past. It would puzle the best Historian to find your Parallel
among the most famous Women: and in the Mo­numents of the Roman greatness,
even while that Glorious Nation held the Empire as well of Virtue and Wit, as
that of the World, I cannot meet with an Heroine, to whom I dare to compare
you. There are, I confess, who tell us of a Noble Roman Lady, one Sulpitia,
who composed a History of Domiti­an's times, in Hexametre Verses, and wrote
many Elegant Poems besides; and who hath been highly celebrated by Martial,
Tibullus, Sidonius Apollinaris, and of late by Scaliger also, as an eminent
Pattern both of a Chast and Immaculate Life, and of a neat Poetical Wit: and
once I had some thoughts of drawing a Parallel betwixt that Lady and your
Grace. But, upon a second examination of the par­ticular Remarks, wherein I
had fansied the resem­blance chiefly to consist; and a more serious review of
the Story of her Life, and the remains of her Pen, (extant among the Fragments
of Latine Po­ets, and usually annexed to Petronius Arbiter) I perceived, I
could not proceed in that resolution, without disadvantage on your part, by a
conference so unequal; and thereupon resumed my former co­gitation, that your
Grace's Statue ought to be placed [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=61) alone, and at
the upper end, in the Gallery of Heroic Women, and upon a Pedestal more
advanced than the rest. We read not that Nature hath been so Prodi­gal of her
choicest Largesses, as to produce two Cice­ro's, or two Virgil's, or two Ben
Johnson's: why, then, should we seek after your Equal? It was their glory to
be single: and it must be yours, to have no Peer, for ought we know, you are
the First great Lady, that ever Wrote so much and so much of your own: and,
for ought we can divine, you will also be the Last.

These, Madam, are a few of those swarms of thoughts that crowded into my
unquiet Head, when I proposed to my self to express some part at least of the
great Honour and Reverence I owe your Grace. If I have so far obeyed the
impulse of my Gratitude and Devotion, as to put them into Words, and offer
them to your knowledge; it was not, I as­sure you, out of a vain conceipt,
that they were answerable either to your vast Merits, or to my Obli­gations;
but meerly upon Confidence, you would descend to exercise your Goodness and
Candor, in receiving them as a simple recognition of both. And if I have
suppressed the rest; it was out of good Manners, and a due fear of farther
offending your Patience. I am not ignorant, Madam, that our Prayers to God,
and our Addresses to Princes ought to be short. Resigning you, therefore, to
the conversa­tion of your own more ingenious and useful thoughts, and to the
Tranquill Fruition of those intellectual pleasures, that continually spring up
in you from the Virtues of your Life, and the Fame of your Wri­tings; I most
humbly beg your favourable Inter­pretation [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=61) of what I have
here weakly said, and with all Submission imaginable, cast my self at your
Feet, as becomes

From my House in Covent-Garden May 7. 1667.

Your Graces, Just Honourer, and most Intirely Devoted Servant,

Walter Charleton.

### 2.59.

MADAM,

I Had the Honour to hear so good Solutions given by your Excellency upon
divers Que­stions moved in a whole Afternoon, you was pleased to bestow upon
my unworthy Conversati­on, that I am turning to School with all speed, humbly
beseeching your Excellence may be so boun­tiful towards my Ignorance, as to
Instruct me about the Natural Reason of those Wonderful Glasses, which, as I
told you, Madam, will fly into Powder, if one breaks but the least top of
their tails: whereas without that way they are hardly to be broken by any
weight or strength. The King of France is, as yet unresolved in the Question,
notwithstanding he hath been curious to move it to an Assembly of the best
Philosophers of Paris, the Microcosme of his King­dom. Your Excellence hath no
cause to apprehend the cracking blow of these little innoxious Gunns. If you
did, Madam, a Servant may hold them close in his Fist, and your self can break
the little end of their Tail without the least danger. But, as I was bold to
tell your Excellence, I should be loath to [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=62) believe any
Female Fear should reign amongst so much over-masculine Wisdom, as the World
doth admire in you. I pray God to bless your Excel­lence with a dayly increase
of it, and your worthy self to grant, that among those Admirers, I may strive
to deserve, by way of my humble Service, the Honour to be accounted,

Hague, March 12. 1657.

MADAM, Your Excellencies most Humble and most Obedient Servant

Huygens de Zulichem.

> I have made bold to joyn unto these a couple of poor Epi­grams I did
meditate in my Journey hither, where your Excellencies Noble Tales were my
best entertainment. I hope Madam, you will perceive the intention of them,
through the Mist of a Language I do but harp and ghess at.

### 2.60.

MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESS,

THe Obligations by which your Grace has eminently engaged your Servants in
par­ticular, and in General the whole world, or at least the Judicious and
Civil part of it, are so many and great, that to ennumerate them to this
present Age may seem a large History, and to Gene­rations to come a real
Romance. The happiness was so great we received the last year, when we had, by
your Graces Permission, the Honour to pay our Duties to your happy self, that
the Contemplation of it by your Grace's absence, adds the more to our
Infelicity. But we shall not wholly despair to be [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=62) restored to the
same capacity of waiting on your Grace, which we are extreamly ambitious of:
In the mean time presenting my Wifes most humble Ser­vice to your Grace, I
take the confidence to sub­scribe my self,

April, 22. 1668.

MADAM, Your Graces very great Honourer, And most Devoted Humble Servant,

BERKLEY.

### 2.61.

MY LORD,

IT is not Strange to me that your Grace is pleased to surprise me with such
obliging ci­vilities which are so essential to your Nature, and made customary
by so many frequent Habits, that it were as difficult for your Grace not to do
Acts like your great self, as it is for others (espe­cially in this
degenerating Age) to imitate yours. I return your Grace my most humble Thanks
for the high Honor and Favour of your Books, recei­ved by my self, and Son,
which are much to be valued by judicious Persons, for the worth contain­ed
therein, and rendred most Illustrious, for the great Authors sake, who will be
much admired, not only by the present Age, but by all succession of Ages, as
long as Loyalty, Sincerity, and high Acts of Honour are esteemed by Men, and
have [[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=63) any
attractive Power, My Lord, I most humbly beseech your Grace to believe me to
be

Berkeley-House at St. Johns, April 22. 1668.

Your Grace's high Honourer, And most Obedient Servant,

BERKELEY.

### 2.62.

MY LORD,

THe Right your Grace has to be a Supream Patron of Poesy, is given you, from
your Affection to the Muses, and the excellent merit of your own Compositions,
which have so many ways beautified Poesy, and delighted our Theatres, as they
have received from your Wit (if possible) equal Glory with your other
Gallantries and Actions, which have so much honoured our Nation; for this
Cause I must beg your Graces Pardon, that I presume, to present you with this
in­considerable Poem of mine, of which (though I wanted not Inclination) I
durst not adventure a di­rect Dedication to your Grace, with whom I had not
the Honour of an Acquaintance sufficient to incourage such a boldness, as also
some doubt, it might not deserve a Patronage from so excellent a Poet, which
made me rather venture its publick Dedication to this Honourable Person of my
Alli­ance, I have mentioned before my Book, though this my private Address to
your Grace, must be my greater Ambition, since you are not only a most
accomplished Judge, but an Author: yet I presume to say that your Grace may
challenge some con­cernment [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=63) in this Poem,
as it treats of the past Glory of our Ancestors; in which the Antiquity, and
Ho­nour of your Blood, could not but have a high Re­nown: and as your Grace
has scarce a Parallel, in all Acts of Generosity, and Nobleness, so your
In­comparable Lady, doth no less excell in her Quality, and Sex, (the
unequal'd Daughter of the Muses) besides all other her voluminous Productions,
which compleat the Wonder of her Name, to whom I have presumed to present,
likewise, with your Lord­ship, a Book of my Poem, as an expression to both
your Graces, how much you are Honoured by,

May 3. 1669.

My LORD Your Graces Very Humble Servant,

Edward Howard.

### 2.63.

MADAM,

I Owe it to your Graces singular condescention, and goodness, that my Letters
are not displea­sing, and I see a great deal of Generosity, in your Graces
acceptance, of such mean things, as my slender stock of Knowledge can impart.
As for your Inquiry about the Plastick Faculties; I Answer, that they are
those, whereby the Body is formed at first, and by which the Alimental Juices,
are after, through the whole course of Life, orderly distribu­ted for the
purposes of growth and nutrition: But whether, as your Grace inquires, they
are Faculties inherent, in the Soul, or are only Mechanical Mo­tions [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=64) of the Body I
cannot determine certainly. But I rather incline to the Platonists, who will
have the Soul to be the Bodies Maker, and they affirm (as is ordinary; though
with some diversity in the Names and Presentation) That there are three sorts
of Faculties, which they Phancy as Analogous parts, or Regions in the Soul,
(Viz.) The Mind, so they call the highest Faculties of abstract Reason, and
Understanding, which is the First. The Second they call the Soul, (Viz.) as it
is united to the Body, and exerciseth the operation of Sense. The Third, is
the Image of the Soul, which is those Fa­culties, that are called Plastical,
that move and turn the Body, but are devoid of Understanding, or Sense; Now
how the Soul, which is Immaterial, can manage and order Corporeal Motions is a
dif­ficulty of which Philosophy as yet hath given no account, as I have
particularly taken notice, and proved in my Sceptis Scientifica, but yet the
thing ought not therefore to be denied, because the man­ner of the most
obvious sensible things is to us un­known; And by this we can only prove, that
we have yet nocertain Theory of Nature: And, in good earnest, Madam, all that
we can hope for, as yet, is but the History of things as they are, but to say
how they are, to raise general Axioms, and to make Hypotheses, must, I think,
be the happy priviledge of succeeding Ages; when they shall have gained a
larger account of the Phoenomena, which yet are too scant and defective to
raise Theories upon: so that to be ingenious and confess freely, we have yet
no such thing as Natural Philosophy; Natural History is all we can pretend to;
and that too, as yet, is but in its Rudiments, the advance of it your [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=64) Grace knows is
the design and business of the Royal Society; from whom we may reasonably at
last expect better grounds for general Doctrines, than any the World yet hath
been acquainted with; but this, Ma­dam, is an excursion. I therefore return to
your Graces Letter, which inquires some things, about my No­tion of the Souls
Original: As to this I would not be understood to affirm peremptorily a thing,
which the greatest part of Men, neither have, nor can re­ceive, only I
consider it as an Hypothesis, that may be taken up to satisfy those minds that
are much troubled at the seeming inequalities of Providence; and whether true,
or false, this I will take the bold­ness to be confident in, That the Doctrine
of the Souls Praeexistence, doth best suit with the appearan­ces of the World.
And best Answers for the Di­vine Justice and Goodness, in all the affairs of
Pro­vidence; In this Madam, I am a little Dogmatical, and this step further, I
think I may take, without im­modesty; That the Doctrine hath so much to say
for it self, from Reason, and the highest Antiquity, as to render it fit to be
considered, and indeed, since the two other wayes, are confessedly desperate,
me­thinks there should be no harm in examining this; which is all I pretend
to. But particularly to your Grace's Quaery, Whether were Souls Created or
Un­created? I Answer, no doubt Created: But then I do not see how that
follows, which your Grace is pleased to infer, Viz. That Sin was then Created,
For our Souls in their State were Spotless and Innocent, as the Angels of God.
That Mankind was so first, and fell by a voluntary Transgression, is the
com­mon Doctrine; and how we may suppose it was par­ticularly in the way of
Praeexistence, your Grace will [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=65) see easily,
when I shall have procured that Book of mine, I have mentioned, and promised
your Grace, but cannot yet light on. The other part also of your Graces
Division: Viz. That if those Souls were Eternal, they are Gods; is I humbly
conceive a mistake likewise, since though the World, had been Created from
Eternity (which even the Schools confess possible) it had nevertheless been a
Creature, by reason of its dependence upon another, for its being, and to have
been produced, and yet from Eternity, is no absurdity, our Faith affirms it,
in the Eternal Generation of the Son, and Procession of the Holy-Ghost, and to
take an instance with which we may make more bold: If the Sun had been from
Eternity no doubt it would have shone E­ternally, and yet it's Beams had been
effects and de­pendent; And whereas your Grace saith again, That what is
Immaterial is a God: I must here also take the boldness, to enter my Dissent
to your Propo­sition; Indeed Mr. Hobbs denys all Immateriality to Created
Beings, but I think upon grounds preca­rious and unsafe, That our Souls are
Immaterial in their Natures, hath been sufficiently proved by some late
Philosophers; particularly by the most learned Dr. H. Moore, and I also have
done something about this, in my Book of Praeexistence, If your Grace de­mands
my Reasons; they shall be ready at the least intimation, of those commands
which I shall ever account a singular Honour to observe. For the anti­quity of
Praeexistence, which your Grace rightly ob­serves, to be no certain Argument
of the truth of it, I humbly say I have not alledged it, for a demon­stration
of the thing, but to take off the prejudice we are apt to have against all
supposed Novelties, [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=65) and to shew
that it is not so despicable, an Hypothe­sis but that several great minds of
former times, even in the Ages of the best Antiquity have owned a kindness for
it, and consequently that we cannot, without some immodesty, deny it a
favourable hear­ing, But madam, I forget my self, and the consi­deration I
ought to have of your Grace's Time and Patience, and therefore only add, that
I am,

Bath, Octob. 13. 1667.

Illustrious Madam, Your Graces Most Obedient Servant,

Jos. Glanvill

### 2.64.

MY LORD,

HAd I not been out of Town a great part of the last Summer, and almost all
this Winter, I had written to your Grace long since. The Town might have
furnish'd me with occasions of writing that had not been impertinent. For only
to say that I am the humblest of your Graces Servants, and that no man has a
greater Honour for you than I have, would be Impertinent, since all that know
me, know it of me already, and I hope your Grace believes it. But (my Lord)
the Printing of the Humourists has given me a new occasion of troubling you,
and desiring your Favour to be an Advocate, for me, to my Lady Dutchess, to
procure me her Pardon, and a favouroble re­ception of that little Comoedy. My
Lord, (as long asyou are so great a Mecaenas) it will be im­possible [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=66) to defend your
self from the Importunate Addresses of Poets: And Poetry is in such a
de­clining condition, that it has need of such Noble Supporters as are at
Welbeck: Your Grace saw this Comoedy (before the Sting was taken out) and was
pleased to approve it, which is to me more than the Plaudit of a Theatre: As
it is, it stands more in need of Pardon, and Protection, which I hope your
Grace, and my Lady Dutchess will have the Mercy to afford it. I have (in this
Play) only shown what I would do if I had the liberty to write a general
Satyr, which (though it should really re­flect upon no particular persons,
yet) I find the Age is too faulty to endure it. If, for this reason, I were
not tyed to too great a strictness for a Poet, I should not despair of
presenting you with some­thing much more worth your view than this mang­led
Play; but all that I can do can never make any proportionable return to the
favours, received from you, by,

London, April 20. 1671.

My LORD, Your Graces most Obliged Humble Servant,

Tho. Shadwell.

### 2.65.

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=66)

MADAM,

IAm to beg your Graces Pardon for my felf, and this imperfect Piece, for which
I have bor­rowed the Patronage of your Name; I am not ignorant of the
disadvantage that Name might ap­pear with (before such a Trifle as this Play)
if it were not too well known, and had been too often pre­fixt to excellent
Pieces of your own to suffer any detraction now: This Dedication will only in
some measure express the Honour that the Humblest of your Servants has for
your Grace, and the Power you have to protect so defenceless a Poem. But
(Madam) I confess it is too great a Presumption, for me, to hope that your
Grace (that makes so good use of your time with your own Pen) can have so much
to throw away as once to read this little offspring of mine: And (but that
before I found not only Pardon for an Offence of this kind but encouragement)
I should despair of having this for­given. When none of all the Nobility of
Eng­land gives encouragement to Wit, but my Lord Duke and your excellent self,
you are pleased to receive favourably and encourage the very endea­vours
towards it: and under that notion this poor Play begs your Pardon and
Reception. Though it met with opposition from the Malice of one party, yet
several men of Wit were kind to it. But whatsoever opposition threatens that,
or me, it can never prejudice either, if that be Protected by your Grace, and
I be thought what I really am,

London, April 20. 1671.

MADAM, Your Graces most Humbly Devoted Servant,

Tho. Shadwell.

### 2.66.

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=67)

MADAM,

BEing an Hundred and fifty Miles from Lon­don, at a place called Chaddeston,
near Man­chester: I had an account, but the last Post, of the receit of your
Graces Noble present: other­wise you had received a more early Acknowledg­ment
with my humble Thanks; which are all the return I can make for that, and many
other Fa­vours I have received from Welbeck: It had been Bounty enough (and as
much as I could have ex­pected) for your Grace to have Pardoned the
pre­sumption of my Dedication, which intituled you to the Patronage of so
sleight a thing: but to reward my Crime, is beyond expression Generous. Thus
your Grace, like Heaven, rewards the intention without considering the
imperfection of the Act. My Design was, in some measure, to testify my
Grati­tude, and the Honour I have for your Grace: but even this Acknowledgment
has run me more in debt. Your Grace is thus resolved to be before-hand with
all your Servants. Let them be never so dilligent, your Benefits will out-go
their Services; and they can never over-take your Bounty. I, for my part, am
in despair of ever coming near it: But nothing shall ever hinder me from
making use of all occasions, I can lay hold on, to testify the great Honour I
have for my Lord Duke, and your Grace, and that I am,

May, 25. 1671.

MADAM, Your Graces most Humble, and most Obedient Servant

Tho. Shadwell.

### 2.67.

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=67)

MADAM,

COnsidering that the Divine Gods accept of Offerings, though never so trivial,
when that their poor and obliged Creatures of­fer them with true Devotion,
incourages me here, by your Favours and Goodness, to believe alike of your
Ladyship, and to hope your Pardon and ac­ceptance of this Sacrifice of Thanks,
which in all Humility I thus Dedicate for the Honour of your Book, of which I
dare not say I am now unworthy, since I find where it comes, it has the
Efficacy of Great Seals, and Patents, to meliorate both Persons and Places,
and such Esteem and Reverence as they come welcomed with, I must always and
much more account due to your Ladyships Orations, and to be Eternally paid by,

MADAM, Your Ladyships Most Devoted, Humble, and Obliged Servant

Bullingbrooke.

### 2.68.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,

THough deprived so many years of your most Noble Presence, yet left your Grace
so perfect an Idea in our Thoughts of your great Virtue, and those rare
faculties of your Understanding, wherewith Nature hath adorned [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=68) your Grace, so
that we ever do admire the same, it being often our most pleasing delight to
discourse thereof, besides the remembrance of your many great and undeserved
Favours formerly received; and though we stand infinitely Obliged for the same
un­to your Grace, yet you are pleased to increase our Obligations, by
Honouring us with the Noble Gift of five several Books together, of your
Graces last Edition, which especially for what belongs to those Sublime
matters of Natural Philosophy are only for the most Learned, and Judicious
Under­standings, and for us to admire, and keep them as a singular mark of
your Graces great Benevolency toward us, and an Emblem of your high
Perfecti­ons, after our Lives to be left as a Testimony of the same. In the
mean time we humbly intreat your Grace to preserve us all in your good
Opi­nion, and Honour me with a belief that I am as long as I live, to the
utmost of my weak Ability,

Antwerp, Octob. 20. 1671.

Your Graces, Most Humble and most Obedient Servant,

J. Duartes.

> My Sisters with the tender of their most Obedient Service, Humbly kiss your
Graces Hand.

### 2.69.

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=68)

MADAM,

UNto the Rich and Incomparable Present of your Excellencies Works, wherewith
you have been pleased to Honour the Uni­versity, I have, by the special
appointment of Mr. Vice-Chancellor, given a just reception; which word I
confess we could not use without being guilty of great rudeness, but that we
have placed them by that Illustrious Piece wherewith his Excellency your
Renowned Lord had before Honoured us, which is it self Incomparable. Indeed
Madam, the Univer­sity finds her self oppressed herein with so many
Obligations in one, that She knows not where to begin her Acknowledgments; as
considering, that not only her Repositories are dignified to be the Cabinet of
so rich a Jewel, but that She is singled out by your Excellency, and valued
above the rest of the World for her Approbation, and (as your Excellency
pleases to stile it) to be a Judge of it. Alas, Ma­dam, that is an Office we
dare not assume, not only without censure of Arrogance, but even of
Impro­priety; for seeing that every one is to be judged by their Peeres, who
shall undertake to be Judge of that that hath no Peer? We may see other things
by the Light, but to perceive the Light it self we cannot call for another
Light; so neither may this gallant Work be Judged but by its own Innate
Ex­cellency, and the splendor it self carrys in it. No, Madam, 'tis Honour
enough for us that we are taught by it, we will not usurp upon it; and shall
count it our Pride and not our Shame to be out-done by so Transcendent an
Example. We acknowledge that we are become instructed in the Sciences which
our [[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=69)
selves profess; Philosophy, Oratory, Physick, Po­etry, we write them over our
Doors, but we find them herein at a farr cheaper rate sent home to those
Doors, and that by a hardiness of Invention which your Excellency first hath
shewed unto the World, and that an easy one too, by sending us to that common
and neglected Mistress, even Nature her self, to whose Benignity if we would
confide (as your Excellency hath done) we should make far greater Progresses
in the ways of Knowledge and Wisdom (as likewise your Excellency hath done)
than through all the tedious Disciplines wherewith we are detained and vexed
in our rugged Nurseries. Two things do justly leave us, Madam, under a
surprize and admiration of your Excellencies great Production; First, that it
should proceed from a Per­son of so high Honour and Fortune; for Ignorance in
such things as those is appointed by the World unto such Estates, and thought
a kind of Preroga­tive belonging unto Wealth: And next, that it should proceed
from a Sex unaccustomed to, and commonly excused from such painful and
elevated Inquisitions. For (as your Excellency hath ob­served) men do assign
to your Sex nothing but va­nities, and Trifles for their Portion, and under
co­lour of Courtship do confine them in their Educa­tion only to some
inferiour Qualities, and so in ef­fect but to a kind of delicate Barbarism:
But herein your Excellency hath shew'd great Courage in breaking through that
Obstruction, and by a Fe­male and unusual Chevalry have rescued your whole
Nation and Sex from the oppression and injury in this point, and of that great
Giant, the World. For our part of your University, we must needs sub­scribe
[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=69) to your
Excellencies judgment herein, for 'tis the Muses were esteemed our best
Genius's and Sciences did choose unto themselves for their Deities not Patrons
but Patronesses: and our Corporation of Learning, though it consist all of
Men, yet when we would express it in the Abstract and in Picture we represent
it by a Woman. And in fine, my self, Madam, (who am allowed the Honour to be
the Custos of your immortal Donary) must be obliged to borrow from a Womans
Eloquence exemplified in the Work it self, whereby to express worthily the
Resentments due unto it by those that have em­ployed me, and particularly mine
own, who am,

May 20. 1663.

MADAM, Your Excellencies most Humble and Devoted Servant,

Thomas Lockey, Keeper of the Publick Library.

### 2.70.

MADAM,

EVer since I had the happiness to see any of your Graces most ingenious
Writings, I have felt a mighty Desire to speak my par­ticular gratitude for
those singular Composures to all which the World is obliged; And had attempted
something towards it more than three years since, but that my acknowledgments
miscarried in the way. I am, Madam, an Admirer of Rarities, and your Grace is
really so great an one, that I cannot but in­deavour [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=70) some Testimony
of a proportion'd respect and wonder, though perhaps there may be Indeco­rum
in the boldness of such unknown Addresses. I am sensible it can contribute
nothing to your Graces great stock of Fame to be acknowledged by
inconsiderable Persons; But yet we must be just, and 'tis Religion to
celebrate the Virtuous. And I know your Grace is too generous to contemn the
offerings of the meanest Devoto's, upon the incou­ragement of which Belief I
am bold to beg Favour and acceptance for a Trifle of mine that was designed
for your Grace, as soon as it saw the Light, but could not find it's way into
the North. I should not have the confidence to present so mean a thing to so
deep and Sagatious a Judgement, had I not an opi­nion of your Graces Candor
and Goodness, equal to my apprehension of your other Celebrated Per­fections;
and these are so Illustrious and so great, that our Sex would envy, did they
not admire, and your own too, Madam, were they not universally concerned in
the Honour. For your Grace hath con­vinced the World, by a great instance,
that Women may be Philosophers, and, to a Degree fit for the Ambitious
emulation of the most improved Mascu­line Spirits.

But, Madam, 'tis time to beg your Graces Par­don for the rudeness of this bold
intrusion; and I know, that grandure and generosity of Mind that occasion'd
the fault, will forgive it to

Bath, April 22.

Illustrious Madam, The Humblest of your Graces Admirers, and Servants,

Jos. Glanvill.

### 2.71.

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=70)

MADAM,

THe greatest Favour I could have expected in Answer to my boldness, was but a
pardon for the confidence of that intrusion; But that your Grace should so
generously accept my Trifles, and make me so Glorious a return as I re­ceived
in your most ingenious Letters, this, Madam, was an Honour as much beyond my
expectation, as desert; and exceeds all my possibilities of ac­knowledgment.
But if ever any thing happen within the reach of my indeavours, by which I may
serve or gratify your Grace, I shall then give evidence of the great
resentment I have of this condescention, and the Veneration which is due to a
Person of so obliging and so unusual a Virtue. Your Grace, I know, is Nobly
inquisitive, and hath a rich stock of generous Apprehensions; and Persons of
this Character use to be pleased in the persual of the va­riety of others
Conceptions; And on this account I presume, that those notions I sometimes
entertain my self with, may not be unacceptable, being not alto­gether of the
road and common track. And if your Grace please to permit, and pardon my
Importuni­ties, I shall take occasion to give you my sense of some things that
are not of the meanest concern­ments. For the present I am obliged to answer
the particulars of your Grace's Letter, in which your Grace hath very much
obliged me by those argu­ments you are pleased to excuse; and to them I make
this humble return.

1\. That whereas your Grace calls the Induce­ments to the belief of Witches,
probable Arguments, I am apt, with submission, to think some of them to [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=71) be as great
demonstrations as matter of Fact can bear; being no less than the evidence of
the Senses, and Oaths of sober Attestors, and the critical inquiries of
Sagacious, and suspitious Persons; which Circum­stances of Evidence, your
grace knows, some of those Relations have to prove them. And there is a
particular Story which is sufficiently famous, and of part of which I my self
was a Witness, which I think is not subject to just Exception. 'Tis that of
the Drum in the House of Mr. Mompession of Tedworth in Wiltshire. Of this,
Madam, I shall take an occasion to give your Grace a particular ac­count, if
you have not yet been acquainted with the circumstances of that unusual
disturbance. But to confine my self now to your Grace's considerations on the
subject; The second thing I observe, is,

The intimation of an Argument against the Ex­istence of Witches, because they
are not mentioned by Christ, and his Apostles, concerning which I humbly
desire your Grace to consider.

1\. That Negative Arguments from Scripture use not often to be of any great
signification or validity. Our Saviour spake as he had occasion, and the
thou­sandth part of what he said, or what he did, is not recorded, as one
Evangelist intimates. He said no­thing of those large unknown Tracts of
America, gives no intimations of the Existence of that nume­rous People, much
less any instructions about their Conversion. He gives no particular account
of the affairs and state of the other World, but only that general one, of the
happiness of some, and the mi­sery of others. He makes no discovery of the
Mag­nalia of Art, or Nature, no not of those whereby the propagation of the
Gospel might have been [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=71) much advanced;
viz. The Mystery of Printing, and the Magnet. And yet no one useth his
Si­lence in these Instances as an Argument against the being of things, which
are the evident Objects of Sense. I confess the omission of some of these
particulars is pretty strange and unaccountable, and an argument of our
Ignorance of the Reasons and Menages of Providence, but I suppose of nothing
else; or if it were, I crave leave to add,

2\. That the Gospel is not without intimations of Sorcery, and contracts with
evil Spirits. The ma­licious Jews said our Saviour did his Miracles by their
assistance, He casts out Devils by Beezebub. And he denys not the supposition
or possibility of the thing in general, but clears himself by an appeal to the
Actions of their own Children, whom they would not so severely criminate. And
besides this,

3\. The Apostles had intimations plain enough of the being of Sorcery and
Witchcraft, as seems to me evident from Gal. 3.1. Gal. 5.20. Rev. 9.21. Rev.
21.8. Rev, 22.15.

'Tis very true as your Grace suggests, that Su­perstition and Ignorance of
Causes make Men many times to impute the Effects of Art, and Nature, to
Witchcraft and Diabolick Contract. And the Com­mon People think God, or the
Devil to be in every thing extraordinary. But yet, Madam, your Grace may
please to consider, That there are things done by mean and despicable persons,
transcending all the Arts of the most knowing and improv'd Virtuosi, and above
all the Essays of known and ordinary Nature. So that we either must suppose
that a sottish silly old Woman hath more knowledge of [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=72) the intrigues
of Art, and Nature, than the most ex­ercised Artists, and Philosophers, or
confess that those strange things they performe, are done by con­foederacy
with evil Spirits, who, no doubt, act those things by the ways and
applications of Nature, though such as are to us unknown. This, Madam, is, I
conceive, as much as is necessary to be said to the Argumentative part of your
Graces excellent Letter.

As for the following Periods, I am mostly of the same Opinion with your Grace,
in the way that I understand them. Nature is in a continual motion (for there
is no such thing as Rest in the World) and perhaps that is not purely
Mechanical, but may, in great part (at least as to the beginnings and
directi­ons of it) be ascribed to the Soul of the World, which possibly is the
great Archeus that formes Plants, Animals, and other more curious Phoenomena.
And there is no doubt but (as your Grace suggests) that much wickedness is
caused by the meer impulse of Lower Nature; and I believe several Men are
determined to Actions of Vice by the odness of their particular make and
contexture. But whereas your Grace saith that nothing but God himself can be
perfect, I cannot so well understand that. Absolutely so, and in all kinds,
'tis true, I grant it, but your Grace doth not seem to intend the proposition
in that sense. And to be Perfect in a lower kind is but to have all the parts
and faculties that are re­quisite to such a being, in that order, disposition,
and all other circumstances which are suitable to its Idea, and proper for its
respective ends. And in this sense I think all things are perfect in their
first con­stitution; according to what your Grace saith af­terwards, [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=72) That [God
cannot create any Imper­fection, being absolute Perfection himself] which
appositely fits mine, but I can not see how it so well consists with your
Graces former assertion, except it be intended to infer, That God made
nothing; a Proposition which methinks your Grace should not own; but some
things that follow seem to look that way, when you are pleased to say [Neither
can I conceive how God could actually make or act any thing, either in a
Mechanical manner, or a Free, being not locally moving] To which I humbly say
that if your Grace doubts the possibility of the Cre­ation out of nothing, I
think I can speak some things as a Philosopher, that may render it
rea­sonable. Nor is actual motion in the Deity neces­sary to his actions,
since he is Immense and needs not local motion to render him present by his
Essence, or his Virtue, to any place of the great Universe, being Eternally
there by the Infinity of his being, and his Power. And whereas your Grace is
plea­sed to say, that God is no Mechanick, I consent that He is not so
properly, in that he needs not material Instruments to act by. But yet he hath
made all things by a kind of Geometry; in Number, Weight, and Measure, saith
the Holy Oracle. And there is a sort of Mathematics in all the Works of
Na­ture.

Thus, Madam, I have made bold with your Graces Patience, in confidence of your
Candor, and your goodness, which I implore, for the Pardon of this Voluminous
Trouble. And in order to it, I have this to say, that I could not well have
said less without having been wanting in some of your Graces Periods; and
there is something else, in which [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=73) I despair of
being ever able to say enough, and that is, to express how much I am,

Bath, July 8.

Illustrious Madam, Your Graces Humble Admirer, and Devoted Servant,

Jos. Glanvill.

### 2.72. To the Right Honourable, the Lady MARGARET, Marchioness, of New-
Castle.

EXCELLENT MADAM,

I Well know that the Generous never propose to themselves any other End of
their Favours, besides Content, which necessarily results from the pursuance
of their own Noble Inclinations, but only the Benefit of the Persons, upon
whom they choose to confer them: and that therefore they usu­ally select such
Subjects, whereon to exercise their Beneficence, that seem more likely to
husband it, by a silent Devotion, and modest Acknowledgment, than to abuse it,
by attempting a Retribution. And this, Madam, both teacheth and assureth me;
that though the Favour you were pleased to do me, in sending me one of your
admirable Books, newly published, under the Elegant and most accommo­date
Title of The WORLDS OLIO; be so eminent an one, as to require from me a more
sig­nificant Expression of my Gratitude, than either my Wit, or Fortune, or
Interest can ever be able to make: yet none can be more acceptable to you,
[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=73) than
this, That I intend ever to continue your Debtor. So much, therefore, I here
solemnly profess; and most faithfully promise you, that I never will, so much
as in a wish for a Capacity of Retaliation, prophane the Freedom of the
Obligation your good­ness moved you to lay upon me.

But, not to state the Particulars of my Debt, at least in brief; might give
you just cause to suspect, that I understand not the Value of what I have
re­ceived. And, therefore, I humbly ask your leave, that I may acknowledge to
you, that you have highly benefited me, in my Reputation, in my Understanding,
in my Affections.

First, I say you have benefited me in my Re­putation; in that you have
declared me capable of so singular an Honour, as to be in the number of those
Persons, whom you thought worthy to receive so rich a Present, from so Noble a
Hand. For me to have sat among the Multitude, whom your Sta­tioner invites to
feast upon your OLIO, had been proportionable enough to the degree of so
ordinary a Judgement, as mine: but to be among those few, whom your self had
nominated for your Chief Guests, was a Grace infinitely above my Ambi­tion.

Secondly, You have benefited my Understanding; in that your Philosophical
Phancies have furnished me with variety of such Novel Conceipts, concern­ing
sundry the most difficult Problems in Nature; as that if my Memory be but
faithful enough to retain them, I shall never be unprovided of somwhat that is
poynant and grateful, to entertain Curiosity withall: and whenever my own
Reason is at a loss, how to investigate the Causes of some Natural Se­cret
[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=74) or
other, I shall relieve the Company with some one pleasant and unheard of
Conjecture of yours. So that by reading of your Philosophy, I have acqui­red
thus much of advantage; that where I cannot Satisfy, I shall be sure to
Delight: which is some­what more than I dare promise from any other Discourses
of the same Title; in so much as they generally leave the Mind in a kind of
Anxiety and Regret, when ever they fail to afford it Satisfaction. And,
certainly, if it be (as some hold) reasonable to allow, that the Fictions of
Poets, and Roman­cists do usually take as strong hold of mens Minds, and Charm
their Affections as powerfully, as the most Authentique Narrations of
Historians; though the Reader well understands the Passages related by these,
to be certain Truths, and the adventures de­scribed by Those, to be meerly
Imaginary; and this, because Delight is equal on both sides: if this, I say,
be justifiable, that man can run but little hazard of his Judgement, who shall
affirm, that your Suppo­sition of Fayeries in the Brain, and of our Thoughts
being their Consults and Suggestions; and your opini­on that the Fayeries
digging for Stones in the Quar­ries of the Teeth, to repair their decay'd
Tenements in the Head, is the Cause of the Tooth-ach; are as worthy the
hearing, as the most solid demonstrative Theory of any Philosopher whatever;
insomuch as these may yield both as high and lasting a Delight as that. I say
Delight as High and Lasting; for, to speak my Thoughts clearly, the Pleasure
that ariseth from the comprehension of the most perfect and la­borious
Demonstration in Geometry, I never could find, either in height or duration,
much to exceed that, which I have sometime been affected withall, [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=74) at the recital
of a Facetious Poetical Extravagancy, of which I had not afore heard. Nor do I
believe, that the Raptures, and Exultations of Don Quixot were much inferior
to that famous one of Archimed, which transported him out of himself, as well
as out of the Bath, into a loud Exclamation, I have found it, I have found it.
And the Reason of this Equa­lity may be well enough thought, to consist
chiefly in the unsatisfiedness of our Nature, which always hurrying our Minds
on to Novelties, causeth us to put an equally cheap rate upon all things we
think already in the possession of our Understanding; and to value acquest of
a fresh, though perhaps useless, and absurd Opinion, above the calm fruition
of an­tient and irregular Maxims. But, this (Madam) being a Paradox, ought to
have more room, than can be spred in a Letter, whose design'd Argu­ment is
Thankfulness: and besides, should I adven­ture further, to avouch it, the same
could not but much redound to my disadvantage; insomuch as it might render me
suspected for something of a Scho­lar, and consequently incapable of the
Honour and Pleasure of sometimes attending you, and hearing your more than
ingenious Discourses. For as I re­member, in one of your Prefaces, or Epistles
to your Readers, you have been pleased expresly to declare; That you never
Conversed, so much as one Hour, with any Philosopher, or Professed Scholar, in
your whole Life: and that, doubtless, must have proceeded from your constant
Aversion to such blunt Company; not from your want of opportunities to hear
what they could say. Because, being always Educated among the Noblest, and
most Knowing Persons of our Nation; you could hardly escape the Conver­sation
[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=75) of the
most Learned in all the Arts and Sci­ences; unless you purposely withdrew your
self from their Society, or shut your Ears against their Dis­courses.

But, Madam, among those, who have perused your Writings, I meet with a sort of
Infidels, who refuse to believe, that you have alwayes preserved your self so
free from the Contagion of Books, and Book-men. And the Reason they give me,
is this; that you frequently use many Terms of the Schools, and sometimes seem
to have Imp'd the Wings of your high-flying Phansy with sundry Feathers ta­ken
out of the Universities, or Nests of Divines, Philosophers, Phisicians,
Geometricians, Astronomers, and the rest of the Gowned Tribe. For instance, of
Divines, when you speak of Praedestination, Free will, Transubstantiation, &c.
Of Philosophers, when you mention Quantity, Discrete and Continued, the
Uni­versal and First Matter, Attoms, Elements, Motion, Dilatation, and
Contraction, Rarefaction, and Conden­sation, Meteors, &c. Of Physicians, when
you distin­guish of Choler, Phlegme, Melancholy, and Blood, and speak of the
Circulation of the Blood, of Venricles in the Heart and Brain, of Veins,
Arteries, and Nerves, and expatiate upon Fevers, Apoplexies, Convulsions,
Droqsies, and divers other Diseases, with their particular Causes, Symptoms,
and Cures: Of Geometricians, when you touch upon Triangles, Squares, Circles,
Diameters, Circumferences, Centres, Lines, streight and crooked, and their
proportions each to other, and that invin­cible Problem, the Quadrature of the
Circle: Of Astronomers, when you speak of the Horizon, Me­ridian, Aequator,
Zodiack, Ecliptick, Tropicks, Poles of the World, and of the Ecliptick, and in
a manner [[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=75)
run over the whole Doctrine of the Sphere, repre­senting the model of the
Universe, and cast some transitory glances also upon the Doctrine Theorical
concerning the Motions of the Orbs, and Pla­nets. Nor can I, indeed, hope to
dissolve the stif­ness of these mens unbelief; untill I shall be better able
to convince them, that all these Scholastical Terms and Notions may be brought
into the World with us, and afterwards drawn forth of the Soul, by solitary
Meditation, and the labour of ones own Thoughts; and are not rather instilled
into it, and imprest upon it, by often Hearing, or Reading the Discourses of
others, who profess those Arts and Sciences to which they belong, and for the
more plain and methodical teaching whereof, they were first Invented and
Recorded. But I fear me, while I insist thus particularly upon the Reason
alleadged by these men, in defence of their Diffidence; I may fall into the
same danger, for the avoidance of which, I even now left my Paradox destitute
of Assertion: and therefore I lay by that subject, and take up another more
opportune and considerable, as to the discharge of my Duty, and confessing how
many wayes you have obliged me.

I acknowledge, therefore, in the last place; that my Affections must own you
for their Benefactress. For those many Moral Apothegms, and Satyrical
Remarques upon the Manners of Men and Wo­men, which you have frequently
inspersed upon the Leaves of your Book, are so pathetically delivered, and
with such vigour of proper and familiar Lan­guage press'd home to the Bosome
of every man; as that that person must be irrecover ably lost in the darkness
of Vice, who doth not, through thhm, clearly [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=76) discern the
Lustre and Amiableness of Virtue, and thereupon instantly abominate his former
Deformi­ties, and become your perfect Proselite. When a Young, Noble,
Beautiful, Witty, and Sprightly Lady, one on whom all the Pleasures of the
World seem to be Enamoured, and in throngs offer them­selves to be accepted
and commanded by her; when such an one, I say is heard to Preach up
Temperance, Abstinence, Modesty, Chastity, Solitude, and the suppression of
all irregular sensual Appetites. What Sardanapalus is there, who must not
blush at the me­mory of his Vicious Acts, and being convinced, that the
delights of a Soul, well ordered according to the rules of Virtue and Honour,
are infinitely more charming and desirable, than the most magnified Pleasures
of the Body, swimming in an Ocean of Luxury, and Laciviousness; firmly resolve
with him­self, thenceforth to seek for Felicity, not in the short Titillations
and Blandishments of the Senses, but in the Purity and constant Serenity of
the Mind. Is it possible, that any of our Ladies, should retain her pretences
of Platonick Love, or continue the practise of her petty Arts of Daubing and
Painting, of Dis­sembling, Medisanse, and Detraction: after she hath once read
your smart Invectives against them, and solid Arguments to shew, that they may
all be justly suspected for Bawds to procure and conceal the fruition of that
Pleasure, which doth not con­sist in the admiring conversation of Souls, but
in the close Conjunction of Bodies, and the satisfaction of that rank Appetite
of the Flesh, commonly called Lust? In a word; what Sex, Age, Constitution,
Condition is there, whose most secret Ulcers, the sharpness of your Wit and
Pen hath not launced [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=76) open to the
bottom; and afterward prescribed most easy and certain Remedies for the Cure
of them? So that I may well conclude this Paragraph with saying that your
Moral Essayes contain wise Pre­cepts enough in them, for the Reformation of
the Age we live in, and that, certainly, is so bad that no Man need ever fear
a worse.

And, now, Incomparable Madam, having done my Homage to you, in token of what I
hold by the tenure of your Wit and Bounty, it remains, that I humbly beg your
Pardon for the rude and tedious manner of it. And that, I hope, you will grant
me, when you have considered, that the Devotion may be sincere, where the
Ceremonies are imperfect; and I have assured you, that I will never omit to
pay you those Dues of Thanks, and constant Observance, that belong to you,
from me, as one whom your Goodness hath made,

London, January 1. 1654.

Your Eternal Honourer, and Faithful Servant,

W. Charleton.

### 2.73. To the most Illustrious, and most Excellent Princess, Margaret
Dutchess of New-Castle.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS,

SEeing your Graces singular Genius, hath long since been experienced, and
fully discovered to us; for such as is both accomplish'd with all various
Learning, and furnished with a Native Cur­tesie; that for its high abilities,
it is able; and for [[Page
150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=77) its eminent
Candor, it usually obtains infinitely upon the favourers of Learning: We
obliged on both these accounts, were unwilling to incurr so great a Crime, as
not chearfully to Consecrate to your Grace, these our Acknowledgments, as
Argu­ments of our Eternal Observance. Your Graces goodness having this,
peculiar and above others, that 'tis neither forced by Solicitations of
Friends, nor Importunities of Petitions, but voluntary and of its own accord
flowes out, and delivers it self. Truely every more than ordinary Spirit is
powerfully drawn out to what is like it self, invites, embraceth, and
preserves, whatever bears the name of any kind of Excellency, as allyed to it.
But how truely Mag­nificent is this of your Grace, that the Arts them­selves,
by your Graces Example, are render'd more August and Venerable? How shall
future Ages stoop under the weight of your Graces Fame, that your Grace in
that Nobility of Extract, and conflu­ence of Fortune, should yet outvie in the
Methods of Learning, even those, whose necessities must prompt them to
diligence? Wherein your Grace hath made so happy a progress, that never any
can more appear, a Devotist to, or Proficient in Learn­ing: so that your
Graces teeming Brain is ever bring­ing forth some new Miracle: and though a
Wo­man, yet hath merited the Diadem of Learning be­fore Men; though a
Courtier, yet before the Aca­demicks: In a word, wherein any one, is in any
thing Excellent, yet is your Grace in that thing far more excellent. Nor can
we believe, that any mortal Man, no not your Grace our Princess (with your
Graces Pardon) can from Natures instinct, or humane strength be excited and
raised to so manifold [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=77) and profound
Speculations. It must necessary, be that that most capacious Soul of your
Grace, expa­tiating it self so far into all sorts of Learning, is Di­vinely
inspired; that almost Infinite Comprehension of so many and so great Notions
informes us, how great a measure of the Heavenly Spirit hath possest your
Grace; and that no single Deity hath enlarged this one Soul unto the Immense
Tracts of all the Sci­ences. With these happy Omens hath your Grace reached
unto, whatever in the Arts seemed good unto your Grace when some Diviner
Genius of your Grace our Princess, judged the No­tion of any clear Truth,
would be beneficial. And whereas it was your Graces Work, not to give
Rea­sons, but Magisterially to Prononce, as from an Oracle; (yet such is your
Graces condescention) that all your Graces Tenets are asserted and con­firmed
with most Cogent Arguments: as if we did not owe a Belief, and had not a
certain Devotion obliging our Assent to your Graces bare Assertion. Henceforth
therefore do we Destine our spare hours unto these kinds of Studies, and are
reaching unto the perfection of Philosophy, seeing your Grace hath judged
these Speculations such as are worthy your Graces Intentions, and nearer
Approximations: for such an happy clearness of Wit shall render every theng
discoverable and fully to be comprehended, and that most free inclinination of
your Graces Can­dor will communicate every thing discovered to your Graces
Cantabrigians. Yet lest we should give our selves up to unworthy Ease, and
Consecrate our selves to Sloth, your Grace hath left us one very difficult
Task, namely Thankfulness. Forasmuch then, through your Graces Labours,
Minerva's [[Page
152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=78) Pupils have now
obtained that Divine thing, which they may, without error, pursue, to wit a
calm re­pose in all our Studies; we therefore judge that a more Honourable
Monument was never at any time erected, to any of the ancient Kings or
Emperours, than what we here humbly dedicate to your Graces worthy name and
memory.

> To Margaret the First: Princess of Philosophers: Who hath dispelled Errors:
Appeased the differences of Opinions: And restored Peace, To Learnings
Commonwealth,

>

> From the Colledge of the Sacred and Individual Trinity. Octob. 5. 1668.

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=78)

## 3\. POEMS, &c.

### 3.1. To the most Illustrious and most Excellent Princess, The Marchioness
of NEW-CASTLE. After the reading of her Incomparable POEMS.

MADAM,

WIth so much Wonder we are strook

When we begin to read your match­les Book;

A while your own excess of Merit stays

Our forward Pens, and do's suspend your Praise;

Till time our minds do's gently recompose,

Allayes this Wonder, and our Duty show's;

Instructs us how your Virtues to Proclaim,

And what we ought to pay to your great Fame;

Your Fame which in your Countrey has no Bounds!

But wheresoever Learning's known, it sounds.

Those Graces Nature did till now divide,

Your Sexes Glory, and our Sexes Pride,

Are joyn'd in you, and all to you submit,

The brightest Beauty, and the sharpest Wit;

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=79)

No Faction here, or fiercer Envy swayes,

They give you Mirtle, while we offer Bayes;

What Mortal dares dispute those Wreath's with you?

Armd thus with Lightning and with Thunder too.

This made the great New-Castle's Heart your prize;

Your Charming Soul, and your Victorious Eyes,

Had only pow'r his Martial mind to tame,

And raise in his Heroick Breast a Flame;

A Flame, which with his Courage still aspires,

As if Immortal Fewel fed those Fires:

This mighty Chief, and your great self made One,

Together the same Race of Glory run;

Together on the Wings of Fame you move,

Like yours his Virtue, and like his your Love.

While we, your Praise endeavring to rehearse,

Pay that great Duty, in our humble Verse,

Such as may justly move your anger; you

Like Heaven forgive them, and accept them too:

But what we cannot, your brave Hero payes,

He builds those Monuments we strive to raise;

Such, as to after Ages shall make known,

While he Records your deathless Fame, his own;

So when an Artist some rare Beauty draws,

Both in our Wonder share, and our Applause;

His Skill, from time, secures the Glorious Dame,

And makes himself Immortal in her Fame.

George Etherege.

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=79)

### 3.2. To her Excellency the Lady Marchioness of New­Castle, on Her
Incomparable Works:

MADAM,

WHen with stol'n Metaphors we would display

Those Glorious Lights which rule our Night and Day,

We call them Lamps and Spangles, and suborn

Our Wits t'obscure, what we cannot adorn:

But when some fading Beauty haunts our Eyes

Tempting to Praise, what Greatest Souls Despise,

We can advance the Phrase all smoothly runs,

Her Cheeks are Roses, and her Eyes are Suns.

Great Virtues only by themselves are prais'd;

What's highest higher by no Art is rais'd:

'Tis proper only to our Imperfections

To need, or to admit, our Wit's Protections.

Were your Pen's Noble Issue such small things,

As the fine Poet to his Mistris sings:

Or else such pretty Babies as are sent

Out from the lab'ring Press, to Complement

Our Childish Age; which nothing so wel pleases

As Lispings, Weakness, and Wit's Diseases:

Then I, perhaps amongst the rest might wast

Some Paper, to be your Encomiast;

And, in the present mode; pick Crums and Scraps

From Sirs that wear their Phancyes in their Caps,

And Cook a Mess of Bumbast to delude

And glut at once the gaping multitude.

But 'tis your Wit's prerogative to be

As far above all Praise as Flattery:

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=80)

And since you have said All, we boldly may

Excuse our selves, you've left us nought to say.

In ev'ry Line you give us we descry

Your Panaegyrick, our Apology:

Where all's so well like you, that to conceive

Ought but our wonder may admittance have,

Is to suppose, you either cannot see

Our meanness, or will veil your Majesty.

Then he betrays your Name whoe're essayes

To load it with vain Epithets of Praise:

Who seems to understand all you have writ,

T'advance his own, doth much abase your Wit.

Madam we're in a maze: such Glorys can

Not be beheld by what is only Man.

When you are pleas'd to work new Miracles

We'll see and read what's yours and nothing else:

When you give Eyes as well as Light, when you

With Language will on us new Tongues bestow,

When you can make us write just as you do;

We'll learn to praise your Works: But sure it is

Impossible; you can do all but this.

'Tis equally absurd for us to guess

We e're should do so much or you ought less.

Thanks for our Freedom from the learned Thrall

Of thrice-three Mistresses; you're One and All:

Those antique wits which erest would not be seen,

But in a mist of obscure Tongues which Screen

More Follies far than Phansies, are become

Like their own Pump'd-out Oracles all dumb;

Great Aristotle and his greater

Plato:

Master

VVith their long rabble have the same disaster.

These Paper-Armies Bodly's Goal contains

Your Captives are, fretting in Iron Chains.

[[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=80)

One Lady's pregnant Brain has slain whole hosts

Of Rabbys, and quite laid their Paper ghosts,

VVhich haunted all our Studies, and perplex'd

Our wearied thoughts with a Moth-eaten Text.

VVho would not give a life that he might live

In the next Age, to see the Learned strive

VVhose Margin should strut biggest with your Name

VVho raise up highest Pyramids of Fame

Over your peaceful Ashes; may it be

Such Phoenixes can know mortality.

VVas it her modesty (for she's a VVoman)

Made Nature Coy, and shew her self to no man?

She walk'd in Vizors till she met with you.

VVhat wonder if she did retir'dness vow

And to our Ruffian Sex shewd Nun that late

Unveil'd to your Sex; and but one of that?

You need not fear to die, she needs must live

Her self, whose Noble Office 'tis to give

Life to our late Posterity: each line

Of yours must be their Oracle, your Shrine.

Your Images the work of your own Pen

Shall frustrate all the curteous Cheats of men,

Pronouncing all your true adorers blest

Without the help of Conjuror or Priest.

Be merciful to Captives (Madam) and

Kill not all those that bend at your Command.

Your softest Sex your Noble Order shall

Vote all such cruelty Apocryphal.

You have subdu'd the VVorld of Learning, spare

At least so much alive as may declare

Who was the Conqueror, that all may know

VVhate're survives is owing all to you.

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=81)

You have out-done what's mortal; Imitate

Those Pow'rs above which to maintain their state

Let some poor vassals live, and worship'd are

Not by whom they destroy, but whom they spare.

Then sheathe your Conqu'ring Pen since nothing now

Remains unvanquish'd but your Works and you.

### 3.3. On her Grace the Dutchess of New-Castles Closet.

WHat place is this? looks like some Sacred Cell

Where holy Hermits anciently did dwell,

And never ceas'd Importunating Heav'n

Till some great Blessing unto Earth was giv'n;

Is this a Ladys Closet? 'tcannot be,

For nothing here of vanity you see;

Nothing of Curiosity nor Pride,

As all your Ladies Closets have beside;

No mirrour here in all the Room you find;

Unless it be the mirrour of the Mind,

Nor Pencil here is found, nor Paint agen

But only of her Ink and of her Pen.

Which renders her an Hundred times more fair

Than they with all their Paints and Pensils are:

Here she is Rapt, here falls in Extasy

VVith studying high and deep Philosophy:

Here these clear Lights descend into her Mind

VVhich, by Reflection, in her Books you find,

And those high Notions and Idea's too,

VVhich, but herself, no VVoman ever knew,

[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=81)

Whence she's their chiefest Ornament and Grace,

And Glory of our times: Hail Sacred Place!

To which the World in after times shall come,

As unto Homer's Shrine, or Virgil's Tomb,

Hon'ring the Walls in which she made abode,

The Air she breath'd and Ground whereon she trod,

Counting him happy, who but sees the Place

And happier who least Relick of her has;

For whose Sole Inkhorn they as much would bid

As once for Epictetus's they did.

Thus Fame shall Celebrate, and thus agen

The Arts shall honour her, who honour'd them,

Whilst others who in other things did trust

Shall, after Death, lye in forgotten Dust.

### 3.4. To the Illustrious Princess, Margaret, Dutchess of New-Castle, on Her
Incomparable Works.

VErtue, and Wit's great Magazine,

Accept an Offering to your Shrine,

Whose wondrous Raptures needs must raise

All Souls to Poetry or Praise:

With such Amazement I was strook,

(Madam) when first I read your Book,

To see your Sex with so great Parts,

Treat of all Sciences and Arts,

As if Inspir'd i'th' Times of Old,

When Poetry all things foretold.

That Waller, Denham, and the Wits,

Who write such mighty things by fits;

I did expect should all at least,

Have sent in Presents to the Feast,

[[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=82)

But that they choose to write no more,

Shews they're out-done and so give o're,

Though 'tis allow'd their luck was such,

They did Coyne Mettle that held Touch,

Like Min'ralists, they sprung a Vein

Of Oare, they could not long maintain;

Your Pregnant Brain does every day

Spring Mines of Gold, without allay,

The Dross you so Refine that we,

Only the purer Mettle see,

Yours is th'Elixar of true Wit,

Because it finds all Subjects fit.

Had Spencer liv'd your Works t'have seen,

You must have been his Fairy-Queen.

Great Virgil would have thought it due,

Not to name Dido Queen, but You.

And had you liv'd when Ovid writ

You'd been the Subject of his Wit;

He would have made a richer Piece

Of you, than Helen fair of Greece.

You've all that's blest in humane kind,

In outward form, and in your mind:

When you with Beauty do invite,

Your Virtue checks proud Appetite.

Some Ladys think they'r born in vain

Unless they Teem; your fruitful Brain

Brings better issue; here's the odds,

They please but Men, you please the Gods.

Strange Power 'tis you Govern by,

What Nature asks you can deny:

Great Miracle in what you do,

That can Charm Men and Angels too;

Th'honour and envy of our Age,

That write for Gown-men, and the Stage;

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=82)

Though you speak to us in one Tongue,

You seem all Languages t'have known,

And Secrets to the World reveal,

As if the Gods did sometimes steal,

To tell you News, and from above

You knew all passages of Love,

We must conclude 'tis only thence

You can have your Intelligence,

By which our Knowledge you so raise,

You merit Crowns, that ask but Bayes.

### 3.5. To the most Accomplish'd and Incomparable Princess, The Dutchess of
New Castle her Grace.

MAdam, 'tis you whom both in Form and Mind,

Nature has favour'd 'bove all Female kind,

You have been constant from the first of Youth

To Friendship, Justice, Chastity and Truth,

Wit in your Childhood did begin to reign,

And like the Tide came flowing in amain,

Wherein such high Conceptions did lye,

As rais'd a new and true Philosophy.

Things Natural and Moral you have writ,

And both in Scenes and Poems shew'd your Wit,

Letters and Dialogues declare your Fame,

In History you Eternalize the Name

Of your Dear Lord, when truly you relate

His Loyal Actions for the King and State;

All this makes you admir'd and envied too,

'Cause you've done more than any yet could do,

In you the Glory of your Sex do's shine,

And all perfections in your Soul combine,

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=83)

What ever is thought Virtue's found in you,

Your mind is high, and yet 'tis humble too;

Not Pride (as Envy stiles it) but a Flame

More noble strives t'immortalize your Fame,

For you do stoop to those of low descent,

And with compassion to their Case resent,

Which Fortune Frowns upon: How can there be

A nobler Mind and nearer Deity?

Nay Fortune seeing how Nature favour'd you,

To her Perfections added Honour too;

Thus Honour, Beauty, Wit, and Virtue joyn'd,

Made you the greatest Wonder of your Kind,

Let none presume to draw your Picture then

For you surpass all th'art and Skill of Men,

Who e're looks on you with a stricter view

Sees Natur's chiefest masterpiece in You.

### 3.6. To the Glory of her Sex, the most Illustrious Princess, the Lady
Marchioness of New-Castle, upon her most admirable Works.

NOw let enfranchiz'd Ladies learn to write,

And not Paint white, and red, but black, and white,

Their Bodkins turn to Pens, to Lines their Locks,

And let the Inkhorn be their Dressing-box:

Since, Madam, you have Scal'd the walls of Fame,

And made a Breach where never Female came.

Had Men no Wit, or had the World no Books,

Yet here's enough to please the curious looks

Of Every Reader: such a General Strain,

Would reinstruct the School-boy-world again,

[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=83)

Philosophers and Poets were of old

The two great Lights, that humane minds control'd;

The one t'adorn, the other to explain,

Thus Learnings Empire then was cut in twain.

But Universal Wit and Reason joyn's

To make you Queen: nor can your sacred Lines

Without a Paradox be well express'd

Truth never was so naked, nor so dress'd.

Majestick Quill! that keeps our minds in Awe,

For Reasons Kingdom knows no Salique Law,

Or if that Law was ever fram'd 'twas then

When Women held the Distaff not the Pen.

The Court the City, Schools and Camp agree,

Welbeck to make an University,

Of Wit and Honour, which has been the Stage,

Since 'twas your Lords the Heroe of this Age;

Whose Noble Soul is Steward to great Parts,

And do's dispence his Reasons and his Arts,

His Wit and Power, his Greatness, and his Sense,

With as much Freedom, and Magnificence,

As when our English Jove became his Guest,

And did receive a more than Humane Feast.

With Arts of Wit, he mixes those of Force

And Pegasus is his old Manag'd Horse.

No wonder he excells all other Men,

They but Nine Muses had, and he has Ten.

A Lady whose Immortal Pen transferrs,

To our Sex Shame and Envy, Fame to hers;

Whose Genius traces Wit through all her wayes

In abstruse Notions, Poems, and in Playes.

Then why should we the mouldy Records keep

Of Plautus, or disturb Ben Johnson's Sleep?

The Silent Woman Famous heretofore

Has been, but now the VVriting Lady more.

[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=84)

### 3.7. On the Dutchess of New-Castle her Grace.

MADAM,

WHilst others study Books, I study you,

And can b'Experience this affirm for true,

Of all your Sex you have the greatest worth

As ever yet these later times brought forth,

And I have Studied many, and some such

As former times could hardly better much,

Your Soul so Spiritual it doth appear

Fram'd for some Angel of a higher Sphere,

However 'twas infus'd, I know not how,

Into a mortal Body here below,

Aspiring restlesly like Fire and Flame

To mount again to th'Sphere from whenc it came,

So nobly active as it doth by Truth,

As by the World the Macedonian Youth,

As soon as y'ave o'recome and Conquer'd one,

You grieve there are not more to overcome,

There being nothing so Sublime and High

But you can reach in all Philosophy;

Nor so profound and deep again, but you

With ease, can dive and penetrate into,

Your Virtues being so infinite, I find

When I consider but your Soul and Mind,

'Twere easier for me never to begin

Than ever to give o're when once l'm in;

Which whosoe're should go about to tell,

Might number all the Stars of Heav'n as well,

The blades of Grass upon Earth's spacious Plain,

Or Sands the Sea's vast Bosome does contain.

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=84)

But as your greatest Beauties have their moles,

So some small faults are still in greatest Souls,

And I shall tell you, Madam, what they be,

T'acquit my self, o'th Crime of Flattery:

'Tis an Ambition above mortal state,

And Mind with Glory never satiate,

Without which Glory and Ambition

No noble Action yet was ever done,

So avidious and so Covetous of Fame,

As only for Eternizing their Name

They, as the Phoenix life to's young do's give,

Would be content to die that that might live.

But now I'll tell what my opinion is

Of Fame (and pardon if I Judge amiss:)

Fame's but a shadow of great action,

And but the Eccho of't when we are gone,

Than whose Trumpet no Musick is more sweet

Nor none's alive more pleas'd with hearing it,

But I do'nt know what pleasure I should have,

When I am dead with Musick at my Grave.

### 3.8. An Elegy upon the death of the Incomparable Princess Margaret
Dutchess of New-Castle.

HEnceforth be Dumb, ye Oracles of Wit;

Ye humbly must to Fate submit:

How soon must ye decline! How low must fall!

Since She is gone who did Inspire ye all?

Her Books are the best Patterns for the Pen,

Her Person was the best of Subjects too;

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=85)

In Wit and Sense She did excel all Men;

And all her Sex in Virtue did outgoe.

Though Grief affords some Eloquence,

Henceforth expect but little Sense;

For, since she's gone, all we can do

Will but the Pangs of Dying-writers show.

VVhen the bright Ruler of the Day

Th'Horizon of his Presence has berest

Some feeble streaks of Light are left,

Yet darkness soon must come, and all that light decay.

Our Sun's forever set, we have no hope

Of this as of the other Sun's return:

VVe all in Darkness must forever grope,

And we for ever must in Tears her absence mourn.

Philosophers must wander in the dark;

Now they of Truth can find no certain mark;

Since She their surest Guide is gone away,

They cannot chuse but miserably stray.

All did depend on Her, but She on none,

For her Philosophy was all her own.

She never did to the poor Refuge fly

Of Occult Quality or Sympathy.

She could a Reason for each Cause present,

Not trusting wholly to Experiment,

No Principles from others she purloyn'd,

But wisely Practice she with Speculation joyn'd.

None was more good, and once none was more fair:

She was not as most of her frail Sex are;

Who ave Fruitful Wombs but Baren 'Brains,

She left the best Remains:

[[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=85)

Though we no Issue of her Body find

Yet she hath left behind

The Nobler Issue of her mighty Mind;

Learning she needed not, nor yet despis'd:

Though from herself all Arts she knew;

The truly Learn'd she nobly Patroniz'd,

And every Artist, she encourag'd too.

Let all her Sex fashion by her their Lives:

She was the best of Women, best of Wives.

T'her Lord Sh'was warme and loving as the Spring,

But to all others cold as Winters lce,

Her sight on all a shiv'ring awe did bring,

And nipt, at first, all vain attempts of Vice;

But though in Love she bore a Noble pride,

She to each Skilful man of Art

Her Conversation freely doth impart,

And to all others civil was beside.

But we by praising thus provoke our Grief

VVhich never can expect Relief,

Nor can the most luxurious Praise

(Though penn'd with Art that might deserve the Bayes.)

Nor all which we can think afford

Ease to her much lamenting Lord:

Whose loss does now by far outvye

All he yet e're sustain'd

Yet he once lost much more for Loyalty

Than any Subject, and much less has gain'd;

This noble half she left behind

Who by her much lamented death must find

Too great a Trial for the greatest Mind.

[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=86)

Oh what Expedient can there be

Found to support his Magnanimity!

The best of Husbands, and the noblest Peer;

The best of Generals, best of Subjects too,

Whose Arts in Peace as well as War appear:

He knows how to advise, and how to do;

His Prudence and his Courage might uphold

The most decay'd and crippled State,

And rescue it from the Jawes of Fate:

His Body may, but Mind, can ne're be old;

Him she has left, and from our sight is hurl'd

And Gloriously shines in the true Blazing VVorld.

Thomas Shadwell.

### 3.9. An Elegy on the Death of the Incomparable Dutchess of NEW-CASTLE.

IF with due honour you would Solemnize

The great New-Castles Funeral Obsequies

Let every Science in close-mourning stand

About the Hearse, with Cypress in her hand:

Philosophy herself shall hold the Pall,

(She's the chief Mourner at this Funeral)

Philosophy which well the Poets drew

With Womens Features; here we find it true,

Nature, whose Lovers (in their Courtship rude)

Into her Privy-Chambers did intrude,

Out of her own Sex modestly one chose,

To whom her self she naked did disclose:

VVho all her wonders did so well explain,

That she the only wonder did remain.

[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=86)

Let Rhetorick, the pow'rful Syren there

Drest in her richest Livery appear;

Drest in those Robes which Tully to her gave

When the Worlds Mistress Rome, he made her Slave;

Or the strong Reason of New-Castles Books,

VVeav'd with the Charming sostness of her Looks:

But yet her weakness let her here confess,

Her Silence best this Sorrow do's express.

The Muses Her in lasting Tears shall steep,

The Graces mourn, and Comoedy shall weep:

And thousand Cupids sigh forth mournful Airs,

And wish for Eyes, to ease their Grief by Tears.

Let them their Bowes in sign of honour wave,

And with their Torches light her to her Grave.

Nor will they this attendance her deny,

Those Torches first were lighted at her Eye.

VVho now their un-arm'd Deities will dread?

Their Magazine is now demolished.

Yet did not her Muse kindle unchast Fires,

That Heav'nly Cupid Heav'nly Thoughts inspires:

No Kitchin-flames before her Beams would burn,

And wanton Love did to Devotion turn.

Thus Sol at once lifts up the Lamp of Day,

And warms at once, and bids the Persian Pray.

Great Issue of Natures united Pow'rs!

Glory of your Sex, and Disgrace of ours!

Which shall I call the greater Prodigy,

That you were such, or being such could Dye?

Did Nature fear lest that thy boundless Mind

For future search should nothing leave behind?

Or did you take this flight to Heav'n to see

How it with Thy fair Model did agree?

Whate're the cause; Joy rings through every Sphere;

And Heav'n more Heaven is since you came there.

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=87)

None in it with more Native Lustre shine,

Or livelier do reflect the light Divine.

Such spotless Innocence in that Bosome lyes,

Eve thinks she brought you forth in Paradice:

For that first crime lest not a lesser trace

On any Breast of all her num'rous Race;

Excepting one, whom you sit next to there,

Who her Creator in her Womb did bear:

And with her too almost you may contend,

What He Created you did Comprehend.

Blest Soul, who dwellest in Essential Light,

Direct us lost in Ignorance, and Night!

Whilst we with grateful Off'rings, what before

We ail admir'd, do humbly now adore.

Knightly Chetwood, Coll. Regal. Cant.

### 3.10. In Obitum Margaretae Ducissae Novo-Castrensis.

BArbara jam sileat, sileat quoque Graia vetustas,

Nec jactet fidas Itala terra nurus:

Hanc unam attonitum non mendax Fama per Orbem

Centeno potiùs debuit ore loqui:

Dulcè cavâ Sapphô testudine flebat amorem,

Sed nec pulchra a satis, sed néque casta fuit:

Haec toto numeris animoque, & corpore constat,

Vita etiam castis consonat ipsa modis.

Arsit fida suum Letho quóque Portia Brutum,

Caesaris at tinctus Sanguine Brutus erat:

[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=87)

Hujus dum Regem sequitur per Bella Maritus,

Per medios lgnes Ipsa sequuta Virum.

Mausolum epotum taceat Regina subimo

Viventem vivens Haec qu [...]que corde tulit:

Pensile nec Tumuli jactet;

Vitam ejus descri­psit.

monumenta Mariti

Duratura magis condidit sta sui.

Natorum numero Niobe non provocet Illam;

Nec specie, Nobes quae Dea stravit opes:

Bis septem è gravido, ceu Jupiter, Illa cerebro

Pignora dat; (decuit sic peperisse Deam)

Pignora ceu speculo totum referentia mundum,

Non nisicum Mundo pignora digna Mori.

Ah! cur non placuit Tibi vivae Academia sedes,

(Ceu

Qui fuit è Coll. Jo­hannes Can­tabr.

Ducis) ut jactet nomine Granta tuo!

Invidit sexus; jam Filia non potes esse,

E Fama titulus nec foret ille Tuâ.

At dum pauperibus legâsti Scripta Camoenis

Ditia, dum Mammas exeris usque Tuas,

(Nunc eniam super Astra faves) Academia Mater

Te Matrem posthàc est habitura suam

Knightly Chetwood, Coll. Regal. Cantabr.

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=88)

### 3.11. Upon the Death of the Illustrious and Incomparable Lady, Margaret
Dutchess of New Castle.

1.

DEath! thou hast done thy worst, we dread not now

The threatnings of thy angry Brow.

By thy last victory we're hard'ned grown,

Learnt to despise thy malice, scorn, and frown.

Thy saucie Power is so great,

That we like Slaves are become desperate.

2.

Since brave New-Castles Dutchess thou hast slain,

We baser Mortals to complain

Think it a crime, dye we would rather all,

That so we might attend her Funeral,

VVait on her, when her Soul takes flight

Into the Mansions of Eternal Light.

3.

VVithin her Breast such throngs of Virtues grew

That they their Prison overthrew,

And being vex'd at this same sottish Age

VVhere dull Impertinence so much does rage,

Their Fetters broke they upwards hie

In hopes to find there better company.

4.

She scorn'd those trifles which her Sex adore,

VVhich they vain Fools do value more

Than inward worth, would not like them mispend

That little time which God to her did lend.

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=88)

It was her only business here

To dress her Soul, and make it fine appear.

5.

Her pow'rful reason aw'd enticing sence,

Taught Rebel-thoughts Obedience.

VVhen stupid matter would unruly prove,

Instructed it, more calmly how to move.

External Pleasures she thought Sin,

Compar'd with those Delights which dwell within.

6.

So vast a knowledge ne're was yet confin'd

Within one single Womans Mind.

Her Fancy it was strong, so great her VVit,

That nothing but her Judgement equal'd it.

When e're she spoke the winged crew

Of pretty Notions streight about her flew.

7.

What e're she pleas'd with ease she overcame,

Learning before her time was lame,

Nature was dress'd but slovenly till she

Made it so spruce by her Philosophy.

It heretofore in Tatters went,

Is grown Gentile now, and can Complement.

8.

Had she but liv'd when blind Antiquity

Call'd what it pleas'da Deity.

She would have quite engross'd the Worship Trade,

Jove and his Kindred had been Bankrupts made.

They must have Starv'd without Relief,

Pin'd to Mortality, and Dy'd with Grief.

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=89)

9.

Rome where Divinity was sold so cheap,

Who Temples built on ev'ry heap

Of dirt and rubbish, would have quickly sent

It's Mungril-Gods all into Banishment.

Told them 'twas manners to give place

To one of a more noble Heav'nly Race.

10.

How well did Providence her real worth

Declare to th'World and set it forth,

When it in ties of Holy Wedlock joyn'd

The best of Men to th'best of Womankind.

And suffer'd fair Lucasia's Charms

To vanquish and subdue the God of Arms.

11.

The mighty Cavendish could only prove

A Husband to the Queen of Love,

Heav'n would have had her sooner, 'twas in strife

Whether she should Dye first, or be his Wife.

At length resign'd its right to show

How much to his great merits it did owe.

12.

What Joy above at her arrival there?

The Angels crowd to welcome her.

And big with wonder all pay Reverence

Unto a Soul of so much Excellence,

A Soul so pure, so bright all o're,

That they the like had never seen before.

[[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=89)

To the Duke.

YOur pardon, Sir, if striving to express

Perfections which in her were numberless,

I vainly mine own weakness do betray,

And show how little foolish Rhithms can pay

To her vast Merits, which like th'Ocean stretch

And drown what ere dares come within their reach.

For if to tell of with due Praise her Fame,

And as I ought her Virtues to Proclaim:

She would have had me rightly understood

She must have been less Worthy and less Good.

### 3.12. On the Death of the most Illustrious Princess, the Lady Dutchess of
NEW-CASTLE.

An EPITAPH.

SHe's Dead, and here she lies; the vulgar cry:

Fools know not that great Wits can never dye.

She sleeps; nay, that's too much: As well could she

Admit of Death, as such a Lethargie.

Yet say she Sleep, her very Dreams outvie

All our Grave Lectures of Philosophy.

Perhaps she Rests; 'tis time for her: but O!

What Fates attend her Rest poor Mortals know.

Tir'd with this World's Impertinence, she's come

For privacy to this Retiring-Room:

The place we call her Tombe, where she doth lie,

But 'tis her Closet, our great Library.

Howe're, she hath withdrawn her felf from hence,

And our Wits Freez, rob'd of her Influence.

[[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=90)

Like breathless Statues, here we stand all dumb,

Not one wise word to set upon her Tomb.

The brightest Sun blind Moles must never see;

So she seems dead because we senseless be.

Her sprightly Soul, ful of Aethereal Fires,

Up far above our Regions now aspires,

To seek new Game, since all things here below

Grew stale, and nothing left she did not know.

Her Phant'sies heat had scortch't all Subjects, hurl'd

The Universe into the Blazing-World:

And having nought out of her self do do,

She soon too active for her Body grew.

Spirits are not confin'd, out thence she flashes,

And leav's her house consum'd to these few ashes.

Puff then broil'd Chymist, wrangle out thy Fire,

Th'Elixyr's fled: and till thou canst inspire

These silent Ashes with new Forme, restore

Us such a Phoenix as we had before;

In spite of thy big words, we standers by

Shall call thee fool, and thy fine Art a Lie.

Be gone thou silly Poet, and invoke

The Destinies, thy Muses all are broke,

Cannot inspire thee longer, but by stealth

Out of her Books the Muses Common-wealth.

This Ladies learned Dust which here doth lye

Hath drunk thy boasted Helicon quite dry.

Bring, old and new Philosophers, your Art,

Rip up Dame Natures Bowels, pierce her Heart.

Alas, all's now too late, here's nothing left,

Her early Industry hath you berest

Of all her Jewels, and your Wits at once;

And bids you this new title wear, Grave Dunce.

She could not else have gone to rest so soon,

Who never paus'd before her work was done.

[[Page 177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=90)

All Natures Treasure in this Tomb doth lye,

If you would find it. Fools despair and dye.

Here lies that noblest Lady, whose great name

Hath choak'd the Muses, and hath glutted Fame.

A Name! All Poetry is mute to hear it,

This hardest Marble here doth sweat to bear it.

And did not yet the Sacred Ashes live,

And better words to Stones, than Men have, give.

We could not know that here enclosed lies,

The wonder of admired Mysteries.

Arts, Sciences, Muses, and Graces all

Comprised in one Golden Manual.

If thou wouldst know more of her, search for it

Amongst the many Wonders which she writ.

If out of those thou canst not spell and frame

Th'illustrious Dutchess of New-Castles Name,

Thou hast but one help left thee, in a word,

Consult the Living-Oracle, her Lord.

'Tis Treason against Wit for any one

To speak her name at length, but him alone:

Seeing in him, and him alone, we find

Whatever she of Wit hath left behind.

And VVit this Lady-Wonder shall survive

VVhilst this great Prince of Honour is alive.

Yea, may He live, till we can weary grow

Of all that Nature in one piece can show;

Wit might seem larger whil'st in Two it shone,

'Tis stronger now contracted into One.

VVhilst by his Curtesy she had ingros'd

So much, the honour of our Sex seem'd lost:

Wit was Hermaphrodite, when One in Twain;

But now 'tis only Masculine again.

Clement Ellis, Minister.

[[Page 178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=91)

### 3.13. Tumulus Nobilissimae, Illustrissimaeque Principis, Margaretae
Ducissae Novi-Castri.

QUis Deus extremum possit prohibere dolorem,

Cùm Dea sublimi tendit in Astra fugâ?

Pectore lacteolo condatur ferreus ensis,

Et non purpureo Sanguine tinctus erit?

Alta cadat  [...]edrus, nemorosae gloria Sylvae,

Non tamen ad Coelos diriget or a fragor?

Quid vetet, ut Saevi perculsus imagine fati

Non gemat, & nubes dissipet usque suas?

Lampade victrici dum transfert Foemina morti,

(Foemina, cui nomen non nisi gemma fuit,)

Unica, virtutum comitatus, vita, salusque,

Graviter officiis consuluisse suis.

Hoc fuit innuptae decus, observâsse parentes;

Uxoris, Domini non violâsse torum.

Non dolus aut ferrum, mollis facundia, nec vis

Surripuit nuptam Conjugis è gremio.

Sed sitiens mortis telum divortia fingit,

Et, quod non poterant caetera fata, facit.

Occidit illa, suis-decus, omnibus altera Pallas,

Deliciae Musis, Coelitibúsque comes,

Nunquid in aeternum vivet post Funer a Virtus?

Nunquid eruditi fama superstes erit?

Qui poterit vivae tolli virtutis Imago?

Ardentem Pallas non super are rogum?

Num febris calor insanae praeordia vellit?

Et Canis aestivus viscera caeca vorat?

Nostrarum extinguet Lachrimarum copia morbum,

Mortis & immerget spicula saeva dolor.

Frigida Sublimem repetunt Cruciamina Mentem?

Vitalesque aurae deseruêre focum?

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=91)

En nostri in tantam Dominam flagrantia Zeli

Scintillas reparat, Religióque fovet.

Certè igitur fatis nondum concessit iniquis

Foemina, quae nullo crimine tincta fuit.

Nonita jampridem divinitùs acta Creatrix

(Unius est summi, posse creare, Dei.)

Ex nihilo finxit diversa volumina Coeli,

Mundum alium, stabiles fixit utrinque Polos.

Huic se transmisit Solio, quia pulchrior illi

Virtutum est facies, formáque lucidior;

Quàm quae vel lippis vulgus dignetur ocellis;

Aut nostro immeritos praebeat Orbe dies:

Sic nimia Phoebus nè vi perstringeret Orbem,

In Clymenis gremium nocte silente redit.

Huc se transmisit, ne longa absentia Mundum

Jam tum constructum verteret in cineres.

Istum dura Fames torqueret, crapula nostrum,

Aequales si non tendat utrique manus.

Ne tantam invidiam pariat, quòd inhospita tecta

Linquat, pernici Pectore summa petens;

Haec non contineat spatiosam angustia mentem,

Quae velit influxum reddere utrique solo.

Indulsit nostris sua quaeque Volumina terris,

Nunc alios Orbes hisce beare cupit.

Utque sciant omnes, quantùm sciat omnia, sese

Transtulit, expressam Numinis effigiem.

ANDERTON.

[[Page 180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=92)

### 3.14. In Illustrissimam Dominam Margaretam, Novi­Castri Ducissam,

EPITAPHIUM.

SIste Paulisper gradum, Viator,

Non longûm moreris erit necesse:

Legenti licet currere,

Currenti licet legere,

Utrique intelligere,

Quòd hic sita est

Lectissima Foemina,

Domina Margareta,

Neo-Castrensis Ducissa.

Nobilitate verè Aulicâ,

Eruditione verè Academica,

Pietate verè Coelicâ,

Praedita & dotata.

Animo virili, super sexum,

Sapientiâ senili supra aetatem,

Ingenio entheo, supra sortem,

Afflata & imbuta.

Quam licèt ex hoc nostro discas Vixisse,

In suis tamen scriptis edisces Vivere,

Scilicet in Vitâ quam scripsit, Mariti,

Suam quoque perpetuare.

Quam licèt Bona Opera,

Moralia, Evangelica,

Ad arces Coelorum avolantem secuta sint.

Literata tamen

Philosophica, Historica, Poëtica,

In Terris spirantem & commorantem reserunt,

Servabuntque superstitem.

Fuit

Florentissimi Mariti, Uxor Splendidissima,

[[Page 181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=92)

Bellicosi viri, Doctissima Matrona,

Armati Ducis, Togata Ducissa,

Quam si habuisset Socrates Uxorem,

Plato ejus Philosophiam, non literis mandâsset.

Quae si habuisset Caesarem Maritum,

Ille non sua Gesta suâ manû scripisisset.

Illa ipsa Socratis Dicta Enarrâsset.

Illa ipsa Caesaris Facta Enarrâsset.

Illa ipsa Fidelitèr, Feliciter, Enarrâsset.

Qualem si Martialis mordax speravisset sibi,

Nunquam non Doctissimam Conjugem optâsset.

Quam modò, Historias omnes callentem,

Curtúmque torquere Enthymema potentem,

Rebúsque honestis Finem Ultimum imponentem,

Cúmque Homero Maronem comparantem.

Utrumque imitantem,

Vidisset Satyricus, non frontem corrugâsset,

Non intollerabilem Uxorem,

Sed Raram in Terris Avem, dixisset.

Vitam In Aulâ Regiâ, Honoratam, Egit.

Vitam In Minervae Castris, Eruditam, Egit.

Vitam In Ecclesiâ Dei, devotam, Egit.

Vitam Domi, Contemplativam, Egit.

Vitam Foris, Activam, Egit.

Vitam Piè, Placidè, Pacatè Egit.

Mortem Mortali natae, Expectatam, Obiit.

Mortem Philosophiae diditae, non formidatam, Obiit.

Mortem Ad Christianam spem vocatae, exoptatā, Obiit.

Mortem Laetè, Tranquillè, Beatè, Obiit.

Quâ translata est Obiit.

A meditatione purâ, ad Perfectam Visionem,

A creaturis contemplandis ad intuendum Creatorem,

A Poëtarum camoenis, ad Angelorum Hymnos,

Ab Aulâ Terrenâ, ad Curiam Coelestem.

[[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=93)

Libros Suos, sobolem Suam, ad utramque Academiam

Misit, at ad dandam non capiendam doctrinam.

Quibus Bibliothecas publicas ditavit,

Quae Ipsa Bibliotheca Animata fuit.

Opera illius fuere suum pretium,

Labores illius suum praemium.

Dedit, ut Herodotus unum Librum,

Singulis Musarum unum volumen.

Quae cum sunt ingressa Bibliothecam Joannensem,

(Solam nobis ex officio memorandam Bibliothecam)

Quàm densum obviam vênit agmen salutantium?

Quae cùm sua ibidem subsellia petebant,

Quâm grande fuit certamen locum cedentium

Vitam Conjugis, quam scripsit, ad suas Parallelas

Apposuit Plutarchus, & locum apparavit.

Philosophia, quam scripsit, se Veteribus adjungi

Modestè non dignata, ad Recentiores concessit.

Poetas omnes singulósque unicè dilexit,

Omnésque singulósque suo ordine visit avit.

Indigna est loco isti catenâ alligari,

Ad quem sibi adeò liberè accessum rogavit.

Anima Ejus regnat in Choro Beatorum,

Corpus (vides) jacet hîc in Choro Poëtarum.

Illa Ipsa,

Ut in Annulo gemma, utrobique refulget.

At Tu, quisquis es, Viator,

Orandus es Lachrymulis

Tuis, pro merito, novum

Heliconis hîc Rivum dare,

Ubi Musis jam fecerunt novum

Tot Poëtarum tumuli Parnassum.

Tho. Brown, Coll. Joan. Cantab.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=56934&page=93)

[Home](/)

Date: 1676  

