## (unknown project)

# The Nightingaless song, or, The Souldiers rare musick, and maids recreation
this song adviseth maidens to have a care, and of souldiers snap-s[a]cks to
beware : the tune is, No, no, no, not I, or, Pegg and the souldier.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The Nightingales Song, Or, the Souldiers Rare muſick, And maids Recreation.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=110189&page=1)

## 1\. The Nightingales Song, Or, the Souldiers Rare muſick, And maids
Recreation.

This Song adviſeth Maidens to have a care,

And of Souldiers Snap [...]ſ [...]cks to beware.

The Tuneis, No, no, no, not I; Or, Pegg and the Souldier.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

AS I went forth,

one Sun-ſhining day,

A dainty young couple

were gathering May:

The one a fair Damoſel,

of beauty moſt clear,

The other a Souldier,

as it both appear.

With kiſſes and complements,

to her he ſaid,

G [...]-m [...]row ſweet Honey,

thou well-favour'd Maid,

I think my ſelf happy,

I met with you here,

As you are a Virgin,

and I a Souldier.

And now if you pleaſed be,

I will you bring,

Whereas you ſhall hear,

the ſweet Nightingale ſin [...]

With other late paſtimes,

my s [...]ll ſhall be try'd,

[...]

Sweet ſir ſaid the Damoſel)

if you will do ſo,

Then hand in hand with you,

along I will go;

It is Recreation,

for Maids in the Spring,

To ſee Flowers grow,

and hear Nightingals ſi [...]g.

And having thus ſpoken,

together they went

Unto a merry green-wood

where ſome time they ſpent;

I  [...] walking and talking

of many a [...]odd thing

But yet could not hear,

the Nightingale ſing;

A dainty clear  [...]

was  [...]

A  [...]

[...]

The Maid ſéem'd unwilling,

and ſaid ſhe'd be gone,

And yet ſhe was- [...]oath

for to leave him alone,

At loſt ſhe reſolved,

her ſelf to this thing,

To ſtay till they heard,

the ſweet Nightingale ſing.

Amongſt the ſweet Flowers,

they ſtraight way ſat down,

The young man in kindneſs,

gave her a green gewn:

He alſo preſented

to her a Gold Ring,

Cauſe ſhe ſhould ſtay there,

till the ſweet Nightingale ſing.

[...] thus done,

[...] middle,

[...]

_[figure]_

THen now ſaid the ſouldier,

'tis time to give o're,

Nay prethee (woth ſhe) play

me one  [...] more:

I like  [...] the ſetting,

and tuning the ſtring,

Far better then hearing,

the Nightingale ſing.

He ſtruck up his Muſick

unto a high ſtrain,

And plaid the Tune over,

again and again:

Gramercy brave Souldier,

quoth ſhe, that didſt-bring,

Me hither, to hear the rare

Nightingale ſing.

Their ſport being ended,

then homeward they went,

Each one thought the time,

to be very well ſpent:

It was (quoth the Damoſel)

a very rare thing,

Whil [...]t thou plaid'ſt thy part,

to hear the Nightingale ſing.

At laſt with a deep ſigh,

[...] [...]ſe words ſeake ſhe,

[...] Souldier,

[...]

Elſe my haſſy pleaſure,

ſweet ſorrows will bring,

And I may repent I heard,

the Nightingale ſing.

Oh no, quoth the Souldier,

I may not do ſo,

Along with my Captain,

to morrow I muſt go:

But if I come this way,

again the next Spring,

We'l walk once more to hear,

the Nightingale ſing.

You Maids of the City;

and Country, that be,

Addicted to pleaſure,

take warning by me,

Let no ſlattering Young-men,

tempt y [...] to this thing,

To go to the wood to hear,

the Nightingale ſing.

Make bargaia beforehand,

for fear you miſcarry,

Know whether or no they are

minded to Marry:

If I had been wiſe, and

had done ſuch  [...]

[...]

[Home](/)

Date: 1675  

