## (unknown project)

# The noble progresse or, a true relation of the lord generall Monks
politicall proceedings with the Rump, the calling in the secluded members,
their transcendent vote for his sacred Majesty, with his reception at Dover,
and Royall conduct through the city of London, to his famous palace at
Whitehall. The tune is, when first the Scotish warrs began.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The Noble Progreſſe Or, A true Relation of the Lord Generall Monks

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37956&page=1)

## 1\. The Noble Progreſſe Or, A true Relation of the Lord Generall Monks

Politicall Proceedings with the Rump, the calling in the Secluded Members,
their tranſcendent Vote for his Sacred Majeſty, with his Reception at Dover,
and Royall conduct through the City of London, to his famous Palace at White-
hall.

The tune is, when firſt the Scottiſh warrs began.

_[figure]_

GOod people he asken to my caſt,

Ile tell you all what did befall,

and hapned of late.

Our Noble Valiant Generall Monk,

Came to the Rump who lately ſtunk,

with their Councell of State

Admiring what this man would doe.

His ſecret mind there's none could know,

They div'd into him as much as they could,

George would not be won with their ſilver nor gold.

The Sectarian Saints at this lookt blew,

With all the reſt of the factious crew,

They vapour'd awhile and were in good hope;

But now they have nothing left but the Rope.

Another invantion then they ſought,

Which long they wrought for to be brought

to claſpe him with they,

Quoth Uane and Scot Ile tell you what,

Wée'l have a Plot and he ſhall not

wée'l carry the ſwap.

Lets Vote him a thouſand pound a yeare.

And Hampton Court for him and his Heire.

Indéed quoth George ye're Frée-Parliament men

To cut a Thong out of anothers mans skin.

the Sectarian. &c.

They ſent him then with all his Hoſt a

To break our Poſts and raiſe our Ghoſts,

which was their intent.

To cut our Gates and Chains all down,

Unto the ground this trick they found,

to make him be  [...]ent:

This Plot the Rump old ſo  [...];

To caſt an outu [...] old my Lord,

But in th [...] [...] put un [...]oo't,

'T was enough to intect both his horſe and his foot,

the Sectarian, &c.

But when my Lord perceiv'd that night,

What was their ſnight he brought to light,

their knaveries all,

The Parliament of Forty eight,

Which long did wait, came to him ſtreight,

to give them a fall

And ſome Phanaticall people knew,

That George would give them their fatall due,

Indeed he did requite them agen.

For he pal'd the Monſter out of his Den,

the Sectarian, &c.

To the Houſe our worthy Parliament,

With good Intent they boldly weut

to Vote home the King.

And many  [...] people more,

Stood at the doore and waited for,

good tydings to bring,

Yet ſome in the Houſe had their hands much in blood,

And in great oppoſition like Traytors they ſtood,

But yet I beléeve it is very well known

That thoſe that were for him were twenty to one.

But the Sectarian Saints at this lookt blew,

With all the reſt of the factious crew,

they vapour'd awhile and were in good hope,

But now they have nothing left but the Rope.

THey cal'd the League and Covenant in,

To read again to every man,

but what comes next.

All Sequeſtrations null and void,

The people ſaid none ſhould be paid.

for this was the Text.

For as I heard all the propi [...]p

They voted King Charles the firſt of May,

Bonfires burning Bells did ring.

And our ſtréets did eccho with God bleſſe ye King.

At this the Sectarian Saints lookt blew,

And all the reſt of the factious crew,

they vapour'd awhile and were in good hope,

But now they have nothing left but the Rope.

Our General then to Dover goes

In ſpight of Foes or deadly blowes

ſaying U [...]vele [...]oy.

And all the Glories of the Land,

At his command there they did ſtand,

in Tryumph and Ioy.

Good Lord what a ſumptuous ſight' was to ſée

Our good Lord Generall fall on his knee,

To welcome home his Majeſty,

And own his ſacred Soveraignty,

But the Sectarian, &c.

Then all the worthy Noble Train,

Came back again with Charlamain,

our Soveraign great,

The Lord Mayor in his Scarlet Gown,

In s Chain ſo long went through the Town,

in Pompe and State.

The Livery-men each ſine the way,

Upon this great Tryamphant day,

The rich Maces carried before,

And my Lord himſelf the Sword he bore.

Then Uiveleroy the Gentry did hug,

For Generall Monk rode next to the King,

With Acclamations, Shoots and Cryes,

I thought they would have rent the skyes,

The Conduits raviſhed with Ioy.

As I may ſay did run all day

great plenty of Wine.

And every Gentleman of note,

In's Velvet Coat that could be got,

in glory did ſhine.

There were all the Péeres and Barrons bold,

Richly clad in Silver and Gold.

Marched through the reet ſo brave,

No greater Pomp a King could have,

At this the Sectarian, &c.

And thus conducted all along,

Through out the throng till he did come

unto White-hall.

Attended by theſe Noble-men.

Bold Heroe's kin that brought him in,

with the Generall.

Who was the man that brought him home,

And placed him on his Royall throne

T was Generall Monk  [...] doe the thing,

So God preſerve our gracious King.

And now the Sectarian. &c.

## Appendix A

Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and W. Gilbertſon.

[Home](/)

Date: 1660  

