## (unknown project)

# Poor Robins ansvver to Mr. Thomas Danson author of the late friendly debate
between Satan and Sherlocke: as also of another pamphlet since published;
pretended to be a defence of that debate against Poor Robin and others. By the
author of Poor Robin's Weekly Intelligence. This may be printed, Feb. 6. 1677.
Ro: L'Estrange.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35437&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35437&page=1)

POOR ROBINS ANSVVER TO Mr. Thomas Danſon

Author of the Late FRIENDLY DEBATE BETWEEN SATAN and SHERLOCKE: As alſo of
another Pamphlet ſince Publiſhed; Pretended to be A Defence of that Debate
againſt POOR ROBIN and others.

Bilem, Saepe Jocum veſtri movêre Tumultus.

By the Author of POOR ROBIN'S Weekly Intelligence.

This may be Printed, Feb. 6\. 1677. Ro▪ L'Eſtrange▪

London, Printed in the Year, 1677.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. POOR ROBIN'S ANSWER, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35437&page=2)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35437&page=2)

## 1\. POOR ROBIN'S ANSWER, &c.

Post varias Remoras, post tot Diſcrimina Praeli,

—Coram quem quaeritis Adſum.

THis Conteſt between Mr. Danſon and my ſelf, will I pre­ſume, appear ſo
ſurprizing and unexpected; that as it happens in ſudden Frays, the firſt Quere
generally ſtarted is like to be, How fell you out? To ſatisfie which, I muſt
diſpence with the Vanity of telling the World; that (what­ever Fools thinks,
or Knaves Report) our Weekly Intelligence is not publiſht ſolely to Get Money,
(though that be an Ingredient which inſinuates in moſt undertakings) nor
meerly to Entertain the Idle with Stories, and furniſh Coffee-Houſes with
Chat, (though for that ſome ungrateful Dons are not a little oblig'd, for
without ſuch Innocent Diverſions, 'tis a thouſand to one but their Tongues
would be imploy'd to the Hazard of their Ears.) But beſides theſe, ano­ther
main uſe of that Sheet, is for Extravagants to do Pennance in: To Expoſe Vice
and Ill Nature to deſerv'd contempt, and if poſſible Laugh Foppery out of
Countenance and Practice. Thus the Name of POOR ROBIN becomes more awful than
an Apparitors, keeps the peace no leſs than the Conſtable, and makes thoſe
tremble who bid defiance to the Stocks and the Whipping-Poſt, whilſt yet he
diſpences his Corrections with ſo much Mildneſs, that onely the conſcious feel
the Laſhes; and By-ſtanders could ſcarce take notice of their Chaſt
[...]zements, did not their own Wincing proclaim their perſonal Guilt, and
ſummon a crowd to whoot at their Folly.

In which Predicament we muſt Rank Mr. Danſon's Printed Re­ſentments: For
certainly, as never Man gave more Cauſe for a Sa­tyrical Reflection, ſo none
but his Diſcreet ſelf would ſince have taken the pains ſo amply to ſatisfie
the World how well he deſerv'd it. Wiſe and good Men cannot but abhor that
miſcheivous humour of teſty Fencers in Divinity, who like Tavern Bullies catch
up what­ever ſtands next, and convert it into a Weapon, or New Medi [...], (as
our Author calls it) for carrying on a Brangle, which too of [...] is no leſs
unneceſſary than unſeaſonable: the one but Milking an [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35437&page=3) He-Goat, whilſt
the other holds under a Seive; But for a Perſon of his pretended Piety and
Gravity to abuſe an-Eminent Miniſter by repreſenting him Dialoguing with, and
Preaching Salvation to the Devil: and by ſlanderous Imputations, mangling his
words, and put­ting Innocent Expreſſions on the Rack of Malice. To Extort an
odi­ous Meaning which 'tis like his thoughts were never Guilty of, was ſuch a
Matchleſs peice of Diſingenuity, that I co [...]ld not but think't deſerv'd to
be expos'd in a D [...]vertiſement to the Hiſs and Laughter of all the world.

As for the Merits of the cauſe, or Original Controverſie I ſhall not meddle,
for 'tis dangerous trampling in Holy Ground, unleſs our Shooes are firſt
pluckt off. I mean, that Lightneſs Prejudice, Self-conceit and Opiniaſtry
remov'd; wherein moſt Men are too apt to walk. And beſides, 'tis the opinion
of Wiſer Men, that Mr. Sher­lock has ſo fully Juſtifi'd his Principles, that
his Book may ſerve as a ſufficient Anſwer, not only to his Adverſaries firſt
Pamphlet, but the latter too (which pretends to be a Reply to it.) And even
whatever elſe, Indefatigable Impertinence ſhall ſcribble for the future on
this ſubject; if people will be but at the pains to conſider and compare his
Words with the others wild diſtorted Inferences only give me leave to ſay;
That I cannot think Mr. Danſon, for all his Clamours to be ſo much at odds
with the foul Fiend as he pretends, for what can be more favourable and
obliging, then when p. 3\. of his Defence, he poſſitively, and no leſs
Blaſphemouſly calls God, The Devils Be­nefactor▪ and abuſes a ſacred Text to
countenance his madneſs. Had Mr. S. been Guilty of ſuch an Obnoxious
Expreſſion, 'twould no doubt have afforded Tragical matter enough for Two or
Three more Ʋnfriendly Debates.

But waving the Body of the Pamphlet, I ſhall take notice onely of what he has
been pleas'd particularly to concern me in, Viz. The Preface; and this forlorn
Hope comes fronted with Two of our Au­thors Cardinal Vertues, Boaſting and
Falſhood; Telling the World that his late friendly Debate between Satan and
Sherlock had a ve­ry fair Reception both as to matter and MANNER, from all
Ranks and Orders, Learned, Intelligent and Pious —Now how well the
Illegitimate Brat was reſented by Perſons of the beſt RANK; Thoſe that Mid-
Wiv'd it into the World have ſome little reaſon not to forget: and 'tis
notorious that moſt modeſt Men of his own [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35437&page=3) party and
Sentiments in the matter of the Controverſie were ſo far diſſatisfi [...]d
with his ſcandalous manner of managi [...]g it, as generally to diſown and
condemn it.

But he proceeds. It had a very foul R [...]ception from other [...] of Mr.
Sherlocks perſwaſion, from whom as I will not ſo much d [...] as to deny them
their ſhare in the two firſt Characters; So, NOR, AS NOT to deny them any in
the laſt, &c. You ſee the Gentleman has ſo blundered himſelf of late in
Logick, that he has forgot his Gram­mar, and now cannot ſpeak without Nonſenſe
and Soleciſmes. There is a credible ſtory of a certain Quondam Fellow of M
[...]dlins, (you know the Stars name, no body Mr. Danſon!) that ſince the
memory of man undertook to teach ſome Gentlemen Latine; but having got an
encouraging ſpill  [...] [...]ſh'd and never came at them more; I fear our
[...] ſome ſuch ſlippery trick by the Learned Ma [...]ron that  [...] have
taught him Engliſh.

After a very punctual Recital of a Divertiſemement in our In­telligence,
beginning— There is lately publiſht a Dialogue be­tween a Monkey and his
Looking▪Glaſs, &c. This Hero of the Gooſe­quill turns up his Muſtacho's, and
ſays— He would ſcorn to take notice of that abuſ [...], if he had not Good
Ground to believe Mr Sher­lock as truly the Authour of it, as other Men are of
the Weekly Ad­vertiſements; ſure he imagines Poor Robin to be of Kin to
Smectym  [...].

"Where tuck'd under each Arm a double Gizzard,

"Five Faces lurk u [...]der a ſingle Vizzard.

I confeſs I have often with much ſatisfaction over-heard grave Coxcombs
relate; that as many Authors Club to an Intelligence as there go Taylors to a
Man; that we tug at the Pen like Slaves at the Oar a whole Bank together, and
write in the poſture that the Sweeds give fire in, over one anothers heads;
Nay ſome have been ſo impu­dent as to pretend intimate acquaintance with half
a dozen of the Fraternity of Robin-Writers. But that any of the Tribe of Levi
had any Finger in the Pye is a ſlander, that none but the Devils Dia­logue-
maker would ſuggeſt; for in truth the Ground of his belief (as well in this as
greater matters) is like to prove nothing but Fancy, or rather Malice, which
cares not what it reports, ſo he may caſt an Odium upon Mr. Sherlock; If I
ſhould ſay I have good ground to be­lieve; Mr. Danſon addicted to Gaming,
Bowls, Nine pins, &c. [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35437&page=4) No doubt he would
cry out calumny and Slander; and yet I can ſhew where he was charged therewith
in Print ſome Years ſince, and which he never diſprov'd that I know of; A far
better ground for believing it, than any he can produce in this caſe; For I do
So­lemnly declare (and know no reaſon but my unbias'd Teſtimony may be
Credited before his Envious Surmiſes) That the ſaid Divertiſe­ment was ne
[...]ther Directly nor Indirectly promoted or procured by Mr. Sherlocke (whom
to my knowledge I never ſaw, nor never had any Correſpondence with) nor by any
from him, or on his behalf; But was i [...]ſerted out of that Natural
Antipathy and contempt I bear to ſuch a Ridiculous and Abuſive piece of
Foppery as the Title, and Contrivance of that Pamphlet.

But now behold! The Man of Sylogiſmes comes furiouſly to Attaque our
Divertiſement, and gravely Confound it with a Firſt, Second, Third, and
Fourth—ly; Beloved;—

Firſt, It was not Well Witted; Though few that know Mr. Danſon can admit him
for a Competent Judge; Yet let's hear his reaſon; The Monkey, (he ſays) muſt
needs be Satan: &c. And why muſt it be ſo; S [...]r Poſitive? May it not ſerve
as well to Emble­matize your Worſhip? who being like thoſe unlucky Ani­mals,
of a medling Enterprizing humour, and having made abun­dance of ſtrange
Grimaces, took them, when repreſented in your Crackt Imagination for a Picture
of Mr. Sherlock; And ſo frighted with your own hideous Reflection, Conjur'd up
a pittiful Devil to de­bate with Abſurdities, that had no body but your ſelf
for their Author.

Secondly, He ſays, It was not well worded, becauſe there is no reaſon the
Arguments manag'd by Satan ſhould be ſtiled the Non-Conformiſts; Yes Sir! Two
or Three ſmall reaſons there are: Firſt, Becauſe what ever looks like an
Argument is generally borrowed (not to ſay ſtoln) from the Non Con's Books;
onely the railing abu­ſive part is intirely your own. Secondly, Your Satan
declares him­ſelf to be a very Preciſe Devil; A Conſtant and A [...]tentive
Hearer at Conventi [...]les, &c. Thirdly, Becauſe your ſelf ſeem'd very fond,
it ſhould be thought ſo, making your Devils Common Formula of Uſhering in his
Arguments to be thus A Phanatick would preſs you, p. 7. The Calviniſts will
object, p. 16. would J.O.. ſay, p. 30 Would a Fanatick ſay, p, 34. Fanaticks
think, p. 38. &c.

In the next Lines Mr. Danſon grows modeſt, Diſclaims his having [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35437&page=4) Improv'd the Art
of Scolding, yet acknowledges he had found out an unheard of way to abuſe any
Antagoniſt: Theſe are his words; — The unheard of way to abuſe any Antagoniſt,
diſcovered in the Friendly Debate, was not the Improvement of the 8th▪ Liberal
Art which the Vulgar call ſcolding (for that may be heard every day at
Billingſgate) but the choice of a Dialogiſt—That was the No­velty; A Novelty
indeed! and ſince we owe the diſcovery wholly to Mr. Danſons Ingenuity, I am
content he ſhould have a Patent to Monopolize the Invention to Him and his
Heirs; Nor is the Myſte­ry of Scolding ſo little beholding to him for its
Improvement, as he baſhfully pretends; For as the Common Profeſſors of Railing
have their Figures, and Peculiar Ornaments, though not ſo learnedly
diſtinguiſht by the Names of Sarcaſmus, Aſteiſmus, Mict [...]riſmus,
Antiphraſis, Charientiſmus, or Ironia, yet have they their dry Bobs, their
broad flouts, bitter taunts, their fleering ſrumps, and their privy Nipps; And
at this Rhetorick Mr. Danſon is Excellent, as himſelf confeſſes, to make the
Devil play upon Mr. Sherlocke.—As p. 22\. Now we are under the Roſe, I will
tell you truely I believe all your talk of a Saviour is but a copy of your
countenance; p. 38. I believe all Chriſts Revelations, and were I ſure none
but Friends were within hearing, I would ſay that's more than you do; p. 4.
None of your Clubb (which it ſeems is a very merry Clubb, p. 43.) care much
for Paul, &c. But above all, that figure is Superlatively fine, and wholly
Novel in his Preface to The Defence, where he calls Mr. Sherlock—Whore.

Thirdly, He taxes the Divertiſement as Guilty of calamny, al­l [...]adgeing
there is no hint of Bawdry in the words Operam Dare ad Liberos procreandos,
they ſignifying no more than to have conjugal commerce; I confeſs Commerce is
a very pretty and appoſite term, that is, To Truck Ware for Ware; But why the
Latine muſt be ren­dred conjugal, rather than any other private Commerce I am
yet to learn; And indeed who could Imagine but our Author, or (which is all
one) his Devil was not a little Tickled with ſome conceit, when he draggs in
by Head and Ears ſuch a pittiful ſhred of Bumbaſt, where there is not the
leaſt occaſion for't, but meerly for the L [...]tch­ery of Latine, and then
cackles over it thus—You ſee as old as I am I have not forgot all my Latine.

He takes it ill, That the Divertiſer ſhould recommend him to a Scotch
Caſemont, which, he, ſays, Is a Pillory.—Seriouſly a Pro­found [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35437&page=5) found Commentator!
but I warrant you he had never hit on't ſo luckily, had not Conſciouſneſs of
his own merits aſſiſted his gueſ­ſing: For not to mention their deſerts who
not onely publiſh Pam­phlets without Licenſe, but alſo abuſe the Ipprimaturs
of Authori­ty, as he does Pr. Deb. p. 28, and 49. 'tis certain that Forgery is
a cr [...]me generally puniſhable by the Wooden Ruff, and how far guilty of
that (at leaſt againſt conſcience and honeſty, though not within the Statute)
Mr. D. is by Miſrepreſenting Mr. S [...]. words and ſenſe, Is obvious to every
conſiderate Reader.

But I am farr from the Malice he charges me with, or wiſhing the leaſt Ill to
his Perſon, and would adviſe him (as a Friend) to calm that fiery, contentious
ſpirit, which hurries him into theſe Abſur­dities; Not to ſuffer blind furious
Zeal to conſume all his Charity; Nor think every man that diſſents from his
Sentiments an Atheiſt, a Mahumetan, or Subverter of the Goſpel; and if he
needs muſt be  [...]ling in Polemicks, to treat his Antagoniſts hereafter with
the Candor of a Scholar, the Civility of a Gentleman, the Gravity of a
Miniſter, and the Moderation of a Chriſtian; this I am ſure is whol­ſom
Councel, but if he will neglect it, and proceed as he has be­gun, I would wiſh
him to Imitate his Brother R. to betake himſelf to the Study of Phyſick in the
Galenical way, with particular regard to the nature of Hellebore and its
Operation, which may be of great uſe this Spring to a perſon of his
complexion, and prevent the dire effects otherwiſe threatned in the Dog-daies.

Sed— Motos praeſtat Componere Fluctus.

—FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35437&page=5)

[Home](/)

Date: 1677  

