## (unknown project)

# Poor Robins prophesies and divertisements

## Table of contents

  * 1\. POOR ROBINS PROPHESIES. And DIVERTISEMENTS.
    * 1.1. The Firſt Propheſy.
    * 1.2. The Second Propheſy.
    * 1.3. Divertiſements.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40661&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40661&page=1)

## 1\. POOR ROBINS PROPHESIES. And DIVERTISEMENTS.

Since the Sybils, and Noſtredamus,

Mother Shipton, Grebnerus, and Lilly,

By Predictions, have made themſelves Famous;

Tho' never ſo Dark and ſo Silly.

Let Poor Robbin put in for a Prophet

With an innocent Prognoſtication,

If there happen no Good to come of it,

It ſhall yet do no Hurt to the Nation.

But from Starrgazing Wiſards of State,

With their Factius Prognoſtiques; defend us;

What they ſeem to foretel, they Create

And they Cauſe all the Ills they Portend us.

'Tis but tuning the Phanſy of the Rabble,

And they'l ſwear 'tis the Starrs; when 'tis they do't;

Not ſo much as this Pittiful Bauble,

But I'le hang, if they don't put a Key to't

UPon turning up the Foundation of Muſh­rome-Hall, there was found a Porridge-
Pot with an Alms-Box in it. The Pott was made of Red Earth, as Man was, and
up­on it, in Saxon Characters, as much as to ſay, OUR ORIGINAL. In the Box
were two Propheſies, written alſo in the ſame Tongue, which are here
faithfully Tranſlated, as follows.

### 1.1. The Firſt Propheſy.

When the Toad ſhall run away with a Legg of the Lyon, and advance it ſelf
againſt the Eagle, then ſhall the Men of the White Iſland ſuffer great
Tribulation, by reaſon of the Ex­ceſſive Price of HORN-BOOKS, and the danger
of their BACON; and take grievous Surfeits of ROTTEN WARDENS. Then ſhall the
Fox whiſtle, and the Geeſe Dance, to the Tune of When Jocky firſt the War
began; and there ſhall be notable Glee among the Children of the Lake.

After this, there ſhall appear a Face of Braſs, under a New thatch'd Houſe,
and a Voice ſhall be heard crying WO, WO, WO, unto thoſe that BAWL; which
ſhall be ter­rible to the Tranſlater of the DOBUNI, and the POOR WHORES, with
their PETITIONS, ſhall fall down before it. Then ſhall Men be diſtracted in
their Recko­ning, and refuſe to give Accompt of their Stewardſhips; and being
far gone in Ale and Concupiſcence, they ſhall have a Hankering after the
Fleſh, and run their Heads against Croſs-Beames in the middle of their Cariere
after the Strange Woman; their Eyes being ſunk into their Breeches, and the
Underſtan­ding fallen into the Lower parts.

### 1.2. The Second Propheſy.

When the Moon-Calf ſhall chop Logique with the Three Lyons, and the
Fatherleſs-Child enter into a League with the French Cutter, the Truſty ſhall
take poſſeſſion of the Houſe-Top, and the Clother of the Dead ſhall call in
the Man of Letter; to his  [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40661&page=2) and the Canon
ſhall play upon him, from the Man of Po.

In thoſe dayes there ſhall come forth a Migh­ty Prophet out of the River of
the South, whoſe Daddy ſhall not be known, for he ſhall ſpring like a Chedir-
Cheeſe; out of the Milk of the whole Pariſh. He ſhall confound the Oracles of
the Pagan Almanacks, and give thanks upon his Knees to St. Stephen, before the
great Tri­bunal, for his ſucceſs.

When this is come to paſs, the Spirit of Delu­ſion ſhall preach a New Goſpel,
in the Name of the fall'n Angel; Maintaining that Rebelli­on, Rapine, and
Bearing falſe witneſs are the ſpecial Privileges of a Babe of Grace. His ſound
ſhall go out into Arabia; He ſhall hold forth in the Synagogues of ſmoke, and
the Martyr ſhall give Teſtimony unto his Do­ctrine. He ſhall be skill'd in all
the Lear­ning of the Egyptians; and of ſo wonderful a Memory, that he ſhall
never forget any thing, but his Sins, his Friends, and the Maſters of his
Pariſh. He ſhall ſhew his Parts before Principalities and Powers, and make
great Pre­ſents of State-Spectacles, for the Diſcovery of Non-Entities, and
ſeeing things inviſible: by which means, his Virtues ſhall be made ma­nifest.

And then ſhall come forth in a fair Foolls-Capp, and bound up in Calves-
Leather, the Living Hiſtory of the Phyloſophy of Go­tham with certain Learned
Exercitations upon the Devils Arſs of Peake, which ſhall make the Squire of
the Wandle, and the Lady of the ſorrowful countenance, great in their
Generations. But behold there is a ſad Cata­ſtrophe at hand; for the Proud
ſhall be Hum­bled, St. George appeareth, and the Puiſſant ſhall eat Grayns.

### 1.3. Divertiſements.

1\. IF there be any Man, Woman, or Child, in Town, or Country, that can
furniſh a conſiderable quantity of good ſubſtantial Statutable Bawdery, let
them repair with it to the ſign of the Kings Whiſperer, and they ſhall be well
paid for their pains, the Maſter and Miſtreſs of the houſe, being upon a
Collecti­on of Curioſities of that kind, which they intend to publiſh with
Aretines Cutts, and their own Notes upon them, for the Edifica­tion of both
Sexes.

2\. There is now ready for the Preſs, an Excellent Piece, call'd, The Memoirs
of Grim the Collier of Croydon, and Dame Gillian his Spouſe, with Inſtructions
how a man may thrive in the world, without either Brains, or Honesty; being of
ſingular uſe, for Buf­foons, Pimps, and Pariſh-Children.

3\. Loſt betwixt Tarts Coffee houſe, and Parliament Stairs, out of a Calves-
Leather-Caſe, a very fair, Large Conſcience, ready harden'd, and fit for Uſe;
together with Bills of Accompts, and two Apologys, one for Judas, and another
for the ſeaven deadly ſins, clearly proving that the Devil is not ſo black as
they paint him, with a Receipt to turn Hob-nails into Guinnyes. Whoſoever has
found them, and will deliver them to the true Owner, in the Chriſt-Croſs-Row,
ſhall have a good reward.

4\. The Dr. that makes the rare Varniſh for keeping people in countenance in
the caſes of Swearing, Lying & Stealing without the common helps of Pillory or
Carting, ſo that they ſhall out-face a Court of Juſtice, and ne­ver change
colour for't, does now ſtand fair for Profeſſor to the Societies of Newgate
and the Gatehouſe, & is to be ſpoke with, from 8 to 12. in the Morning, at the
Graceleſs Babe; & from 2 to 7 in the Afternoon, at the ſign of the Cloake-
Carrier. At other times he may be heard of at the Virginia in Black-Fryers.

## Appendix A

This may be Printed May 23, 1677. R. L'Eſtrange.

Printed by H. B. in the Year 1677.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=40661&page=2)

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1677  

