## (unknown project)

# Poor Robins Character of France, or, France painted to the life in a brief
dialogue of the description of that nation, their manners, customs,
complements, language, discourse &c. : as also, an exact character of the city
of Paris, of their gentry, peasants, women &c. / by Poor Robin ...

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=1)

POOR ROBIN'S CHARACTER OF FRANCE: OR, FRANCE Painted to the Life. IN A BRIEF
DIALOGUE OF THE Deſcription of that Nation, their Man­ners, Cuſtoms,
Complements, Lan­guage, Diſcourſe, &c. AS ALSO, An exact Character of the City
of Paris, of their Gentry, Peaſants, Women, &c. By POOR ROBIN, Knight of the
Burnt-Iſland, a Well willer to the French Taylors.

London, Printed in the Year 1666.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=2)

## To the Judicious READERS.

Gentlemen,

I Here preſent you with a Diſh of Dainties, I aſſure you you no Kickſhaws,
though dreſt after the French mode. To deſcribe that people aright, a man muſt
have in him extraordinary of the Mimmick, and therefore I would deſire the
Reader in the peruſal of theſe Lines, to adde to them ſomething of action; for
it is impoſsible to perſonate a French-man aright, unleſs he with it play the
Antick: My requeſt therefore is to all thoſe who ſhall read this  [...]ook in
Taverns, Ale-houſes, or Coffee-houſes, to have a ſpecial care therein, that I
may not be murthered in my own Lines, but to adde to it a graceful ſhaking of
the head, drawing back the legs, and thruſting out the ſhoulders, and then it
will be ala mode France. If all the humors I have writ of them do not ſuit
patt to the Nation the ſame time you read this, you muſt impute it to the
fickleneſs of thoſe people, whoſe inconſtancy is ſuch, that let me now write
never ſo real a truth of their Garb or Clothes, though the Author and Printer
make all the haſte imaginable, they will be in another faſhion before the Book
can be publiſhed, that a Taylor may as well take meaſure of a Garment for the
Moon, as an Au­thor to deſcribe the Habits and Faſhions of that People. So now
Reader, having told you at the door how you are to be­have your ſelf, if you
pleaſe walk in and ſee the Show.

## Table of contents

  * To the Judicious READERS.
  * 1\. POOR ROBIN'S CHARACTER OF FRANCE.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=2)

## 1\. POOR ROBIN'S CHARACTER OF FRANCE.

Engliſh-man.

GOod morrow, Monſieur.

French-man.

Tres humble Serviteur, Monſieur.

Engliſh-man.

What makes you ſtirring ſo early this morning?

French-man.

No ting, but me owe de leetle mony to de Hoaſteſs, and de pocky-hora vill no
ſtay, but ſend vor de Shargeant, dat ſcare me worſs den de Tif­fell; begar me
ſooner ſee de Tiffel den de Shargeant, me be de ſuſh Bird vas vill no ſing in
de Cage: fiſh vay ſall me take to be ſafe? me mus come no near de Hoaſteſs, me
goe in de France, den futra vor de Shargeant.

Engliſh-man.

And what Calling do you intend when you come into France?

French-man.

Ah, me have de brava Calling in de Varle, me play ode Fidle, me teaſh a to
Dance, O ſo rare, ſo rare! begar London vill de undone when me be in de
France: Begar you no ave de autre man in all de Shitty ſo brave fellow as me
ſelfe; yet begar me no ſhuſe but run, de pocky Shargeant doe ſcare a me ſo.

Engliſh-man.

Indeed a Fidler in France is a man of a very high repute, for I remember about
five years ago being in your Countrey at a town [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=3) not far diſtant
from Orleans, whileſt I and the reſt of my compa­ny (amongſt which was a Fille
de Joy of Paris) were at Dinner, there entred into our Room three of theſe
uncouth fellows, with Flats on their heads like cover'd Diſhes, and in ſuch a
garb as our Countrey-men uſe to clothe Poles wherewith to affrighten Crows
from eating their Corn, being for the moſt part pinn'd together, and the reſt
faſtened with here and there a ſtitch, ſo that they were a la mode de
Tatterdemallion. At the firſt ſight of them I caſt one eye on my Cloak, and
the other on my Sword, as not knowing what occaſion I might have of the one,
to deſend the other; for by their inſol [...]nt int [...]nſion and ſa [...]cy
boldneſs, I could not imagine them to be other than Thieves: but when I took a
more ſtrict ſurvey of their Apparrel, I ſoon alter'd that opinion, and rather
gueſs'd them to be the Excrement of a Priſon, though it ſoon appeared that I
was alike deceived in my thoughts, they being neither better nor worſe than
errant Fidlers. Theſe fel­lows, though ſuch as we in England ſhould not hold
worthy of the Whipping-poſt, without leave, and without reverence on their
parts performed, fell to their work, abuſing our ears with ſuch an harſh
Leſſon, that one of our School-boys playing on the Jews-Trump compared to
this, might have been taken for the Muſick of the Spheres: but as if this had
not been puniſhment enough un­to us, they muſt needs adde to it one of their
Songs, but then how did I bleſs my ſelf in the remembrance of our Ballad-
ſingers when they Chant the Tunes of In Summer time, and Ch [...]vy-Chaſe! Now
though I underſtood not French perfectly yet by that little I had, and the
ſimpering of the Fille de Joy, I perceived it was Bawdy, yea, ſuch as could
not patiently be endured by any but a French-man.

French-man.

Begar you be de Rouge to ſpeak ſush ting of de French-man, no pee­ple in de
varle dat do ſing like unto dem; begar me ſhould by de prate tink dat dis
drunk, but dat me no ſee ſtagger.

Engliſh man.

But Monſieur, give me leave to proceed in my Story: what to do to be rid of
theſe fellows I knew not, for I knew not how to call them Rogues handſomly in
French, and for other Languages [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=3) they underſtood
none, and to beat them, they were Villains of ſuch an inferior quality, as
indeed was not worthy of mine or any honeſt mans anger; a knot of Raſcals ſo
infinitely below the ſe­verity of a Statute, that they would have diſcredited
the Stocks; and to have hang'd them, as it would have hazarded the reputa­tion
of the Gallowes, ſo it would have been unprofitable to the Executioner, their
Clothes being onely fit for the Rag-woman; it would have puzzled a man in a
whole years time to have ſtudi­ed a Vengeance for them which they would not
have injured, in the ſuffering the greateſt torment one could inflict on them,
be­ing not to hearken to their Ribaldry. But to proceed, after their Song was
ended, one of them pulled a Diſh out of his pocket, and ſet it before us, into
which we were to caſt our Benevolence, which by cuſtom (you know Monſieur) is
but but onely a Soll from every man; ſuch a rare Calling it is to be a Fidler
in France!

French-man.

Begar me be no ſush Fidler, me be de Muſhiſhaner, dat play to de Lords, to de
Ladies; me goe brave in de Parrell, me kiſh de Shamber­maid, me lye wid de
Kitchen-Wenſh, but if me get her wid Shilde, O Diabolo, vat ſall become of me
den?

Engliſh-man.

It is but ſhifting into another Countrey, you know Fidlers and Beggars are
never out of their Sphere. I ſuppoſe it is impoſſible for you to be lowſie you
ſhift ſo often.

French-man.

Begar me go to Parry de brav [...] Shitty in de varle, dis Shitty is no
compare wid Parry, no more den de Buſhers knife is wid a long Tord.

Engliſh-man.

Indeed Monſieur your Compariſon is very ſuitable, if by your laſt word you
mean Paris, as I ſuppoſe you do; the onely ſtink of which place being a
greater ſtrength unto it, and more powerful to keep out an Enemy, than the
Ditches or Bullwarks round a­bout it; well therefore may it be ſaid to be the
ſtrongeſt Town in Chriſtendom, if we take the word (ſtrong) in that ſenſe, as
when we ſay, ſuch a man hath a ſtrong breath; for otherways it is ſo weak,
that if the ſtink of the ſtreets keep him not out, there is no aſſurance to be
looked for of the Walls: But that which is [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=4) moſt admirable,
is, that in ſuch a perpetuated conſtancy of ſtinks, there is alſo ſuch an
admirable and diſtinct variety, that a Chy­mical Noſe after two or three
perambulations, would hunt out b [...]inde-fold, each ſeveral ſtreet by the
ſmells, as perfectly as an­other by his eye in a ſerene Skie at noon day.

French man.

Par ma foy de tell loud lye, begar Parry is ſo brava dat no expreſs it, begar
be Son of Debaſtalder to ſay Parry tinks, when it is ſweet as de Roſe, and de
brava Houſes in de varle.

Engliſh-man.

I confeſs your Houſes in Paris are very handſom to the ſtreet­ward, but for
the Furniture within, they come very much behind ours; the French men moſt
commonly carrying all their wealth on their back, ſo that when they are in
their beſt Clothes, they may be ſaid to be in the middle of their Eſtates,
when the pooreſt Tradeſ man in London hath his Plate to drink in, and is
ſerved up with his Pewter-diſhes of ſeveral ſorts, your Artiſans of Paris
coming ſo far behinde them, that they would be glad of meat (could they but
reach to the price of it) although it were in a Wooden Diſh.

French-man.

Begar de Artiſan of Parry be de brava fellow, de Engliſs Taylor be noting, de
make Breech vit vor de Plough-man, 'tis not ala mode France: De France Taylor
trick de Clown up ſo rara, make him zhow like de Gentil-man. De Engliſs Barber
Trim make man like de Goate.

Engliſh-man.

The French Barber trims ſo as makes a man look like a Mon­key, come Monſieur I
muſt help you out with it: You French men are indeed excellent fellows for
Toys, very perfect at Tooth­picks, Beard-bruſhes, and Gentle womens Fans; but
in other more ſubſtantial Trades how infinitely ſhort do you come of the
Eng­liſh? Your Cutlers make ſuch abominable and fearful Knives, as would
grieve a mans heart to ſee them, enough almoſt to make one loathe the Victuals
that ſhould be cut by ſuch miſ-ſhapen In­ſtruments. And your Glovers are worſe
than your Cutlers, for you would imagine by their Gloves, that the hand for
which they were made, were cut off by the wriſt. And what excellent work­men
[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=4) your
Painters are, may be ſeen by the Signes hanging over each door in Paris for a
diſtinguiſhment, as with us at London: but ſo hideouſly are theſe made, and ſo
little reſembling the thing ſig­nified, that if a Hen did not ſcrape better
Pourtraitures on a Dunghil, I would be bound to eat no other meat but of a
French paiſant womans dreſſing during life, which would be a torment next to
ſtarving; very convenient therefore is it that they have it printed in Capital
Letters under every Sign what it is, for fear the Spectators ſhould take a
Cock for a Bull, or a Pigg for a Goſs-hawk.

French-man.

Me can no longra endure to heare Parry de brave Shitty in de varle to be ſo
degraſte.

Engliſh-man.

A brave City indeed, and of a ſtrange compoſition, wherein a man cannot live
in the Summer for fear of being poiſoned with the ſtink, nor in the Winter for
the like danger of being mired with the dirt.

French-man.

Begar if de ſpeak ſo falſe of Parry de brava Shitty, vat will de den doe of de
Countrey!

Engliſh-man.

For your Countrey, I muſt confeſs indeed the ſoyl thereof is enough plentiful,
ſtored with Corn, Beaſts, and Fowls; but alas, what is that to the poor
peaſant, who onely beholdeth it with his eyes, ſeldom or never ſo much as
taſting it with his mouth; a Capon or Rabbit being almoſt as unlawful for
theſe miſerable Creatures to eat, as it was in the Old Law for any but the
Prieſts to eat Shew-bread. I believe one of your Countrey Taylors has but an
ordinary Trade with them, they thinking themſelves hap­py if in their apparel
they can but mount to Canvaſs, for wool­len Cloth is beyond the reach of their
purſe, and he that aſpires to Fuſtain, will not ſtick to juſtle for the beſt
place in the Pariſh, even to that of the Church-warden: For Hats they will be
ſure to have them, though their Bellies pinch for it, and that it may appear
they have them, they alwayes keep them on their heads. I ſuppoſe they are
great Enemies to Hoſiers and Shooe-makers, [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=5) becauſe they
ſeldom wear any Shooes or Stocking;, but ſuch as Nature furniſhes them withal,
unleſs it be on ſome principal Ho­ly-day, when they will be ſure to go to
Church.

French-man.

Vat dis de ſpeak of de p [...]iſant, begar de paiſant be de Clown in all
Country, but de France Gentilman is de brave Gentilman in de varle.

Engliſh-man.

What is ſpoken of your Nation in general, that they are won with a Feather,
and loſt with a ſtraw, may more particularly be applyed to theſe your de brave
Gentil men, who at fi [...]ſt ſight will be as familiar with you as your
ſleep, and follow you as doth your ſhadow; but upon the leaſt diſtaſte, for a
word ſpeaking they will draw their ſword: They are brave fellows at a firſt
On-ſet, begin an action like thunder, and end it in a ſmoke, at the firſt
encounter more than men, in the cloſe thereof leſs than women. They are very
Complemental, and full of their Court Cringes, without which none is accounted
a Gentil-man. At my firſt co­ming to Paris, one of theſe Monſieurs add eſſed
himſelf to me, carrying his head as if he had been ridden with a Martingal,
then did he draw back his legs, and thruſt out his ſhoulders in ſuch a
ridiculous poſture, that made my Worſhip to laugh heartily to ſee the Ape out-
done by the French-man.

French-man.

Begar me can forbeare no longra, de Rouge, de Raſcal, de Jack-napes, compare
de France-man ala moda, to de Ape, begar fleeſh, blood, ſpee­rit, na de Saule
can no ſuffer dis; par ma foy de thruſh Tord in de heart bleed if de ſpeak
dis.

Engliſh-man.

Monſieur, not ſo angry, we know the temper of your Country­men well enough,
though you will draw the Sword on the leaſt diſtaſte, a minutes pauſe ſheathes
it again, then if a man beats you into better manners you will take it kindly,
kiſs your hand, and cry Serviteur. I muſt confeſs at firſt when I came to
Paris, I did much admire the gallantry of your Nation, thinking no place in
the world comparable to it for Nobility and Gentry, until at laſt one foul
miſtake rectified my judgement, which was this: There came to viſit a Scotch
Lord of my acquaintance a French [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=5) Gallant, who had
on him a Sute of Turky Grogram doubled with Taffata,  [...]aſht after the
French faſhion, and belayed with Bugle-lace, a Shirt of pure Holland appearing
through the open­ings of his Doublet, which was likewiſe wrought with curious
Needle-work; the Points at his Waſte and Knees (for ſo the fa­ſhion there then
was) alledged with a Silver-edging; his Garters, Roſes, and Hat-band ſutable
to his Points; a Beaver Hat, and a pair of Silk-ſtockings; his Cloak alſo of
Turky Grogram cut up­on black Taffaty. This man by his Habit I gueſſed to be
no leſs than a Lord, (for who would have imagined Aeſops Fable to have been a
real truth, that the Aſs was dreſt up in the Lyons skin) and according to the
man that I imagined him to be, I gave him the Stile of My Lord at every word.
After ſome diſcourſe, he ſee­ing me to clap a Handkerchief to my cheek, and to
make a kinde of a ſowre face, asked me what I ailed? I told him I was very
much troubled with the Tooth-ache. Alas, ſaid he, that is a grie­vous pain,
but ca [...]l on me at my Lodging the next morning, and I ſhall preſently give
you eaſe: I humbly thanked his Lordſhip for ſuch an immenſe favor, with the
greateſt obeyſance I could de­viſe; and the next morning ſomewhat before the
time appoint­ed, ſent my ſervant for a Barber to trim me and make me neat,
becauſe I could not tell what occaſion I might have of ſeeing his Lady, or his
Daughters. This Meſſenger chanced to happen on his Lordſhip, who was no other
than a Barber; but when I ſaw him come in with his Apron before him, and
pulling a Caſe of In­ſtruments out of his pocket, bleſs me! I thought I ſhould
have ſplit my ſelf with laughing, had not the conſideration of my own folly,
of being ſo obeyſant to him the night before, ſomething re­ſtrained me. His
Lordſhip, though he gueſſed the cauſe of my extraordinary mirth, yet fell to
work about me, to the earning of a Quardeſou, and indeed he was very dexterous
in his Art, and ſoon made my Chin ala mode; then would he have proceeded to to
the pulling out of my Tooth, but the pain being now ſome­thing abated, I told
his Lordſhip I would retain it in my head a little longer: wherefore pocketing
up his Quardeſou, with a low cringing, and leſs courteſie on my part than
before, his Lordſhip departed.

French-man.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=6)

Begar dat vas brave, de France Barber couzen de Engliſs-man, begar me no ſhuſe
but laugh till de burſs: O de France Barbers be de brave fellows in de varle,
but where den did thee goe ven de went from Parry?

Engliſh-man.

A Friend and I having a great deſire to ſee the Countrey, we took Poſt-horſe,
intending for Amiens, but might as good have been mounted on a Poſt, as on
ſuch Jades; as lean they were as Envy is by the Poets feigned to be, having
neither fleſh on their bones, nor skin on their fleſh, nor hair on their skin;
neither was it ſo alone, that their bones might be numbred through their skin,
but the Spur-galls had made ſuch Caſements in their fleſh, that an ordinary
Farrier might have known what Diſeaſes they were trou­bled with, by ſurveying
their Entrails. They were very eaſie to be mounted, and there was no great
fear of melting them by over­riding, ſurely Don Quixot's Rozinante was a horſe
of State to either of theſe. Being thus mounted, and galloping a foot pace, in
twelve hours we had ridden fourteen miles; night coming on, and a pretty big
Town juſt before us, we reſolved to lodge there, whert enquiring for one of
the chief Inns, we were directed to the skelliton of a Houſe, which in England
would ſcarcely have paſſed for an Ale-houſe, and yet there it was an Inn, ay,
and an honorable one too: Alighting at the door, the Hoaſt of the houſe came
out unto us, at firſt ſight I took him to be one of the three Fidlers I told
you of before, a pitiful ragged, ſhabby fellow.

French-man.

Dat is no honeſt to de graſe French Inns, de baſe Gueſt dat raile on de Hoaſt;
begar de French Inns be more good den de Engliſs Inns, ver in de French Inns
is de brave vine, but in de Engliſs Inns is no ting but de Beere

Engliſh-man.

But Monſieur, notwithſtanding your Wine, I ſuppoſe our ordi­nary Ale-houſes
are a ſtory higher praiſe worthy than your Inns, as may appear by the
deſcription of this, and by which you may give a gueſs at the reſt. No ſooner
were we alighted, but our Hoaſt (the ragged fellow I told you of before)
conducted us to a [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=6) room, ſomewhat
reſembling a Charnel-houſe, being full as dark and as dampiſh; on one ſide
whereof was a pretty big hole, which formerly had been a Glaſs-window, but the
Glaſs being gone it was for the moſt part ſtopped up with Peaſe ſtraw: In this
room was the reſemblance of three Beds, for by their deſcription you will ſay
it was improper to call them Beds; the foundation of them was of ſtraw, which
not having been ſhifted in many a year, it was ſo infinitely thronged
together, that the Wooll-packs which our Judge ſit on in the Parliament, were
melted Butter to them. Upon this lay a large Bag containing a Medley of Flocks
and Fea­thers, but ſo ill ordered, that they ſtuck out of the ſides like to
the knobs of a Crab-tree Cudgel; the Sheets on thoſe Beds were party per pale,
a mean betwixt white and black, and ſo courſe, that a Mariner would have
diſdained to have uſed them for a Sayl; the Coverlets were alike anſwerable to
the reſt of the Bedding, here a hole, and there a patch, and for Curtains and
Valances, my Landlady had diſrobed the Beds of them two years before, to make
ſhe and the kinde natured Gentleman her Husband, Clothes of them.

French-man.

Begar if de make Cloaſe of de Curtans a [...]d de Vaylance, den de look like
de Jack Pudding.

Engliſh man.

Having taken a view of the Furniture of this Room, ſeeing eve­ry thing ſo
naſty, I ſuppoſed it was impoſſible to finde any Vi­ctuals there; and that if
our horſes were the Pictures of Envy, this place was the Receptacle of Famine:
But ſee how I was mi­ſtaken in my thoughts! for my Hoaſteſs (whoſe head was
wrap­ped about with a dirty Diſh-clout) had for our Suppers cut the throat of
a Pullet, and tearing it in pieces with her hands, ſhe af­ter that took away
Feathers and Skin together, ſtripping it as we ſtrip Rabbets in England, then
clapping it into a Pan, it was ſoon fryed and ſet upon the Table; the Napery
belonging to which was ſuitable to the Bedding, as foul and as dirty, my
Landlady being ſo provident a Creature, ſhe would not have it worn out with
of­ten waſhing. The Napkins were fit companions for the Clothes, [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=7) which would
rather foul ones fingers with whiping on them, than make them clean.

French-man.

Begar ſhe were de Slu [...]t dat no w [...]ſh Linnen till de tink, par ma foy
de Shade va [...]d bin hanged; bega [...] me could raile on her out of all de
cry.

Engliſh-man

Nay Monſieur, you may as well rail on the reſt as on this, for though ſome few
of your Inns be not altogether ſo wretched, yet is the alteration almoſt
inſenſible.

French-man.

Begar de lye dere be brave Inns in France, in Paris, in Roven, &c. one, twa,
tre ſtories high, where de Hoaſt goe like de Gentil­man, and de Hoaſteſs like
de Madam.

Engliſh man.

I ſpeak not of your Inns in Paris, nor ſome other great Cities, but of thoſe
in the Countrey, which are generally ſuch as this, and therefore Monſieur,
give me leave to go on in my Story. The Meat being on the Board, we fell unto
it, hunger making us the better able to digeſt the Naſtineſs of the Cookery:
After Sup­per, deſirous to go to Bed to refreſh our Bodies, weary with ri­ding
on thoſe tyred Jades, we called for a Chamberlain, but you might a good have
ſpoken Greek to them, none of them under­ſtanding what a Chamberlain was: at
laſt came a fellow with ſome patches hanging on him, but for the moſt part
open to the skin, who having pulled off our Boats, preſently had recourſe to
the Coverlet to wipe them, and having rubb'd one ſide a little, left the other
part to be finiſhed by us if we would have it; it was enough for him that he
had written the Copy. Thus forced to make a Law of Neceſſity, we lay till
morning, not making extraordinary haſte out, leſt perchance we might have loſt
the ſight of my Hoa­ſteſs and her daughters; they were not very hard to be
known, for at the firſt bluſh a ſtranger might ſwear that they were of a
blood, and indeed it had bin great pity had it bin otherwiſe. Not to ho­nor
them with a further Character, let it ſuffice to know, that their perſons kept
ſo excellent a decorum with the houſe and furniture, that it was great pity
they ſhould be parted.

French-man

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=7)

Begar me no vill ſtay if de ſpeak ſo; Oh Mordien, we ſall ſhitt me ſelfe to
heare do parte, and den vill they ſay dere is de ſhitten French-man.

Engliſh-man.

Well then, Monſieur, to take my leave of this Inn; being about to depart, we
had ſuch a throng about us of thoſe ill-favoured fa­ces, and every one chiming
out this Ditty, Pour les Servant, that one might with greater eaſe have
diſtributed a Dole at a rich mans Funeral, than to give them a penny, their
importunity, be you never ſo haſty, will foreſtal your Bounty; yet their
ambition is not ſo high: after all this impudent begging, they expect but a
Soll, and he that gives them more out-bids their expectation, and ſhall be
counted a Spend-thrift.

French-man.

Begar me vill ſtay no longra, de be ſuſh time taking leave of de Inn, dat de
might in dat time have rid fife, ſex, ſefen mile.

Engliſh-man.

Well then, to proceed: Being mounted, and riding very ſoftly according to the
Genius of our horſes, at the end of the Town we came to a great Green, and it
being then a petty Holy-day, there was aſſembled on the Green a Miſcelany or
Gallimaufry of all ages and conditions on purpoſe to dance.—

French-man.

Begar me muſh ſpeak now: O de dance, de skip, de fidele, par ma foy de brava
ting in all de varle.

Engliſh-man.

It ſeems your Nation does naturally affect it, not onely the poor Peaſants,
but alſo the Gallant Monſieurs and Damoſeils; for here were aſſembled both
Youth and Gentry, Age and Po­verty, the Rags interwoven with the Silks, and
wrinkled Brows interchangeably mingled with freſh Beauties. Thoſe whom age had
forced to walk with a ſtaff in the ſtreet, here taught their feet to meaſure
out the paces of a Dance, and others that had been long troubled with the
Sciatica, though they could not trip it ſo nimbly, yet would enfo [...] their
feet to hobble. Some of them were ſo ragged, you would have thought that a
ſwift Galliard [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=8) would almoſt
have ſhaked them into nakedneſs, and yet would they venture the looſing of
their Clothes for the gaining of a Dance. Nay, thoſe whom either Age or other
Infirmity had not permitted to go, yet would be carryed thither in their
Chairs, to behold the Paſtimes, and tread the meaſures with their Eyes; to
perſwade them to ſtay at home when they heard the Fidle, was to ſeek to empty
the Sea with a ſpoon, or to perſwade a Lutners Love-Lady to become a Nun.

—A work ſo great,

Would make Olympus bearing Atlas ſweat.

French man.

O de brave exerciſe in de varle, begar no ting is wid it de com­pare. O de
brave ſhite to heare de Fidele, to ſee dem dance, to leap, to skip.—O dat me
were amongſt dem.—

Engliſh-man.

That which to you is ſo pleaſing, ſoon wearied us, wherefore we took our
leaves of them, and proceeded on in our Journey, and about Noon came to
another Town ſomewhat bigger than a Vil­lage, and comparable to the worſer
ſort of Market-Towns in England, diſtant from the place where we lay before,
about five miles, (for we rid very hard, and ſpared not for Horſe-fleſh) here
we reſolved to bait both our ſelves and our horſes, and to that purpoſe
ſingled out an Inn where we expected to finde beſt ac­commodations, and indeed
we thought we had found a great pur­chaſe, for there it was our fortune to
meet with a Rabbet, larded it was, as all meat is in that Countrey, otherwiſe
it is ſo lean it would be burnt up ere it could be roaſted, it was ſerved up
with the feet on, and the reaſon of the cuſtom thereof in that Country is (I
conceive) that being a frugal Nation, they would make them go the further. The
ſight of this Diſh gave us great content, but when we came to eat thereof, it
proved ſo tough, that I verily think it was no more than two removes from that
Rabbet which was in the Ark; but though it proved ſo bad in the eating, the
price thereof was good enough, no leſs than Half a Crown Eng­liſh. My
Companion thought it to be very dear, but I adjudged otherwiſe, for certainly
the Graſs which fed it was worth more than eight times the money.

French-man.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=8)

Begar ſome men do tink meat is no good if dat it be no deare, par may foy
vould me had it preſent, me could eat it, vor me is very angry.

Engliſh-man.

Nay Monſieur, if you be ſo angry that you grow quarrelſom, I ſhall beat you
into better manners.

French-man.

Begar me no ſay quarrelſom, me be angry, dat is, me could veede on de Rappit.

Engliſh-man.

O cry you mercy Sir, now I underſtand ye, I ſuppoſe you are better to feed
than to fight; but alas, Rabbets are too dainty meat for French Peaſants, for
in that rank I muſt place ye, though now you have got on a borrowed Garb of
Engliſh Feathers, but when you come amongſt your fellows, you muſt then be
glad to do as they do, your Bread of the courſeſt flour, and ſo black that it
can­not admit of the name of brown, and for drink have recourſe to the next
Fountain, content onely with ſo much as is ſufficient to keep you from the
extremities of Cold and Famine.

French-man.

Begar be de R [...]gue to call me Paiſant, me be de Gentilman Mu­ſhiſhaner, me
be de Compaigne vor de Lord, vor de Madam, me fi­dele vor de Gentilman, and at
de Weddin.

Engliſh-man.

Now you put me in minde of a Wedding, I muſt tell y [...] of one that I ſaw
once at Orleans, where at my going into the Town, I met with Miſtriſs Bride
coming from the Church: The day before ſhe had been ſomewhat of the condition
of ſuch as ſcowre Drip­ping-pans in Great Mens houſes, and went accoutred as
thoſe wo­men that in London cry Kitching-ſtuff about the ſtreets of the Ci­ty:
but now there was a ſtrange metamorphoſis in her, you would not believe ſhe
was the ſame woman, ſhe was ſo tricked up with Scarffs, Rings, Croſs-garters,
Knots of Ribbonds, &c. that ſhe was a la mode France. Now could the fellow
have marryed onely her Clothes, I ſhould have very much applauded his
for­tune, but it could not be ſo (God be merciful to him) he was al­ſo [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=9) chained to the
Wench, much good may it do him with her, and much joy may they have together
moſt peerleſs Couple.

Sing, Hymen, Hym [...]n, O Hymenae [...],

O Hymen, Hymen, Hymenaee.

I would have a French man marry none but a French woman, for a fitter Match
cannot be.

French-man.

Vat is dat de ſay? begar France weemen be de brave weemen in de varle.

Engliſh-man.

Now Monſieur, I ſhall ſpeak ſomething of what I obſerved of the women in your
Country, and to begin with the Peaſants, as being moſt in number: They are a
ſort of people which cannot ſay the leaſt claim to any ſhare of beauty, ſo
that ſhe which with us is rec­koned amongſt the vulgar, would be amongſt them
eſteemed for a Princeſs, quite contrary to the women in England, where you
have many thatched Cottages that harbour ſuch Beauties, as would tempt Jupiter
from his Throne to court them in a golden Showre. Anſwerable to their Beauty
is their Attire, their head being wrap­ped about with an old Diſh clout turned
out of ſervice, or the cor­ner of a Table-cloath reſerved from waſhing; the
goodneſs of their faces tells us that that is ſufficient, for why ſhould the
back­part of their head be handſomer than the fore-part? They have no need of
Masks, and the Bacon-rined colour of their faces tells us that they were
ſtrangers to Bon graces when they were children. As concerning Petticoats,
they have all of them ſuch a kinde of Garment, but moſt of them ſo ſhort, you
would think them cut off at the Placket; Now when the Parents have worn them
till ſuch time as the rottenneſs of them will ſave a labor of undreſſing, they
are a nevv cut out and fitted for the children, by vvhich time they have done
vvith them, they ſpeed to the dunghil, being ſcorned to be taken up by the
Rag-vvoman. For ſhooes and ſtockings they take no great care for, few of them
ever had above one pair in all their lives, and vvhich they vvear every day,
being very durable. In this degree hath Nature placed them, and the greateſt
happi­neſs that they do enjoy, is that they are contented vvith the ſame.

French-man.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=9)

But vat is dis of de Paiſant to de France Gentil woman.

Engliſh-man.

Well, next I will ſpeak ſomthing of the middle ſort of wo­men, or ſuch as live
in Cities and great Towns, (for I ſhall for­bear to mention the Court, as
being above my ſphere) of theſe ſort of women there is much difference from
the Peaſants; but in what? ſurely nothing but in attire, otherwiſe Nature hath
not been over prodigal to them for beauty, ſo that Don Quixot did not ſo
deſervedly aſſume to himſelf the title of The Knight of the ill favoured face,
as they may that of the Damoſels of it; The moſt comly and beſt proportioned
part about them is their hands, long, white, and ſlender; but ſcarce ſhall you
ſee one of a hundred, whoſe wriſts, and betwixt their fingers is no [...] all
over-run with a ſcab like to a leproſie. Their diſpoſitions hold good
correſpondency with their faces, and ſuit as well as a Toaſt and Nutmeg doth
with a pot of Ale in the depth of Win­ter, all which you will ſwear to be
truth, when you once come but to hear them ſpeak; no better Character being to
be ga­thered of them, then from their prating, which is ſo tedious and
infinite, that you ſhall ſooner want ears than they Tongues; ſet but their
Tongues once a going, and they are like to a Watch, you need not winde them up
above once in twelve hours, for ſo long will the Thread of their diſcourſe be
in ſpinning, ſuch everlaſting Talkers are they all, that they will ſooner want
breath then words, there being no wayes to ſilent them, but only to go out of
their Companies. But were this only to ſome of their Familiars, it were the
more tolerable, but ſtran­ger or acquaintance, all is one, though indeed no
man is to them a ſtranger, for in two houres time you ſhall have them as
familiar, and as merry with you, as if you had been of their ac­quaintance
ſeven yeares, or bred up in a houſe together ever ſince you were born; Now
though I cannot condemn any of them of diſhoneſty, as having had no ſuch
experience of them, yet to an Engliſhman ſuch ſudden affability argues ſomwhat
of a confident boldneſs, to ſay no worſe. I remember, the firſt time I came to
London, being but a young Novice, ſcarcely wri­ting [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=10) Man, paſſing
through Luteners-lane, a Gentlewoman ſtand­ing at the door accoſted me with
theſe words, How do you Sir, I am heartily glad to ſee you well, how have you
done a long time? Seeing ſo beautiful a Lady, with black patches on her face,
and dreſt Alamode de France, thus to ſalute me, I could not chuſe but admire;
Madam, ſaid I, do you know me? alack (Sir ſaid ſhe) pray come in and let us
diſcourſe together: but notwithſtanding her bold invitation away I went, and
coming to my Lodging, relating the ſtory, Sir, ſaid one to me, you muſt have a
care of ſuch Creatures, for notwithſtanding their brave Garbe, they are no
other then common Strumpets. This ſudden fami­liarity of the French-women made
me to remember this ſtory. for—

French-man.

Begar be de Rogue, de ſhallenge de feeld, compare de French Madam to de
Lutener-lane pocky-hora; begar me no ſhuſe but feight up to de noſe in plood;
begar me can no dure dis.

Engliſh-man.

You fight, you ſh—think you with high words to daunt me? do not I know the
Nature of your Country men better then ſo? how in one thing they very much
reſemble the De— meekneſs or ſubmiſſion maketh them inſolent, but a little
reſiſtance putteth them to their heels, or makes him your Spaniel.

French-man.

Begar me tink no hurt, though de ſpeak ſo. Tres humble Serviture Mounſieur.

Engliſh-man.

Then to proceed in my ſtory concerning the French women. They are abundantly
full of laughter and toying, and have al­ways in ſtore ſome laſcivious ſongs,
which they refuſe not to ſing in any company, ſo that a ſtranger would think
modeſty were quite baniſhed the Kingdom, or rather that it had never been
there; and whereas women in other Countrys are moſt aſhamed to diſcourſe of
thoſe parts which makes them women. Theſe French Dames will talk of them, even
before men, as [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=10) broadly as a
Midwife, or a Barber-Surgeon. So that if that ſaying be true, that Modeſty is
the beſt apparel of a woman, I doubt many of the Female ſex in France, muſt go
thinly clad, and a great many of them quite naked.

French-man.

Begar dere be but ſome dut be ſo bad as de peak of.

Engliſh-man.

Truly I ſaw but little difference amongſt them, it is an Epidemical diſeaſe,
both Maids and Wives, Madams and Damoſels, Rich and Poor, alike ſick of it, if
there were any difference, it was onely in this, that thoſe who were higheſt
in their places and callings, were likewiſe higheſt in this lightſom vein of
ribaldry.

French-man.

De ſpeak of de Common hora, but de Franſh Gentilwoman be no ſuſh.

Engliſh-man.

God forbid I ſhould condemne every one of them, though they generally be ſo,
but for them you call Common whores, I muſt rank them in a degree by
themſelves; It was my fortune once to be in the company of two of theſe Fille
de joyes, but never ſince I firſt knew mankinde and the world, did I obſerve
ſo much impudence in the general, as I did in theſe two; ſo au­daciouſly
bawdie in their diſcourſe, that even any immodeſt ear would have abhorred
their language, and of ſuch a ſhame­leſs deportment, that their very behaviour
would have fright­ed luſt out of the moſt incontinent man living, but a
French­man. In a word, they were Wenches able to have ſhamed all the Friers
with whom they had trafficked, for they would not be caſt-a, and could not be
caut-a, and ſo I leave them, for me­thinks my diſcourſe of them is unſavoury,
but he that rakes in filthy puddles, muſt be ſure to meet with naſty ſtinks.

French-man.

Begar de hora be over all de varle, dere be de creat many in de Lon­don, me go
in de Turnbull ſtreet, me go in de Neetingale lane me go in de Roſemary lane,
me go in de Ra-ra-ratcleefe high way, me go to Damaris Page, me ſure doe find
pocky-hora, me veele it in my bones.

Engliſh-man.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=11)

Ha Mounſieur, have you got a Clap with a French-Fiddle.

French-man.

Begar me no deny it, me pay Shurgeon one, twa, tree pound var de cure.

Engliſh-man

I commend you Mounſieur, for your ingenuous acknowledg­ment; but I having
ſpoken ſo much of the French-woman, I think it convenient to ſay ſomthing of
the men, for pity it is they ſhould be parted.

French-man.

Begar me will liſten to dat, me love to heare of de France Gen­til-man.

Engliſh-man.

As I ſaid of the women, you might character them out by their diſcourſe, ſo
may I ſay of the men, you may look into their breaſts by their talk, which
moſt commonly runneth upon two wheels, treaſon and ribaldry. Never in my life
did I hear people talk leſs reverently of their Prince, and as our Nation have
been always addicted too much to your Apiſh faſhions, ſo in our late times,
when Rebellion was rampant, had they got too much of your unworthy cuſtom of
ſpeaking irreverently of their King; but I hope that cuſtom is out of uſe with
us now. I wiſh it were ſo in France; where ſcarce a day paſſeth without ſome
ſeditious Pamphlet printed and publiſhed, in diſgrace of the King, or ſome of
his Courtiers; the Contents of which Libels they will not ſpare to ſpeak of in
each place where they come; take them from this, (which you can hardly do till
they have told all) and then they fall upon their ribaldry, re­lating ſtories
of their own uncleanneſs, with a face as confi­dent, as if they had no
accidents to pleaſe their Hearers more commendable. Never did valiant Captain
more glory in the number of the Cities he had taken, then they will do of the
ſeveral women which they have proſtituted.

French-man.

Par ma foy me no diſlike dat, me love to hear talk Bawdy de leetle, me be no
ſhamed of dat, begar it does teekle my ling [...] to hear dit.

Engliſh-man.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=11)

Nay, I know that you are not only good to talk bawdy, but to act bawdily, and
to boaſt of it too, as many of your Countrey-men have done, who having been at
London, upon their return, report ſtrange Chimera's of the Engliſh modeſty; as
what Merchants wives they enjoyed here, and in what fa­miliarity ſuch and ſuch
a Lady entertained them at Weſtminſter, when the poor fooles have been cozened
with common Proſti­tutes; and to this purpoſe I ſhall relate you a pretty
ſtory. A French Mounſieur coming over full purſed to London, be­ing hot in the
Codpiece as many of them are, deſired a Cooler, but his ambition ſoared ſo
high, that common beau­ties, (ſuch as thoſe of France) would not ſerve his
turn; but he muſt have a rare one, no leſſe then a Phoenix; and falling in
acquaintance with a French Pandar, for a ſum of money he promiſed him the
enjoyment of a Lady, who was much fa­mouſed for her beauty; the Mounſieur
gladly hearkens there­to, pays his money, and thinks every houre ten, till the
pre­fixed houre come. In the mean ſpace the Pandar goes to a com­mon
Proſtitute, inſtructs her in the buſineſs, they ſhare the mo­ney, and ſhe
takes upon her to imitate the Lady; a Coach is hired, (for a Cart m [...]ght
have been in danger of ſhaking her in pieces) the Pandar and ſhe goes
together, who conducts her to the Mounſieur, the French Gentilman courts her
alamede, ſwears he is her ſervant, and ſhe with a ſeeming unwillingneſs at
laſt condeſcends to his requeſt, but whileſt he is buſie in his employment,
ſhe picks his pocket of his Watch, and three­ſcore pieces of gold, which as
ſoon as ſhe riſes from the Bed, is ſtrait conveyed to the Pandar, who all this
while guarded the door. Upon the receit of the prize he is gone; but before
the pretty Mob could make an eſcape, Mounſieur miſſes his Watch and his money,
he ſtormes and chafes like a mad-man, miſtruſts his Mob, but wonders a Lady of
her quality, as he took her to be, would do ſuch a thing. Neceſſity has no
Law, ſhe endea­vours an eſcape, gets into the ſtreet, but Mounſieur overtakes
her there, and layes flat felony to her Ladiſhip, preſently an huburb is made,
the Conſtable comes and carries them both be­fore [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=12) a Juſtice, the
Frenchman challenges her Ladiſhip with his money, and ſhe challenges him with
a Rape; the Mob is ſearcht, but no money found; Mounſieur is askt again, if he
would ſwear poſitively ſhe pickt his pocket; he conſiders of it, and then
ſays, he was miſtake; but ſhe being known to be a prime Trader in Fleet-yard,
was ſent to Bri [...]ewell, and Mounſieur diſ­miſt to go to borrow money to go
to the Surgeon, of whom now he had great need.

French-man.

Begar me was ſerve ſuſh a trick one, me go into de Lutener-lane, de-brave
Gentilwoman at de door call me in; me kiſs her, and me do ſometing elſe, but
when me was gone, me vent to de Ordinary to eat Veetle, ven me come to pay,
all me mony vas gone.

Engliſh-man.

And how come you off with the Cook?

French-man.

Begar de Cook call me French Rogue, tell me de beat-me, me vas pray him to bè
quiet, and me vild leave de tord for his reckoning.

Engliſh-man.

That was a right French trick, to eat up the Cooks meat, and leave him a a
tord for his reckoning.

French-man.

Me do no mean de tord in de belly, me mean de tord dat hang by de ſide.

Engliſh-man.

Nay Mounſieur, it is pitty you ſhould ever ſpeak any thing but French, your
Language being very agreeable to your Natures, which to be ſpoken with a
grace, the head, body, ſhoulders muſt all concern in the pronouncing of it,
and the many Proverbs wherewith it is furniſhed, makes it very ſignificant to
your Na­tions humor of ſcoffing. Indeed it is very full of Courtſhip, which
makes all your people ſo Complemental: The pooreſt Cobler in the Village
having his Court-cringes, and his Eau beneſte de Cour, his Court holy-water,
as perfectly as the beſt Lord of them all.

French-man.

And vy ſhoole henot, begar Franceman be de all Gentilman.

Engliſh-man.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=12)

And that makes you in your ordinary diſcourſe to beſtow the highgheſt of
titles upon thoſe of the loweſt condition, and by this reaſon the Beggar
begetteth Mounſieurs and Madams to his ſons and daughters, as familiarly as
the King.

French-man.

Begar di [...] true or me be de hang.

Engliſh-man.

But on what Gibbit Mounſieur would you deſire to be hanged on, for I obſerved
in your Country there were ſeve­ral ſorts of them, every Haute Juſtice having
his peculiar Gibbit, which were made wonderful methodically, by the criticiſme
of which you may judge of the quality of him that owneth it; for the Gibbit of
one of the Nobles hath but two pillars, that of the Chaſtellan three, the
Barons four, the Earls ſix, and the Dukes eight, ſo exact is your Nation that
they obſerve a Mode even in their Gal­lowſes.

French-man.

But begar me no love hanging, me ſhuſe to die in de ſtraw, den be hang on de
vine Gallowes in all de France. Begar den me mus eat no more quood Mutt, quood
Beef, quood Lamb, &c.

Engliſh-man.

Now you ſpeak of Beef, Mutton, and Lamb, give me leave to tell ye ſome
obſervations I made of your Cookery, and how your Gentlemens tables furniſhed,
which though they come not nigh ours, yet are they beyond compariſon above the
Paiſants. Their Beef they cut out into little chops, ſo ſmal, that what goes
there for a laudable diſh, would be thought here to be a Univerſity Commons,
now ſerved from the hatch. A loyne of Mutton ſerve amongſt them for three
roaſtings, beſides the hazard of making pottage with the Rump. They have
likewiſe ſtore of Fowl, but ſuch as the King found in Scotland, viz. foule
napkins, foule table cloaths, &c. but to ſpeak truth, that which they have is
ſufficient for Nature and a friend, were it not for the [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=13) ſtrange
miſteries of the Kitching-wench. Their Cooks are much famed for rare fellows,
but their skill conſiſts not in the handling of Beef, Mutton, and ſuch like
ſolid meats, but in the making of puff-paſtes, kickſhaws, and ſuch fine
devices, onely to fill the pallat, but not the belly, and ſo by conſequence
would make rare fellows in a Garriſon, to cozen the belly, and feed the eye.
Now if you can digeſt the ſluttiſhneſs of the Cookery of (which is moſt
abominable at the firſt fight) ſit down and welcome, where you muſt ſay your
own Grace, private Graces being there as ordinary as private Maſſes, and from
whence (perhaps) they learned them. Grace ended, fall to where you like beſt,
for they obſerve no order nor method in their eating, and if you expect a to
have Carver, you may riſe a hungry; thus are their Tables furniſhed, and think
themſelves ſerved in as great ſtate as King Nebuchad­nezars.

French-man.

Vat is dat you ſay, No be gott no ſir.

Engliſh man.

I ſaid Nebuchadnezar, the name is ſomething hard.

French-man.

Begar ſo it is; No, no, no, no be gott no ſir. Eng. ne. Fr. ne. Eng. bu. Fr.
bu. Eng. chad. Fr. chad Eng. ne. Fr. ne. Eng. zar. Fr. zar. now me have it,
Ne-bu-chad-ne-zar, begar me vil carry dis name into me Country var to cure de
Tooth­ake.

Engliſh-man.

And why may not that name cure the tooth-ach, as well as many cures which are
aſcribed to be done by Re­liques, of which Reliques I ſaw divers of them at St
Denis, a ſmall town with a great wall, ſhowing like all the world like a
Spaniards little face in his great  [...]uffe, or like a ſmall chop of Mutton
in a large diſh of Pot­tage at the th [...]ee Penny Ordinary, at this Town in
the Church of  [...] D [...]nis, is ſa [...]d to be kept one of the naile
[...] [[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=13)
Town in the Church of St. Dennis, is ſaid to be kept one of the Nails which
faſtened our Saviour to the Croſs, as alſo a piece of the Croſs it ſelf,
though ſo many parts thereof are ſhown at ſeveral places, that were they all
put together, would have broken the back of Symon of Cyrene to have carryed
it. Here is alſo ſome of the Virgin Maries milk, the Arm of St. Simeon ſet in
a Caſe of Gold, the Reliques of St. Lewis, and the Head of St. Dennis, with a
part of his Body; of this St. Dennis (being the Patron of France) I ſhall tell
you a Story, more than ever you read in the Hiſtory of the Seven Champions of
Chriſtendom, and perhaps as true, which is this: He being to ſuffer death
under the Reign of Domitian the Emperor, for not bowing before the Altar of
Mercury, when the Executioner had ſmitten off his head, he caught it in his
arms, and ran with it down the Hill as faſt as his legs would carry him;
ha­ving run thus half a mile he ſat down and reſted, and ſo he did nine times
in all, (you muſt conceive he was very heavy loaden to car­ry his head in his
arms) but having ran three miles, he ran himſelf quite out of breath, for then
he fell down and died, over which place was built this Church conſecrated to
his Memory wherein the aforeſaid Reliques are kept.

French-man.

Begar Sen Dennis was de brave fellow when he live, he cut, he ſlaſe, he ſlay,
he feight like de ſpright; he vas love Wench named Roſ­ſalen, ſhe make him
Cuckoll, he weare de horns on his head ſefen year; den came Zhorge on de
Hoarſ-back, and wid his Tord cut dem off at one blow.

Engliſh-man.

Was not St. George of England than a brave man to do ſo wor­thy an Act?

French-man.

Begar he was de brave Shampion in all de varle, but de France man; he kill de
burn Dragon, but de Seignior Amadis de Gaule be kill de Shyant, one, twa, tre,
four ſtory high; begar den he was brave fellow; let me ſee den, dere was
Monſieur le Charlemaigne, de Roy Pepin, Monſieur Oliver, Monſieur Rowland,
begar de France man be de creat killer of de Shyants in all de varle.

Engliſh-man.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=14)

Indeed no Nation in the wo [...]ld is greater killers of Gyants and multitudes
of people than the French; but how? why in Romances, wherein there is little
danger in fighting; but for real feats of Arms, alas how far ſhort do they
fall in the performance! How often have they been beaten by the Engliſh, with
the greateſt diſ­advantage almoſt that might be? witneſs Poicters, Creſcy, and
Agen-Court Battels, wherein their Armies exceeded ours almoſt ten to one; nay,
have we not taken their Kingdom from them? the Engliſh King Crowned King of
France in France? where was their Valour then? Why they were forced to have
recourſe to a Witch, one Joan of Arc, when France lay as it were expiring out
her lateſt breath. How were they forced to pretend a Meſſage to her from God,
to breathe new courage into the hearts of their fan­ting Soldiers? and yet
when they had wrought all theſe Forgeries, it was not ſo much their Courage as
our own Diviſions, that cau­ſed the Engliſh expulſion out of France.

French-man.

Begar though me ha skill to Fidele, me ha no skill in de Hiſtory, me can no
tell if de ſpeak true; but me muſh tink dis, me muſh give loo­ſer leave to
ſpeak.

Engliſh-man.

Nay Monſieur, if you are up with your Proverbs, I muſt alſo give you one,
which though but a homely one, yet ſets out the three Nations, French,
Engliſh, and the Spaniards to the life. The French man is compared to a Flea,
quickly skipping into a Coun­trey, and as quickly skipping out; their Valor
being like a blaze of fire, makes of a ſudden a great ſhow, but is quickly
extinguiſh­ed. The Engliſh are like a Lowſe, ſlowly maſtering a place, and as
ſlowly driven out again. The Spaniard like to a Crab fiſh [...] hardly gaining
any thing, but where he enters ſeldom or neve [...] again removed.

French-man.

Begar me leeke dis Proverb well enough of de men, vat is de Pr [...]verb of de
weemen?

Engliſh-man.

They ſay that to the making up of an abſolute Woman, the [...] [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=14) is required the
parts of a Dutch woman from the Girdle down­wards, the parts of a French woman
from the Girdle up to the Neck, over which muſt be placed an Engliſh Face, for
the great­er perfection of all the reſt; for if you come to compare the French
Beauries with the Engliſh, alas they are not to be named the ſame day with
them, their Faces being as bad a puniſhment to the Eyes, as their Diſcourſe is
a torment to the Eares: And herein may the Engliſh glory, that they have the
faireſt Women, the goodlieſt Horſes, and the beſt breed of Dogs in all the
whole world; To which we may adde, that as England is ſaid to be A Paradiſe
for women, by reaſon of their Priviledges, ſo it may be ſaid to be A Paradiſe
of women, by reaſon o [...] their un-marchable Perfections.

French-man.

Begar de France woman be de hanſom woman vor all dat.

Engliſh-man.

For your French women, as their ſhoulders and backs are ſo broad that they
hold no proportion with their middles, ſo are they of a very black hair, and
ſwarthy complexion; and though the Poets do commend Leda for he [...] black
hair, as in that Verſe of Ovids, ‘Leda fuit nigris conſpicienda comis.’ yet
that blackneſs reached onely to a kinde of dark brown, not ſo fearful as this
of the French women, who are generally blacker th [...]n a gracious lovelineſs
can admit: And though black hair do give a luſtre to a beautiful Face, as a
ſhadow doth to a Picture, or a Sable bearing to a Field a [...]gent; yet what
are the French wo­mens Faces concerned in that, which are ſo far from that
thing called Beauty, that when they are adorned with black Patches, they look
like ruſty Gammons of Bacon ſtuck with Cloves.

French man.

Me can no ſhuſe but confeſs me had rader eat of de Gammon of Baoon, dan kiſs
de hanſom woman in all de v [...]rle.

Engliſh-man.

Now you talk of kiſſing, I cannot but much admire that humor of the French
women, who though (as I ſaid before) they are ſo light and wanton in their
diſcourſe and geſtures, yet are ſo coy of [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=15) their Lips that
they will not admit of a kiſs, accounting that wo­man that is kiſſed, more
than half whored, be her deportment o­ther wayes never ſo civil▪ Now, though I
muſt confeſs I like this their cuſtom very well, it ſparing me many an
unſavory piece of mannerlineſs when I was amongſt them, yet it was to me a
kinde of a ſtrange Riddle, that they ſhould confine all immodeſty and
laſciviouſneſs to a harmleſs kiſs. But as it is ſaid of the Italian, That he
will rather murther a man in private, than ſpeak ill of him openly, ſo it may
be thought of theſe Damoſels, that they will not refuſe a mans bed in private,
although they deny to kiſs him openly.

French-man.

Begar de tell lye, de France Madam be de Civil Madam dat lives in de whole
varle.

Engliſh-man.

Yes Monſieur, I ſhall tell you of a piece of Civility of one of your Madams,
as I was informed by an Acquaintance of mine who was an Eye-witneſs to it.
That being at a Tilting, a Roguiſh Boy was peeking under a Ladies Coats, a
Courtier ſeeing it, went about to remove him from that ſawcy action: but when
her La­dyſhip perceived his intention, ſhe hindred him with this Com­plement,
Laiſſe Monſieur, laiſſe les yeux ne ſont pas larrons: The boys eyes would
ſteal nothing away. Certainly thoſe who are ſo w [...]nton in their diſcourſe
and actions abroad, will not ſtick out of play, when Night and the Curtains
may conceal it.

French-man.

Par ma foy vis is no ſuſh ting, de Frenſh be a no ſoe bad, dey make more
conſcience den ſo.

Engliſh-man.

I will not deny but there may be ſome of them very conſcien­tious, but
generally they are moſt irreverent and irreligious; great Scoffers, yea in
matters of Religion, and at thoſe times when they ſhould be moſt ſolid,
witneſs that Gallant who lying on his Death-bed, when he had the Hoaſt (ſo
they call the Sacra­ment of the Lords Supper) brought to him by a Lubberly
Prieſt, he ſaid, That Chriſt came to him, as he went into Jeruſalem, riding▪
upon an Aſs. Another of them being to receive the Sacrament, [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=15) when the Prieſt
had with many words perſwaded him that the Bread and Wine was the real Body
and Blood of Chriſt, he refu­ſed to taſte of it, becauſe it was then Fryday.
And I was infor­med by a Gentleman, that at a Maſs in the Cordeliers Church in
Paris, he ſaw two French Papiſts, when the moſt ſacred Myſtery of their Faith
was celebrating, break out into ſuch a blaſphemous and atheiſtical laughter,
that even an Ethnick would have bluſhed to have heard it. Can we then think
theſe men to be religious, who make a ſcoff at the Divine Myſteries of our
Salvation? Cer­tainly had a Lutheran done this, ſome French hot-head or other,
would have ſent them laughing to Pluto.

French-man.

Dat is none good to do ſoe; me had rather goe to dine den to die, to feede den
to feight, dere is no ſuſh haſte to goe to de Teiffel, he vill have dem ſoone
enough me varrant ye. Me vill be glad to live ſo long as de old woman of
Parry.

Engliſh-man.

I remember dat old woman very well, who was of ſuch an age, that it is
queſtionable whether ſhe were ever young or no: for, but that I have read the
Scriptures, otherwiſe I ſhould have been apt to have believed that ſhe was one
of the firſt Pieces of the Creation, and that by ſome miſchance or other ſhe
had ſcaped the Flood: Our Countrey-man Tom. Parr the Salopian Wonder, was but
an Infant to her; at the leaſt you could not but have ima­gined her one of the
Reliques of the firſt Age after the building of Babel, ſeveral Ages before the
birth of the Wandring Jew; her face was for all the world like unto that of
Sibylla Erythrea in an old Print, or like that of Solomons two Harlets in the
Painted Cloth, or like thoſe Statuas on the out-ſide of Weſtminſter Abbey,
which for theſe ſix hundred years have been expoſed to winde and weather. It
is doubtful whether our Arch Poet Ed. Spenſer, when he writ his Poem of The
Ruines of Time, did not purpoſely in­tend it of her; ſure I am it is very
appliable in the Title. Now by reaſon that all her Teeth were out, her Tongue
was boundleſs, and without ceaſing would move for ſix and twenty hours
toge­thet, the faſtidious pratler which Horace mentioneth in his Ninth Satyr,
was but a Poiſne to her. Now whether ſhe be living ſtill, [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=16) or no, I know
not, but if ſhe once come to be ſpeechleſs, I ſup­poſe ſhe is then paſt all
recovery.

French-man.

Begar ſhe was creat pratler indeed, and ſo me tink we be, derefore me now make
haſte, vor my belly de chime Noon, and me muſh make haſte vor fe [...]r of de
pocky Shargeant.

Engliſh-man.

Well Monſieur, onely one word before you go, and then fare­well. There is an
old Proverb, that the Emperor of Germany is Rex Regom, the King of Spain is
Rex Hominem, the King of France Rex Aſinorum, and the King of England Rex
Diabalo­rum. The Emperor of Germany is called Rex Regem, in reſpect of having
ſo many free Princes under him, who have power of themſelves to Coyn Money,
raiſe Soldiers, and other Immuni­ties conſenant to Regal Authority. The King
of Spain Rex Ho­minem, for that his Subjects are ſo conſtant and faithful in
their Allegiance, not queſtioning what the Prince does, but obeying becauſe he
ſo commands it. The King of France is called Rex Aſinorum, becauſe of the
Subjects patient bearing of thoſe inſup­portable Taxes which he ſucks out of
their ſweat and blood. Pride in matters of Sumptuouſneſs, and the Civil Wars
which laſted a long time in that Countrey, having occaſioned moſt of the Crown
Lands to have been ſold or mortgaged, ſo that the Subject is now onely the
Revenue of the Crown. The Kings hand lying ſo heavy upon them, that it hath
almoſt thruſt them into an Egyp­tian bondage: To recite all thoſe Impoſitions
which this miſer­able people are afflicted withal, were almoſt as wretched as
the payment of them, I ſhall briefly inſtance in ſome few, and firſt Gabelle
de Sel, or Gabel on Salt, which is an Impoſition that no man in the Kingdom
(ſome few Countries excepted) can eat any Salt, but he muſt buy it of the
King, and at his price; but this is not all, for though through poverty many
of them could be con­tented to eat meat (when they can get it) without Salt,
yet are they forced to take ſuch a quantity of it, or howſoever they will have
of them ſo much money. This Impoſition is exacted with ſuch unconſcionable
rigour, that it is thought to be worth unto the King 3000000 of Crowns yearly.
Next is the Taillon, a [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=101631&page=16) heavy burthen
which lies almoſt altogether upon the poor Pea­ſant, who are a people of any
other the moſt unfortunate, paying ſuch infinite Rents to their Lords, and
ſuch innumerable Taxes to the King, that all their care and extream labour is
onely ſuffi­cient to pay their Duties, and keep them from the extremities of
cold and famine. This Impoſition was at firſt levyed by way of Extraordinary
Subſidy, and lay alike heavy upon all, but now it is confined onely to the
Peaſant; the greater Towns, the Of­ficers of the Kings Houſe, the Officers of
War, the Preſident, Councellors, and Officers of the Courts of Parliament, the
No­bility, the Clergy, and the Scholars of the Univerſity, being freed from
it. Divers Impoſts have they beſides, as the Soll upon the Liure, which is the
twentieth penny of all things bought or ſold, onely Corn and Sallets excepted.
Impoſts upon Wine double and treble, and after all this, the poor Vintner
forced to pay the 8th penny of that Wine which he ſelleth, to the King. Then
is there beſides Impoſts on all ſorts of Fruits, Proviſions, Wares, and
Mer­chandize, to which we may adde the baſe and corrupt money in it, being for
the moſt part made of Tin and Braſs. Hardly ſhall you ſee a Piece of Gold of
the French ſtamp, ſcarce any but what comes out of Spain, which are very ill
proportioned, and which one reſembles to a French Cheeſe, being neither long,
nor ſquare, nor round, nor thick, nor thin, nor great, nor little, nor any one
of theſe, but yet all, and yet none of them.

Theſe Circumſtances conſidered, we may the clearer ſee our own felicities,
which to expreſs in a word, is to ſay onely this, That the Engliſh Subject is
in no circumſtance a French man, though we are ſo blinde as herein not to ſee
our own happineſs, but by our often Rebellions have given occaſion to that
Apellation, that the King of England is Rex Diabalorum.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1666  

