## (unknown project)

# A whip for the marshalls court and their officers the petition of Robert
Robins gent. to the House of Commons against the abuses practised in the
marshalls court, and a discovery of the jurisdiction and priviledge of that
court, with some of the particular greevances the subjects suffer under the
pretended authority threof ... written for the releife and redresse of all
that have, or hereafter shall be arrested or wronged there : with directions
where to repaire for advice and assistance therein, and how and where to get
restitution for the same / by Ro. Robins.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=1)

A WHIP For the Marshalls Court, and their OFFICERS. The Petition of ROBERT
ROBINS Gent. to the House of Commons, Against the Abuses practised in the
MARSHALS COVRT. AND A Discovery of the Jurisdiction and priviledge of that
COVRT, with some of the particular greevances, the Subjects suffer under the
pretended Authority thereof, maintained by ill Members of the Common-wealth.
Written for the Releife and redresse of all that have, or hereafter shall be
Arrested, or wronged there, with di­rections where to repaire for advice and
Assistance there­in, And how, and where to get restitution for the same. By
RO. ROBINS.

London printed for the Author. And are to be sold at the Signe of the three
Pigeons in Kings Street, Westminster.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=2)

## TO THE READER,

SIR.

HAving by the malice of the false and cruell Marshalls mens periuries, an
opportunity to  [...]ivulge what I long since intended, their false swearing
the last Term, procuring me a Prison, leasure to manifest the Iurisdicti­on of
that Court, and to discover some of their abuses, and vile extortions by the
assistance of the Printers Presse to your view, hereby intreating you to
per­ruse this little booke, and then to repaire to me, either in the Fleete,
or at the three Pigeons in King-street West­minster, where I shall not faile
to bee, and satisfie you the true course that the Law of England hath in this
Case, provided whereby you may recover not only what expence or charge, or
summes of money it hath cost you, or you have paid by any arest or suit there,
but also dammage for your false imprisonment thereby susteyned, by due and
iust [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=3) Course
in Law (every Arrest by a Marshalls man made being cleerely (as I shall shew
you) false Im­prisonment, And I shall shew you Iudgements, for pre­sident in
the Case, and shall let you farther to know where to levy any Iudgement upon
Persons whose Estates are responceable untill which time I am

Your most humble Servant to Command: RO. ROBINS.

From my Iron Cage in the Fleet, 29th. of August 1647.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE READER,
  * 1\. A WHIPE For the Marshalls Court, and their OFFICERS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=3)

## 1\. A WHIPE For the Marshalls Court, and their OFFICERS.

ABout a yeare since at the Sessions of the Peace for Westminster holden in
Westminster Hall before the Kings Majesties Justices of the Peace sitting
there in open Court by good advise of Councel, I Indicted two of the Marshalls
men, amongst other of their Confederates, for an assault and battery made by
them upon me, (this is one of their Arrests) and by force deteyned me in their
Custody, untill I did deliver them five shillings and six pence, lawfull money
of England, of my owne proper monyes numbred, which Bill was upon positive and
full Evidence to the Grand Jury given, found, and by them in their Virdict,
delivered in Billa vera, and the Justices, the grand Jury, the Constables and
inhabitants within that liberty feeling and well knowing what a mis [...]rable
oppression they and the Dwellers there suffered by Arrests, Suits, and Actions
commenced in that Court against them, upon idle and frivolous pretences did
joyful­ly seeme to joyne with me in the endeavouring a Rectification thereof,
and then promised me that if I would draw a Petition to that purpose to the
Houses of Parliament they would procure it to be read, thereby humbly desiring
the Houses to settle that Court in its just Jurisdiction and Priviledge, And
take a­way the abuse of it, to which I condiscended (though contrary to my
opinion) knowing and acquainting them that I could very well doe it at Common
Law, if I could once come to a Tryall at the Common-pleas Barre, with them
concer­ning [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=4)
their Jurisdiction to hold plea in actions between party, and partie, not
being of the Kings house, and their extorted fees, which Petition I herein,
verbatim set forth, being drawne in my owne name, on the behalfe of all the
Inhabitants in generall, within 12. miles round, about the sitting of the same
court, within which is their pretended Veirge, and for the avoyding of Tumults
and Crowdes of People to waite on the houses with it, therefore I did it not,
doubting but most of the Members of both Houses know very well the oppression
the greived Communalty live under by that Court.

### 1.1. To the Honourable, the Knights, Citizens and Burges­ses, Assembled in
Parliament.

The humble Petition of Robert Robins, Gent. SHEVVETH.

THat your Petitioners by the desire of his Majesties Justices of the peace for
the City, and Liberty of Westminster, at a Ge­nerall Sessions of the peace
houlden in Westminster Hall, about a yeare since, as also by the request of
many of the Inhabitans within the said City and Liberty, and divers House-
Keepers aswell Com­manders, Gentlemen, and others, and especially poore
Trades­men within twelve miles about London, doth present unto your Honors
consideration the intollerable misery and oppression they live under in a
perpetuall dayly feare of arrests, by a pretended Ju­risdiction of a Court,
called the Marshalls Court, alias, the Court of the Kings palace of
Westminster weekely on Fridayes houlden in Southwarke, contrary to the Lawes,
and Statutes of the King­dome, kept by Colour of a Pattent granted by the
Kings Majestie to Sir Edward Sidenham Knight, Marshall of England, under the
old Great Seal of England, since the twenty second of May, 1642\. Which
pattent is by vertue of an Ordinance of both houses of Par­liament concerning
the Great Seale of England void; The great and heavy pressures thereby▪ laid
on the Shoulders of the Free­born Subjects of this Kingdome as well
Inhabitants as Lodgers, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=4) Country
gentlemen here in Towne, about their affairs, and within twelve miles about
London (which is within the Veirge of that Court, as the Marshalls men,
Steward, Attorneys and others their Officers, very untruly affirm, justifie
and maintain) are so violent­ly, injuriously, and extortiously, and contrary
to the knowne Lawes, and Statutes of this Kingdome, and the liberty of the
Sub­ject put in execution, by the Officers of the said court, that many
hundreds are thereby ruined, and others in a most sad, desperate, and
lamentable condition in that crewell Jayle, starved and dye And the
Parliaments Commanders attending here for their ar­reares, for their good
service done, notwithstanding their extream wants are by the Marshals men
dayly arrested and forced in that prison, to take up their quarters for life,
for the prevention where of, and for the releefe of all Freeborne Subjects
that desire to live under, and be governed by the ancient and good Lawes of
Eng­land.

Your Petitioner humbly prayeth, That your honors will be plea­sed to order
that the said Court may bee, and continue in its just Iurisdiction, and
privlledge for fees, and all other rights per­quisits and pleadings, and to
the same intent and purpose as it it was first ordained for, provided and
granted by the severall Acts of Parliament, and that the late pattent granted
to the said Sir Edward Sidenham and all other Pattents, and author­ity they
sit by, contrary to the first institution of the severall Acts of Parliament,
and the said court thereby confirmed may be to all intents and purposes void,
and utterly annihilated and that all by that court; or Officers thereof,
wronged, or by any ar­rest, or proceeding therein, sufferers, may have the
benefit, and assistance of the common Law of England,to sue for reliefe, and
in the interim the Court silenced from their proceedings there, untill its
ancient Iurisdiction be fully setled, and the corrupt proceedings taken away.

And he shall daily pray, &c. RO: ROBINS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=5)This I doe
manifest and declare to all that will lend a judici­on and gentle aspect, and
audience to what I have here with a candidheart, at my great cost and charge,
and disgracefull reproa­ches, and hard imprisonments delivered, not doubting,
but to see the distressed communalty to reape plenty of the fruite of my sad
labours as the neighbouring inhabitants by my pen and person, doe from the
hands of serene Justice, beg, and implore cordially assuring my selfe, and
them that a gale of VVesterly wind is at hand to blow off those Caterpillars,
from being so neare our seates of Justice which will be a meanes to preserve
much of the whole­some fruit of the Law from their rapins devowrings, spoyles
and perjuries to feed the poore wronged and greeved Subject with, and it will
undoubtedly afford more good wholesome and joyfull no­rishment to both soules,
bodyes and estates of the oppressed and wronged people then the Marshalls
prison begging basket.

The first institution of this Court, called the Marshalls Court, or the Court
for his Majesties House, was by a grave and learned counsell in many
Parliaments settled and ordained, and if conside­rately looked on, and
understood for the Subjects benefit, and ad­vantage, and not to destroy them
as it is now used.

That I am very confident that most honest Subjects are not ig­nor [...]nt that
all his Majesties meniall Servants now are, and in all former ages have beene,
and according to the ancient customes of England, (a laudable custome) ought
to be protected by the Royal protection as necessary Servants to the Kings
most Excellent Ma­jesty, who swayes both the Septer, Sword, and Mace of this
and his other two Kingdomes, and by them and the Lawes, rules and go­vernes
his Subjects under him, and thereby preserves, and main­taines the causes of
the Pious, Honest, Just, pooer, abused, wrong­ed, oppressed, and distressed
Subject: And with the same cutts off, strickes to the ground, and layes stat
to the earth, the wicked, proud, unjust, malevolent, and ungodly oppressors, &
extortioners, and such wicked persons; And no servant who enjoyes, or ought to
enjoy this priviledge of protection, is or ought to be Arrested, Sued, or
impleaded, molested or hindred, from his imployment in his Majesties service,
for or by reason of any Suit, Action, or mole­station,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=5) or pretence
whatsoever, in any Court (except in cases cri­minall) thereby violence, taking
such a servant from his Majesties service, and by that meanes (if tollerated)
his Majesties Cooke may be taken out of his Kitchen, when he is provding, &
dressing his Majesties Dinner, & so consequently, all his other Servants may
in the like manner be taken from him, and by such meanes when his Majesty
expecteth his Dinner, and that attendance which be­longs to, and befits so
great a Monarch will be wanting, which were no small abuse to his Majesty;
therefore protection is for such Servants, provided, ordained, and allowed of;
This  [...] Contra saith the Subjects, were a sad condition for us, and much
suffering, and losse must of necessity follow to our disadvantage, if this
prote­ction should be allowed of, and defended, for then his Majesties
Servants will be lawlesse, and may by cunning and sinister wayes, and false
and deceitfull meanes get into any of our debts, and pro­cure our Estates by
dealings, trusts, and otherwise into their hands and possession, and if we
cannot sue for it, if they refuse to restore it to us, but shall be barred by
this protection, we were meerely cheated, which no doubt that wise Councell &
parliament hath al­ready very satisfactorily answered and resolved, that is,
they have ordained, and constituted this Court called the Marshalls Court, or
the Court for his Majesties House, and meniall Servants, and none to sue, or
be sued in that Court, but either the Plaintife or Defendant must be one of
his Majesties meaniall Servants, and the Knight Marshall and Steward are the
Judges of that Court, as ap­peares by the contents of the severall Statutes
hereafter following in his verbis, viz.

### 1.1.

That the Steward and Marshall shall not hold plea of any Covenant, or any
contract made betweene the Kings people, nor of debt, but only of Trespasse
done within the Kings House, or Veirge▪ but of such contracts and Covenants
that one of the Kings House maketh with another of the same House within the
House, and not else where, and they shall plead no Plea of Trespasse, except
the partie were attached, by them, before the King departed from the Veirge
where the Trespasse was commit­ted, and shall plead them speedily from day to
day, before the King depart out of the lymits of the Veirge, where the
Trespasse was [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=6)
done, and if so chance that they cannot be determined within the lymits of the
same Veirge, where the trespas was done, then shall the same plea cease before
the Steward, the matters determina­ble at the common Law, and from thence
forth the Steward shall not take cognizance of any debts nor of other things,
but of such things onely as be of the Kings house, nor shall hold no other
plea, by obligation made by a distresse taken by the Steward or Mar­shall, and
if they attempt any thing to the contrary to this Statute, it is void. 2\. E.
1.3.

If any plea of Debt, detinew, or other plea personall, be commenced betwixt
any persons not being of the Kings house, though the Record do make mention
that the Plaintiffe and De­fendant in the same plea be of the Kings house, yet
the defen­dant shall not be estopped by such Record but may have his A­verment
that he himselfe, or the Plaintiffe were not of the Kings house, at the time
of the Plea, or suite commenced. 15. H. 6.1,

In all places where the King in his owne person, shall come to rest, abide or
make repose within the veirge limited to his graces Court, which shall not
passe the space of twelve miles, to be ac­compted from his Majesties lodging
(13. R. 2.3.) his Steward Marshall, and all other Officers may keep their
Court of Justice, and execute, their Offices which shall appertaine to them,
accor­ding to the Lawes, Customes, and Statutes of this Realme, as well within
liberties as without during the time of the Kings a­bode any priviledge or
graunt notwithstanding  [...]1\. H. 8.24.

In every case where enquests be, to be taken, before the Stew­ard and Marshall
of the Kings house, such enquests shall be taken by men in the County
thereabouts, and not by any of the Kings house, except it be of contracts,
Covenants, or Trespas made by such whereof the one part, and the other be of
the Kings house, and that in the same house. 5: E. 3.2.10. E. 3.2.

If any man will complaine of Error made before the Steward. and Marshall of
the Kings house, he shall have a writ to remove the Record, and the proces
into the Kings Bench, and there the Error shall be redressed 5 E. 3.2.10: E.
3.3.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=6) The Marshall
of the Marshalsey of the Kings house may take the Fees hereafter following in
open Court, that is of every person which commeth by capias to the said court,
foure pence, and if he be let to maine prize untill his day, two pence, and of
every person being Defendant, which is impleaded of Trespas, and giveth
manucaptors, to keep his day to the end of his plea, two pence, and of every
one committed to prison by the Judg­ment of the Steward in whatsoever manner
the same be foure­pence, and of every person delivered of fellony, fower
pence, and of every Fellon, let to maineprise by the Court fower-pence, But if
the Marshall or any of his O [...]ficers under him do take any o­ther Fee,
then before are declared, the said Marshall and every of his Officers shall
loose their Offices, and also shall pay to the party greived treble damages
for the same for which the sayd party shall have his suite before the Steward
of the said court, for the time being a Serviture of bills (now called the
Mar­shals men) which beareth a Staffe of the said Court: shall take for every
mile from the said court unto the same place where he shal doe his service a
penny, and for twelve miles twelve pence, and so to serve a venire facias, or
a distringas out of the same court the double, and if a Serviture of Bills do
the contrary he shall be imprisoned and make Fine to the King after the
discretion of Steward of the same Court, Al which articles the Steward at his
comming into the Country, hath authority to proclaim and put in execution. 2.
H. 4.23. And Preists and other Ecclesiasticall persons taken in the Marshalsey
of the Kings house shal pay such Fees as Lay-people shall reasonably pay, and
no more.

The Steward of the Marshalsey shall for ever from time to time be assigned by
writing under the Seal of the Lord Steward of the Kings house for the time
being 33. H, 8.12.

Very much more I could set downe concerning the Jurisdiction of this Court, in
cases of Batteryes, blood sheds, and other mis­demeanors which I conceive not
fit to be heer incerted, in respect my intent is onely to treat of, and
manifest the matter of arrests
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=7) pleadings and
power of holding Plea, in that Court of Actions be­tweene partie and partie,
as now they doe.

There is a Statute made in the 23. H. 6.10. which giveth every man from whom
any money is extorted, by an Officer, other then the Statutes do allow, power
to sue the Extortioner in action of Debt for fortie pounds which he shall
recover by tryall at Law, and twentie pounds thereof his Majesty is to have,
and the other twentie pounds the partie wronged, and that sueth for the same
is to receive, this I shall shew all men that are wronged and desire reliefe,
and restitution of their injury, if they will be pleased to re­paire to me, to
be satisfied in it, with severall other benefits the Law hath provided for,
our good and quiet living, and enjoyment of our owne▪ Estates and Liberties,
and there is provided in them, punishment for those vile and unsufferable
creatures, called ex­torting Bayliffes, Marshalls men, and Jaylers.

Now having here shewed the Jurisdiction of the Marshalls Court and their just
Fees and priviledges, and wherefore ordey­ned, I am very confident that you
are and may be satisfied, that that Court which usually sitts every Friday in
Southwark is of no validety, nor hath any power or Jurisdiction to execute
that Au­thority which they wrongfully and unjustly doe, upon the igno­rant
people every day, and that no processe issuing out of that Court, ought to
have obedience yeilded to it, but is onely a collour for their rapines and
cheating the people, for what money soever is by pretence of Law forced from
the Subject contrary to Law, is a meere cheat, and no better then plaine
English Theevery.

Now concerning the Fees usually taken by the Court and their Officers, as many
as I know I will herein set downe the particu­lars, viz. Their Writ two
shillings and six pence, whereof there is Eighteene pence paid, and the
Marshalls man coseneth the other twelve pence, which he calleth the advantage
of the Writ and then this Writ must be executed, the Marshalls man for doing
it, must have ten or twenty shillings, otherwise he will not doe it, nay hee
shall sweare a hundred Oathes in an hower, that the Defendant which is to be
Arrested is a man very seldome to be seene, and a dangerous man and this hee
shall sweare over and over againe,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=7) that if it
were not for the Plaintiffe whom he takes to be his spe­ciall friend, he would
not execute it for that money, no if it were for his owne Father, and that he
shall spend more in waiting for him, then he doth aske for serving the Writ,
all which is false, for no sooner is the Plaintiffe gone, but he goes and
fetcheth the De­fendant, and so they two go to an Alehouse, and drink lustily,
and so the Marshalls man getteth money of him, and sometime tak­eth Bayle, but
if it be one of his acquaintance, then he taketh a bribe and letteth him goe,
or if a Begger then to the Goale, he is presently carryed, and you see the
first extorted Twelve pence is as much as is due, if he did Arrest one the
full twelve miles, from the sitting place of the Court; And when they Arrest
one, and deteyne him for want of Bayle, hee must presently give two
suffi­cient House-keepers, bound with him in a Bond of fortie pounds, or more,
according as the Marshalls man pleaseth, for his perso­nall appearance the
next Court, and this Bond is taken in the Jay­lors name, and not in the Knight
Marshalls name which ought to be done, and must presently pay five shillings
and six pence, for the Knight Marshalls Fee, and bayle bound when there is but
six pence due, that is two pence for admitting him to Manucaptors, and foure
pence for the bayle Bond, there is you see five shillings ex­torted; And if
for want of Bayle the Arrested be committed, his Prison his Fees are eighteen
shillings foure pence for the turne Key, (alias Dictus turned extorting knave)
& there is but foure pence due and (the eighteene shillings is extorted) to be
paid up­on the Prisoners discharge out of Prison, two shillings for walk­ing
in the Garden, to take the Ayre, which makes the Jaylor Heire, of an estate
gathered by compulsive extortion out of both Heires, young Brothers, and
beggers Estates; Two shillings and six pence the Garnish, which is to be spent
in Beere, in the Seller of the Prison, this makes the Tapster rich, giving so
much per Bar­rell to the Jaylor for drawing the Beere, five shillings a week
for a Chamber, when the King commands Lodgings, Bedding, Candle­stick,
Chamber-pot, Bason, and foure pence a day in all his Prisons, to be given to
the Prisoner, otherwise the Prisoner for Debt (which is an honest mans case,
or a Prisoner upon a commitment
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=8) by a court of
Iustice, and commonly not deserved) is in a worse and sadder condition, and
case then a Theefe or Fellon, who is allowed so much, and shall a poor Debtor
or an imagined mis­demeanor have no thing, then the fellon is farre before a
Debtor or misdemeanor in respect he is at every Sessions following, his
commitment, (except in some speciall cases) either condemned to dy for his
fact, if proved or set at iiberty, and the others must ly and starve by
degrees, a lingring death, and one of the cruelest for hunger compelleth
passion in a man, and to attempt almost any thing, even to kill himself, to
cry out against King and King­dome, for want of releefe and Justice, yea,
sweare, curse and blaspheeme their God, the mother in such case to eate her
owne Children, as in Ierusalem, to eate their owne Dunge, their shoes their
owne flesh, and what not, this is a pitifull punishment for nothing that a
poore prisoner is forced to, so horrible, is a star­ving life, till the grave
cures, yet Magna Charta doth not com­pell any to ly and dy in prison, for debt
or misdemeanor, but o­therwise provides reliefe and succour, if it were put in
execution And I never heard of any man hanged for debt, and in my opini­on it
were better hang debtors then starve them, A multitude of other just demands,
the poore prisoner is forced to pay, or else to lye and starve, as it is a
usuall thing with Jaylors, for prison sees, be the parties never so poore, and
not one penny so deman­ded due, to deteyne them in this kind, and when he
comes to Court to give bayle, he must pay five shilings ten pence, when there
is but two pence due, This is the nature of their proceedings in that Court,
by which meanes they pillage and rob the poore Countrey of at least two
hundred thousand pound per annum, amongst them all.

And to further dispute the Cause with them, they pretend that the Court they
now keepe is not the Marshalls Court, but the Court of the Kings Palace of
Westminster, granted to them by Pattent bearing date at Canterbury, the twelfe
day of Iuly, in the sixt yeare of King Charles his raigne, which his Majesty
gran­ted for the good of the Subjects (of which I am very confident his
Majesty conceived so, but the contrivers got it past for the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=8) goods of the
Subject) as by them is practised and reported) to be gotten by the advice of
the then Judges of the Kings Bench, Com­mon-Pleas, the Barrons of the
Exchequer, and Mr. Noy his Ma­jestifs then Atorney.

To which specious pretence of theirs I answer that the Kings bench where the
King sits himselfe Cheife Justice, held in VVest­minster Hall; where other
Iudges of that Court, sit as assistants to his Majesty for the matter of Law,
is the Court of the Kings pal­lace of Westminster, held, in the pallace of
Westminster, in the greate Hall there (formerly the Court for his Majesties
house) and that the Kings Bench  [...]s the Court of the Kings Pallace of
West­minster, is evident by all the Statutes concerning that court in the
Statutes at large, to be seen and read. And the then Judges, Bar­rons and Mr
Mr. Noy were no Parliament and therefore could not repeale the severall acts
of Parliament that setled the Mar­shalls Court of the Kings paliace of
Westminster, thereby to take away the power and Jurisdiction of them two
courts to make a cleare power in the King to dispose of them by this new
Pattent, and all the World knowes that King and Parliament must repeale Acts
of Parliament otherwise they are still in force and where a­any thing is by
his, Majesty granted; and confirmed by Act of par­liament, the Iurisdiction of
that guift be it just or unjust is good untill repealed by Act of Parliament.
Provided it be not against a­ny of the Chapters of Magna Charta.

It is not to be ommitted in this Case what Nagna charta sayes, that is the
City of London and all other cities, Townes, and Ports shall enjoy all their
free charters, and customes, without encroach­ment of any power whatsoever,
and this was long before the Pat­tent of Sexto Car. and therefore by the way
of goods advice let me intreat you good Mr. Win, and your servitures by vertue
of that pattent not to infringe Liberties and corporations, any more for if ie
be any longer continued, some body must accompt for it.

Now to come to the manner of their proceedings, which are as hereafter
according to my knowledge I will declare.

First their originall Processe, is an odd Writ called a Non omit­tas,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=9) which put
spirit into the heart of the Marshalls man (as in this case is requisite to
put a good face upon a bad matter) that he hath more power then the Sheriffe
of each County upon an originall Proces by which he can enter into and arrest
in five Counties, viz. Essex, Kent, Middlesex, Surry, and Hartfordshire which
makes him desperate with his Sword by his side, and sweare and drink, and
dominere, that he is a brave fellow, and he hath a non omittas, and sweares
40. or 50 Oathes one after another, that he will enter any liberty within
them, five Coun [...]ies within twelve mile round, their Court in Southwark,
and doth so, and Arrests within them all and the writ is his warrant, and the
Court will beare him out in it, and the Sheriffe durst not doe soe, and why
will not every one sue within their Court and veirge (when in­deed there is
neither veirge nor power, and not at Common-Law, for there they shall be sure
to recover, this is the Marshalls mans carriage with his Writ.

This Writ of such force, power and strength; I will verbatim here write downe,
viz.

### 1.1.

CAROLVS Dei gratia Anglie, Scotie, Francie, et Hibernie, Rex fidei defensor,
&c. Portatoribus virgarum officiarum et Ministrum Curie Palatij nostri
Westminsterij, et eorum cuili­bet salutem pricpimus vobis et cuilibet vestrum,
quod non omit­tatis propter aliquam libertatem infra Iurisdictionem Cur. prid.
quin capiatis, sen aliquis vestrum capiat per Corpora sua Ioha­nem Doe, et
Ricardum Roe si invent. fuerunt infra Iurisdicti­onem Curie pred. infra tres
Septimas tunc prox. sequen [...] et eo salvo Custodiatis, Ita quod habetis,
seu aliquis vestrum habeat, Corpora eorum eoram Indicibus Curie predict. ad
Prox. curiam nostram Palatij nostri Westminsterij, pred. post captionem illam
infra tempus Pred. apud Southwark in Comitatu Surrey, reneud. ad Respondendum
Iohani Stiles in Plito. transgr. et heats. ibm. tunc hac bre. Teste Edvardo
Sid [...]nham mil [...] ▪ apud South­wark, undecimo die Decembris, Anno Regni
nostri vicesimo se­cundo.

Shetterden.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=9)This writes
being blanks signed in their Office at Clemens Inne by Master Shetterden their
Prothonatory (a wise court to have a Prothonatory only to signe writts, not
able to draw a a plea, but to give 2500 li. for a place and pick it up againe
by theis writts, where the Marshalls men on this side the Thames usally fetch
them, or send for them, sending to the Office the names of the plantiffe, and
dtfendant, to be filled and entred but at general times and almost commonly
the marshalls men have these writts blanke in their pockets and a seale of
Office being a Parcullis and wax, and so they fill them seale them and execute
them, by which Proceedings and actions every Marshal man keepeth an office in
his pocket, and when he thinks fit makes re­returne of them or of so many as
he conceiveth convenient, and in case of necessity, as they call it, they
having no blanks about them, they take old writts, of which their pockets are
com­monly full, and raise fill and execute them (this is but forge­ry and
false imprisonment) and detaine the prisoner arrested, by that forged and
raised writt untill they can end the businesse which they will indeavour, and
by that meanes the arrested is drawn into a fooles paradice, thinking them to
be as honest men as may be, which invites him, if a stranger, to put trust in
him, and the Marshalls man perceiving the arrested to put some confidence in
him, sweares himselfe to be as honest a man as any in England though he be a
Marshalls man, and the ar­rested beleeveth so, and thanketh God that he is
happened into an honest mans hands, seeing it was his fortune to be arrested,
and he is very confident that the Marshalls man wil end his bu­sinesse, which
the Marshalles man binds with a multitude of oathes, and that he doth not
desire to gaine one farthing by it but for quietnesse sake to make neighbours
freinds, he will be contented to loose his fees, and then the Marshalls mans
man comes in swearing as God shal Judge him there is not an hone­ster man in
England, then his Master, & he hopes his Master and he shall make an end of
the businesse, for what fooles are men to goe to Law, so long as neighbours
(who I thingke are fools
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=10) indeed) may
end it, and if they goe to Law, the Lawers will get all the money, and for his
part he will have nothing for his paines, and fees, so there may be a good
end, which hee hartily wisheth, and so he will drink to the arrested, and
caleth for another flagon, or a halfe douz [...]n of beer, (which the
ar­rested must pay for) and professeth that his master and him­selfe are two
of the honestest men in England, and noe harme in them, (no, no more then in a
Divell of two yeares old) but wisheth all peace and quietnesse, and if they
cannot effect it this way, then they send to the Office for a new writ, which
is filled and entred before the arrest by the registers man Tho­mas Greenfill
by which they force the arrested to give bayle, or they will turne all their
freindship into rigour, and carry him▪ if not monyed, to prison, saying they
forfeit their bonds, if they keep a prisoner above six howers, but if he hath
money and will pay them well, and that he will hold his peace and not reveale
it, then they will doe him the best curtesie they can, and hee shall lie in
their house til he can take a course to end his bu­sinesse or give baile,
provided that he pay twelvepence every night for his lodging, besides ten
shillings a day for atten­dance, and sometimes twenty, and when all his money
is gon then his cloake or some other good thing, and at last he can­not keepe
him any longer, but must goe to prison unlesse he will have the Marshalls man
undone for him, and he hath done as much as he canne, and he is sorry for it,
but cannot helpe it, and any thing that lies in his power he will doe, and
sweares lustily to it, and will be one of his bayle so he can get another, so
the poore prisoner is meerely cheated, this is their custome, but if they
compas the busines, as commonly in such arests they do then they take the fee
for the writ, that is to shillings and six pence, the Knight Marshalls fee,
and bayle bond five shillings and six pence, and for the arrest and waiting
what they can get, some­times twenty and commonly thirty shillings or more,
swearing that they get not any benifit by it, for they must pay the prison
fees out of it to the Keeper, and all the former fees, or else they
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=10) shall
forfeit their bonds, when they keep all this money not­withstanding their
swearing, and if the defendant be carried to prison, then if he can procure
the favour, he must appeare the next Court, and put in bayle which will cost
five shillings and tenpence, when there is but two pence due, and must also
give two sufficient housekeepers bayle within the said liberty, though the
action be not worth two pence, and then must answer to a new kind of
declaration called an Incippitur, which is in this manner. Iohannes Doc quer
versus Richard Roe, implito. transg. or transg. super casus or the like ad dam
▪ 20. l. or the like, and this is al the Declaration commonly they have before
the tryall, then the next court the defendant must answer, and so they proceed
on, in this Arbitary horse trot way, wherein is neither sence nor Law. And
when any motions be in Court made, the Steward Mr, Win, desireth still that
all things may be done with consent, which is very cunningly thought on by
him, when they can do nothing by Law, and after Verdict in any case by their
apprentized Jury given, which is commonly for the Plaintfffe, according to the
custome of that Court then they enter judgement in this form, viz.

### 1.1.

CVria Domini Regis Palatii Regis Westm: tenta apud Southwarke, in Com Surrey,
die veneris sciliscet, none die Octobris, Anno regni Domini Caroli, Dei gratia
Anglie, Sco­tie, Francie et Hybernie, Regis fidei defensoris &c. vicessimo
secundo coram Edwardo Sidenham, milite Mariscalo hospitii Domini Rogis, et
Henrico Win, ar. Senlo, cur. pred. Indicibus curie illius virtuto litterarum
patent gerand. dat apud Can­bry. duo decimo die Iuly, Anno regni sui sexto,
Memorand. quod alias silicet, ad curiam domini Regis Palatii Regis Westm:
tenta apud Southwarke in dicto Com. Surrey infra Iurisdictio­nem huius curie
die veneris septimo die Augusti ultimo preter. ito venit hic Danielis
Shetterden ar. de hospitio Domini Re­gis nunc. non existans per Richm. Somer.
Attorn suam et, pro­tulit hic in cur quandam billam suam versus Iohannem
Avery, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=11) unu.
portator. veigarn. officiar. et Minister. hujus curie gen. presen. hic in
Curia in propria persona sua de cod. hospitio non existen. in plto. deb. et
sunt pleg. de proso Io. Do: et Rio. Ro.

And so they go on in the forme of the Common Law, in entring their Judgement,
and for the executing of it, issue forth a fieri facias, or a Capias ad
satisfac. returnable within a yeere and a day after the Test.

To give you an Accompt of some of the Erronious procee­dings of that Court in
the writ and Exordium of the Judge­ment formerly by me set downe, and how all
their Arrests are false imprisonment trespasse and batteries, and the & fees
mony so taken extorted and forced from the Arrested, I intended to satisfie
you in some thing, but not in all part lye in respect, I cannot here in my
Iron Cage procure the yeare bookes, Dyer, Cooke, and such as you should have
Cited, and partly I hould it sufficient to tell my enemy, I will fight with
him, and that I challenge him as I do now againe the Marshalls Court, or that
Court Mr. Henry Wyn is Steward of, if they durst come to a faire Tryall with
me at the Common Pleas Barre, concerning the Jurisdiction of that Court, to
hold plea in actions betwixt party and party not being of the Kings house, &
how by them as yet I have suffered out of purse above 2300. l. besides my
credit no man knows whether or no by all the wayes or meanes I can use, though
it be by many costly & troublesome Law, Suits or o­therwise receave one peny
thereof, for if I should set forth all that I know, and can make appeare of
that Court, it were to arme my enemies being Rich and numerous, and leave my
selfe in a kind of naked condition, my estate being most in other mens hands,
and a stranger in Sodome, and friendlesse Gomorah, yet I feare them not, for
my heart is good, and just, my Actions honest, and my wayes streight, and one
that have not done any wrong, but can bouldly dare that man who ever he be, or
ever soe rich to meet him in any place, and with the spirit of truth tell him
thou liest, if so be shall devulge any thing that may carry the least species
of dishonesty, or scandall against me, I
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=11) serve and
feare my God, and love all honest people, and know not to day whether I shall
see to morrow, and love Heaven better then money, not fearing death, counting
him an insinua­ting knavish Scicophant that knowes any dishonest act by me
done and is silent, not procuring just punishment to be insflcted on me for
it, which is all the comfort I have, in my fortified Castle garded more then
regarded, and watched both night and day, where my selfe with many more
causelesly gaze away our time, thinking what Law hath produced such a heavy
bur­then in the bowells of one house, and when to be delivered, into the new
part of the ould City, there to be rebaptized, by the name of Goale Birds,
amongst our scandalous enemies, to the honour of our Nation, that Gentlemen
shall have new Titles, in this time of Reformation.

But to returne to my ould work, of the Marshalls Court, I will satisfie you
every one, if you will repaire to mee, in what­soever point you conceave
dubions concerning the jurisdiction of that Court, and in what manner you
shall ground your Actions for Recovery which shall be so fixt as upon a Rock,
and also make it appeare so cleare as the Sun at noone day, that every one
that hath beene sued in that Court shall recover da­mage for his false
imprisonment.

First what Fees are allowed in the Statutes, you have read them, and what they
have received, to whom, when, and where paid is best knowne to your selfe, and
how long you have been imprisoned, or in custody, by whom and when, where to
find their Estates, I am very well satisfied and can let you know it, and for
their extortions in what nature to be punished, and what restitution you may
recover, I will give you an accompt of it.

Secondly, note the nature of the Writ of such power and force, being directed
to the Carryers of the Rodds of the Of­fice of the Ministers of the Court of
the Kings Pallace of West­minster,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=12) where ipse
facto there is no such Officie (but they that make this Writ tollerate, signe,
seale, and execute, it had need of A Thousand Rodde Carryers, and beadells to
whip them out of this peece, which may bee would put some better law into
their heades, or beat them into more wisdome and honesty) and to let you
understand a little more, the court of the Kings palace of Westminster is the
court of the Kings Bench, and they have noe such offices as rodd car­riers,
but tippstaves, & the carriers of the Rodds, are the Knight Marshalls men (as
I have formerly proved by the statutes) depu­ted by him to serve the processe
of that court, by virtue of their capias with their roddes in their hands,
livery coates upon their backs, and cognizances upon their sleeves, this
should be their garbe, and by this they are known to be officers, and every
one who is by him arrested, ought to yeeld obedience, and to defend themselves
in due course of law, but contrary to this rule, or any good rule, they issue
forth their writs, with a pre­cipiums quod non omittatis propter aliquam
libertutem infra jur. curie predict (when neither themselves, or any one else
knowes the jurisdiction of that court, caled the court of the Kings pallace of
Westminster which they hold in Southwarke) quin capiatis &c.

By vertue of this writ being a dangerous on, & clean contrary to law they
euter, and break into the foresaid several Counties and the ancient charters
and liberties thereof, they impudence,▪ and insolent violence infringe, break
and enter, taking to them­selves by this illegall Writ of Non ommittas, full
power and authority to justifie any arrest within twelve miles about their
Court in any Corporation or Liberty in these sive Counties, as in London, wher
one Edward Gunsmith did arrest Mrs. Marga­ret Landgridge, and carried her to
the Marshalsey, from Shoe-Lane, and in Westminster, where be at least forty
Arrests every weeke in the liberties of the Tower, White Chappell, St.
Ka­therines, the Dutchie-Finsbury, the Burrough of Southwark, the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=12) Clinke, St.
Giles, and many others; I am confident you are not ig­norant how that no
inferiour Court can grant proces out of one County into another, as this Court
doth (except the Marshalls Coutt for the Kings house, which Court is alwaies
to attend his person wheresoever he goeth, and this is by speciall Act of
Parliament and not by Pattent or Common Law) And none of the Kings superiour
courts at Westminster. can do it but with special direction to'th Sheriff of
of each County, who is to make returne of all such writs, and here they arrest
in generall, in the five severall counties by one writ, and the Sheriffe never
hath any knowledge of it, or of any such Writ (a horrid boldnesse) and carry
away the arrested whether they please, out of one County into another, let all
men consider what an infringement of liberties this is, and with so much
impudence Justified, and not one officer who live in such infringed l
[...]berties endeavour the prevention hereof, though their Oathes binds them
to it & know and see it oftner then my selfe and yet are silent, I doubt
Gen­lemen your silence herein is perjury, and let me intreat you to repent of
your ignorant perjuries. and do so no more, and be no longer dumb, but
endeavour the cure of this Malady or I wil call you by good statute law
provided for Newtralist-resiants, and Officers) to accompt for it, and be no
looser by the bar­gaine, and if you love your soules [being warned] hereafter
to discharge your Offices with a regard to your oathes and bring these
Marshalls men to condigne punishment for such offences, and transgressions,
and note that if Custome or Tolleration of this evill once become a Law by
perscription any man that can prevail, may get a Pattent from his Maj. to have
the same power over all the Kingdome, as this Marshals Court hath within the
five Counties, for if his Majesty have power to grant such a Pattent for
twelve miles, there is in his Majesty the like power de die in diem, to grant
Pattents of the same nature for twelve hundered miles if the Kingdome were so
large, and so conse­quently all the Courts, Jurisdictions, Charters, Lawes
priviledges and rights of the Subject, so long enjoyed, and by Magna Char­ta
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=13) by so many
Kings confirmed upon us utterly overthrowne▪ and wholy in his Majesty.

Thirdly the test their writs from the last session of their court before they
take it forth and make it returnable, in fra tres septimanas tunc prox.
sequen. what a false and erronious writ is this, the Law cannot any way
warrant such a returne, but there a turne must be the next court after the
test, and they keep their court every Friday, and so the returne cannot bee,
but from Friday to Friday.

If this returne of theirs were law why cannot the Kings bench or common pleas
issue forth writs beareing test in Trinity Term to be retornable in Easter
terme following, tis all one and the same law, and if an inferiour court can
doe this, why not a supe­riour Court, if any Atturney. Be it of the Kings
bench or com­mon pleas should make such a writ, he would be thrown over Barr,
and imprisoned for it, as he should well deserve, and so consequently if this
were law, an Attorney might make a writ tested last terme, and returnable
seaven yeares since, and arrest any one by vertue of it presently after the
writ issued for upon a pretended account of ten thousand pound, and for want
of bayle the arrested must lye in prison, untill the returne of the writ,

Fourthly they command the body of the arrested to be brought before the Judges
of the Court, of the Kings pallace of Westminster which is a strange power in
my opinion, that the Knight Marshall by vertue of his writ out of that court
held in Southwarke should command any man to be arrested and car­ried to
prison, and his appearance to be before justice Bacon or justice Roll at the
Terme, which is the court time of the court of the Kings Pallace of
Westminster, when their tests are not to the writs, they being the Judges of
the Court, of the Kings pallace of Westminster, but the test of this writ is
by Sir [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=13)
Edward Sidenham, he having nothing to doe there, or in any other Court,
neither hath he taken the oath of a Judge in any Court, and if he had taken
such an oath, yet he is a Delinquent, and the Office of Knight Marshall, as
much as concerneth him in that Court, and the benefit thereof long since
sequestred, and ta­ken from him by the Committee of Sequestrations in the
County of Surrey, and let to another for a­bout thirtie pounds per Annum, And
Sir Edward Siddenham hath not yet made his Composition, yet the Test of the
Writ is still in his name, which Va­cuats the writ in it selfe, for by the
Votes of the 20. of MAY, 1642. and by the Statutes of the 11. R. 2.1. H. 4.
the same is confirmed, all Delinquents are declared Traytors, and he being a
Delinquent, I con­ceive him to be within compasse of the Votes, which if he
be, let all Lawyers and wise men give their o­pinion upon, whether or no the
Test of the Writ be in a Traytors name, and if tested by a Traytor, then the
Writ is cleerely void and of none effect, and what man will be so base and
unworthie a fellow, to yeeld obedience to Traytors test or command, thereby
confederating with him, It will be objected that the Chancery, Kings Bench,
and Common-Pleas writes bear the Test of the Keeper, and Chiefe Justice after
they be came Delinquents, which is true, but not after their Offices were
sequestred and taken from them, for then the Committee for ob­structions,
Justice Bacon, and Justice Reeve bore the Tests of the Writts, Moreover Sir
Edward Siden­hams
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=14) Pattent is
void into severall waies, by which he is made Knight Marshall, first his
Pattent is not inrolled in the Rowles here in due time, and second­lie it is
past under the ould Great Seale at OXFORD, which by vertue of the Ordinance of
both Houses of Parliament is void, that Ordinance declaring all Graunts,
Pattents, &c. past under the ould Great Seale since the twentieth second of
May 1642\. void, which was the time Littleton the Keeper Run away to York with
the seal, and at that time, and sinre Sir Edmond Varney was Knight Marshall,
who was at Edgehill, the twentie third of October following kil­led, after
whose death Sir Edward Sidenham had his Pattent to be Knight Marshall sealed
with the ould Great Seale. So the whole foundation of the Court is destroyed,
the Knight Marshall not being Knight Marshall whose Test is to the Writts, and
also the Marshalls men have no Deputaion from the Knight Marshall, which must
of necessity be other­wise, they are no Marshalls men, and so all their
Arrests every way false imprisonment, and let all men judge if that Court hath
not ruined it selfe.

Fiftly, their writts run to Arrest John Doe, and Richard Roe in an action of
Trespas, and they de­clare some times in debt, sometimes in Trover in Action
sur le Case, and the like which is repugnant to Law, for wherefore shall I
Answer to any other action according to the Common Pleas proceedings which is
Law, then that I was Arrested for and put in Bayle to, and wherefore shall not
I have [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=14) Costs
upon that Action by nonsuit if not declared against, according to the first
Proces, and Arrest.

Sixtly, by what Law or rule, I must be bound to answer to an Incippitur, such
a one as I have former­ly mentioned, I know not, but sure I am that such an
Incippitur is a peece of non sence and not com­ming neere the name of a
Declaration, the Steward if he were a just Steward ought to grant a non pros.
upon it for want of a Declaration, but for the Courts benefit, that lawfull
proceeding is slighted, and instead thereof puts the poore Defendant by
lawlesse and irregular rules and other by blowes, to a very long attendance,
and much cost, and lately one Gilbert Barrell one of the Attorneys of that
Court hath found out a quirk which he pretends to be Law, to preserve the
Plaintiffe from paying the Defendant Costs, when there is no cause of Action,
that is to declare in a good Declaration, and when the Defendant answereth, to
demurre to the Answer, and so the Judgement shall passe against the
Plain­tiffe, and that Court gives no cost upon a demurrer, this was his client
Bowers his case against Mrs. Car­ter, and thus in an odd erronious way, and
kind of proceedings they go on, and when they are to enter Iudgement in any
Case, this is their Exordium which I have litteratly set downe formerly, out
of which have observed one pritty passage, and the like is in their VVrit,
which I will onely mention, and so endeavour a Conclusion.

Note they make their writ retournable before the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=15) Judges of
the Court of the Kings Palace at West­minster, of which Court Mr. Win pretends
to be Steward, and Tests it with Sir Edward Sydenhams Test, Knight Marshall,
and so Ioyn both the Court and Steward, and Knight Marshall together.

And for their Judgement they begin with Curia Domini Regis Palatii Regis
Westm: &c. Which Court is not the Court of the Kings Pallace at West­minster,
but the Kings Bench is the Court of the KINGS Pallace of VVESTMINSTER, as I
have formerly Declared and cannot be held in Surrey as aforesaid, unles by
special adjournment is tenta coram Edw. Sidenham milite Marescallo Hos­pitii
Domini Regis et Henerico Win. Ar. Senlo. cu­rie pred. and so in all their
proceedings joyne their two courts in owne to make as they say a vis unita
fortior, and need they have to if that would helpe, but the worst is, neither
of their courts hath jurisdicti­on before the King come, and then but one, and
that is the Marshalsey for his Majesties house, and is not this able to
trouble Mr. Win, that the power of two Courts cannot make one, yet
neverthelesse he mar­rieth them both together by which meanes mony e­nough
will begotten if the Spawnes of that Court, the Marshalls men, be carefull to
sow Sedition e­nough, between the Scoulds, Bawdes, and Whores, within their
Veirge, from whom most of their living and benefit comes.

The last of my exceptions that I intend at this time in this Booke to set
forth; is to intreat you to take
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=15) notice of
their executions retornable within a yeare and a day, within which time there
is 52 Courts, one every week held, wherefore shall not the Common Law make
forth an execution returnable 52 Terms after the Test of the Writ, and so that
Writ will not be out of Date, or the return past in 52. Terms, which is about
Thirteen yeares, I do not thinke but it is false imprisonment in any one to
execute such a writ when the Law will not allow them to make it retur­nable,
but from court to Court, as the Common Law doth from Terme to Terme.

If a man could but have the full view of their pro­ceedings, I am verie
confident he should discover more errors in one day then he could with his
penne devulge in a Yeare.

### 1.1.

Civitas Burgus et Vil. Westm. in Com. Midd. §. Apud generalem Session. pacis
Domini Regis tent. ibm. Die Lunae existen. un­decimo die Januarii, Anno Regni
Dn. mi. Caroli nunc Regis Angliae. &c xx ii. coram Gregorio Fenner Mil. Humph.
Edwards Enbulo Thelwall et Johe. Hooker Ar. et al. sociis suis Ju­sticiar. &c.

IT is Ordered by this Court that Cornellius Avery who is alleadged to be a
Marshals Man, or Servant to a Marshalls man, be supprest from keeping a
vi­ctualing House any longer, and that from henceforth hee shall not sell or
utter any beere or Ale whatsoe­ver by colour of any License or Warrant made
him by this Court, or any of his Majesties Iustices of the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=41747&page=16) peace within
this Citie and Liberty, and that from henceforth no person who is, or shall be
a Marshalls Man be Lycensed to keep a Victualling house to sell beere or Ale,
within this Liberty but that all ly­censes granted or to be be granted to any
Marshalls Man, shalbe ufterly voyd to all intents and purposes whatsoever.

per Iohannem Iackson.

There is also an Order granted at the Sessions at Hicks-Hall, that no
Marshalls man or Bayliffe shall keepe a Victualing house in the County of
Middle­sex. But that all such lycenses granted or to be granted to any such
shal be to all intents and purpo­ses void.

I wish all the Sessionses in the Kingdome would do the like in all their
Counties and liberties, and see the same put in execution by their Constables
and Officers.

If Heaven be pleasd, when men do cease from sin.

If Earth be pleasd, when Theeves do enter in.

If Hell be pleasd, when she receaves a Knave.

Then all be pleasd, this Courts going to its grave▪

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Robins, Robert.. Date: 1648  

