## (unknown project)

# Lycidus, or, The lover in fashion being an account from Lycidus to Lysander,
of his voyage from the Island of Love : from the French / by the same author
of The voyage to the Isle of Love ; together with a miscellany of new poems,
by several hands. — Voyage de l'Isle d'amour. English

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=1)

LYCIDUS: OR THE Lover in Fashion. Being an Account from LYCIDVS to LYSANDER,
Of his Voyage from the ISLAND of LOVE.

From the French.

By the same AUTHOR Of the Voyage to the Isle of LOVE.

Together with a MISCELLANY OF New Poems.

By Several HANDS.

LONDON: Printed for Ioseph Knight, and Francis Saunders, at the Blew Anchor in
the Lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1688.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=2)

## TO THE Earl of Melford, &c. KNIGHT Of the most Noble Order OF THE THISTLE.

My LORD,

THis Epistle Dedicatory which humbly lays this Little Volume at your Lordships
feet, and begs a Protection there, is rather an Address
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=3) than a
Dedication; to which a great many hands have subscrib'd, it Present­ing your
Lordship a Garland whose Flowers are cull'd by several Iudgments in which I
claim the least part; whose sole Ambition is this way to congra­tulate your
Lordships new Addition of Honour, that of the Most Noble Order of the Thistle,
an Honour which preced's that of the Garter, having been supported by a long
Race of of Kings, and only fell with the most Illustrious of Queens, whose m
[...]mory (which ought to be Establish'd, in all hearts can not be better
preserv'd,) than by reviving this so Ancient Or­der; well has His Majesty
chosen its Noble Champions, among whom none merits more the Glory of that
Royal Favor than your Lordship: whose
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=3) Loyalty to
His Sacred Person and interest through all the adversities of Fate, has begot
you so perfect a ve­neration in all hearts, and is so pecu­liarly the Innate
vertue of your Great mind; a virtue not shewn by unrea­sonable fits when it
shall serve an end, (a false Bravery for a while when least needful, and
thrown off when put to useful Tryal; like those who weigh­ing Advantages by
Probabilities only, and fancying the future to out-poyse the present, cast
there their Anchor of Hope,) but a virtue built on so sure and steady Basis's
of Honour, as nothing can move or shake; the Royal Interest being so greatly
indeed the Property of Nobility, and so much even above life and Fortune:
Especially when to support a Monarch so truly just, so
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=4) wise and
great; a Monarch whom God Almighty Grant long to Reign over Vs, and still to
be serv'd by men of Principles so truly Brave, as those that shine in your
Lordship.

Pardon, my Lord, this Digression and the meanness of this Present, which to a
Person of your Lordships great and weighty Employments in the world may seem
Improper, if I did not know that the most Glorious of Statesmen must somtimes
unbend from Great Af­faires, and seek a diversion in trivial En­tertainments:
Though Poetry will Iustle for the Preheminency of all others, and I know is
not the least in the Esteem of your Lordship, who is so admira­ble a Iudg of
it, if any thing here may
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=4) be found
worthy the Patronage it Im­plores, 'twill be a sufficient Honour to,

My Lord,

Your Lordships most humble, most oblig'd, and obedient Servant, A. BEHN.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=5)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=5)

## To Mrs. B. on her Poems.

HAil, Beauteous Prophetess, in whom alone,

Of all your fex Heav'ns master-piece is shewn.

For wondrous skill it argues, wondrous care,

Where two such Stars in firm conjunction are.

A Brain so Glorious, and a Face so fair.

Two Goddesses in your composure joyn'd.

Nothing but Goddess cou'd, you're so refin'd,

Bright Venus Body gave, Minerva Mind.

How soft and fine your manly numbers flow,

Soft as your Lips, and smooth as is your brow.

Gentle as Air, bright as the Noon-days Sky,

Clear as your skin, and charming as your Eye.

No craggy Precipice the Prospect spoyles,

The Eye no tedious barren plain beguiles.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=6) But, like
Thessalian Feilds your Volumes are,

Rapture and charms o're all the soyl appear,

Astrea and her verse are Tempe every where.

Ah, more than Woman! more than man she is,

As Phoebus bright; she's too, as Phaebus wise.

The Muses to our sex perverse and coy

Astrea do's familiarly enjoy.

She do's their veiled Glorys understand,

And what we court with pain, with ease command.

Their charming secrets they expanded lay,

Reserv'd to us, to her they all display.

Upon her Pen await those learned Nine.

She ne're but like the Phosph'rus draws a line,

As soon as toucht her subjects clearly shine.

The femal Laurels were obscur'd till now,

And they deserv'd the Shades in which they grew:

But Daphne at your call return's her flight,

Looks boldly up and dares the God of light.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=6) If we Orinda
to your works compare,

They uncouth, like her countrys soyle, appear,

Mean as its Pesants, as its Mountains bare,

Sappho tasts strongly of the sex, is weak and poor

At second hand she russet Laurels wore,

Yours are your own, a rich and verdant store.

If Loves the Theme, you outdo Ovids Art,

Loves God himself can't subtiller skill impart.

Softer than's plumes, more piercing than his Dart.

If Pastoral be her Song, she glads the Swains

With Livelier notes, with spritelier smiles the plains.

More gayly than the Springs she decks the Bowrs

And breaths a second May to Fields and Flowrs.

If e're the golden Age again return

And flash in shining Beames from's Iron Urn,

That Age not as it was before shall be,

But as th' Idea is refin'd by thee.

That seems the common; thines the Elixir, Gold,

So pure is thine, and so allay'd the old.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=7)

Happy, ye Bards, by fair Astrea prais'd,

If you'r alive, to brighter life you're rais'd;

For cherisht by her Beames you'l loft yer grow,

You must your former learned selves outdo,

Thô you'd the parts of Thirsts and of Strephon too.

Hail, mighty Prophetess! by whom we see

Omnipotence almost in Poetry:

Your flame can give to Graves Promethean fire,

And Greenhills clay with living paint inspire;

For like some Mystick wand with awful Eyes

You wave your Pen, and lo the dead Arise.

Kendrick.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=7)

## Advertisement TO THE READER.

WHereas Mr. Higden, at the end of his Translation of the Tenth Satyr of
Juvenal, has Printed a paper of Verses, entitul'd Cato's Answer to Labienus
&c. without the Author's consent or know­ledge; and either he or the Printer
has so alter'd 'em, that the Author cannot own 'em for his: This is to let the
World know, that that Copy so Printed by Mr. Higden, is false almost in every
line, and that here is in this Miscellany a true Copy of the same Verses
printed with the Author's consent, from the Original paper writ in his own
hand, and corrected by him at the Press.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=8) Licensed,

May 13. 1687.

R. L. S.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE Earl of Melford, &c. KNIGHT Of the most Noble Order OF THE THISTLE.
  * To Mrs. B. on her Poems.
  * Advertisement TO THE READER.
  * 1\. LYCIDUS: OR, THE Lover in Fashion, &c.
  * 2\. A Miscellany OF POEMS.
    * 2.1. To a Fair Lady, sent with a Miscellany of Poems.
    * 2.2. To Urania in Mourning.
    * 2.3. SONG.
    * 2.4. On Beauty. A PINDARIC.
    * 2.5. SONG.
    * 2.6. SONG.
    * 2.7. To the Heroick Antonia.
    * 2.8. To Laurinda.
    * 2.9. On a Lady singing.
    * 2.10. To Mr. W.
    * 2.11. Armida: Or, The Fair Gill.
    * 2.12. Predictions for Saturday next.
    * 2.13. To Astrea, on her sending me a Bottle of Orange-floure Water.
    * 2.14. To Cloris going into the Country.
    * 2.15. SONG.
    * 2.16. To a Lady, (whom he never saw, nor had any description of,) to prove he Loves her.
    * 2.17. Song by the same hand.
    * 2.18. Sleeping on her fair hand.
    * 2.19. To Gloriana on saying I had a tough heart.
    * 2.20. Sent with Ovids Epistles, to a fair Lady.
    * 2.21. Sent with a Basket of Fruit:
    * 2.22. Love cannot be indifferent.
    * 2.23. To Astrea, On her absence, during which I cou'd not write.
    * 2.24. To the most accomplisht Heroick, and incomparable, the Lady Antonia.
    * 2.25. Sent with Cowleys workes to Astrea.
    * 2.26. To my Heart.
    * 2.27. DIALOGVE Thirsis and Clarona,
    * 2.28. SONG.
    * 2.29. Strephon to his three Mistresses.
    * 2.30. To the Fam'd Antonia, on her Dwelling.
    * 2.31. SONG.
    * 2.32. On an ungrateful and undeserving Mistress, whom he cou'd not help Loving. Being a Paraphrastical Translation of Ovid's 10th Elegie Lib. 3. Amorum.
    * 2.33. On the Death of Melantha.
    * 2.34. To the NIGHTINGAL coming in the Spring. To invite Cloe From the Tumults of the Town to the innocent retreat in the Country.
    * 2.35. A PASTORAL On the Marriage of the right Honourable the Earle of Ossery to the Lady Mary Somerset. In a Dialogue between Damon and Menalcas, written by Mr. Edmond Arwaker. M. A.
    * 2.36. A Song by Robert Wolseley Esq
    * 2.37. A PASTORAL On the Death of His late Majesty written by Mr. Otway.
    * 2.38. SONG.
    * 2.39. Strephons complaint banisht from Sacarisa.
    * 2.40. An Elegie written by Mr. W. O. Damon, and Thirsis.
    * 2.41. A PINDARICK To Mrs. Behn on her Poem on the Coronation.
    * 2.42. To Mr. Wolseley on his Preface to Valentinian.
    * 2.43. Mr. Wolsely's Answer to the forgoing Copy.
    * 2.44. On the Honourable Sir Francis Fane, on his Play call'd the Sacrifice. by Mrs. A. B.
    * 2.45. Cato's Answer to Labienus, when he advis'd him to consult the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon. Being a Paraphrastical Translation of part of the 9th Book of Lucan, beginning at —Quid quaeri, Labiene, Iubes, &c.
    * 2.46. To his Grace the Duke of Ormond, upon his leaving the Government of Ireland.
    * 2.47. SONG.
    * 2.48. To Damon. To inquire of him if he cou'd tell me by the Style, who writ me a Copy of Verses that came to me in an unknown Hand, by Mrs. A. B.
    * 2.49. SONG of Basset, by Sir George Ethrege.
    * 2.50. To the Lord Bishop of Rochester, on His History of the Plot written by His late Majesties command. And an Apologie for these Verses call'd the Advice to a Painter, by the same Author.
    * 2.51. Upon the Arrival of his Excellency Henry Earle of Clarendon, And his entring upon the Government of Ireland, Ian: 1685/6. by a M. of A. Mart: Ep: Phosphore, redde diem, quid Gaudia noster moraris, Caesare venturo, Phosphore, redde Diem.
    * 2.52. A Poem against fruition written on the reading in Mountains Essay: By Alexis.
    * 2.53. To Alexis in Answer to his Poem against Fruition. ODE. by Mrs. B.
    * 2.54. To Alexis, On his saying, I lov'd a Man that talk'd much. by Mrs. B.
    * 2.55. A PASTORAL Pindarick. On the Marriage of the Right Honourable the Earle of Dorset and Midlesex, to the Lady Mary Compton. A DIALOGUE. Between Damon and Aminta.
    * 2.56. On Desire A Pindarick.
    * 2.57. SONG. By a person of Quality.
    * 2.58. SONG. By a person of Quality.
    * 2.59. SONG. I. by the same hand.
    * 2.60. A Pastoral Song on the late King.
    * 2.61. The Departure.
    * 2.62. To Amintas, Upon reading the Lives of some of the Romans, by Mrs. B.
    * 2.63. On the first discovery of falseness in Amintas.
    * 2.64. SONG.
    * 2.65. On a Blew spot made in a Ladys neck by Gunpowder, by a person of Quality.
    * 2.66. On Dydo.
    * 2.67. SONG.
    * 2.68. The Choyce.
    * 2.69. A Letter to Asfrea.
    * 2.70. To Mrs B. from a Lady who had a desire to see her, and who complains on the ingratitude of her fugitive Lover.
    * 2.71. To the fair Clarinda, who made Love to me, imagin'd more than Woman.
  * Appendix A The Table

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=8)

## 1\. LYCIDUS: OR, THE Lover in Fashion, &c.

I Have receiv'd your melancholy Epistle, with the Account of your Voyage to
the Island of Love; of your Adventures there, and the Rela­tion of the death
of your Aminta: At which you shall forgive me if I tell you I am neither
surpris'd nor griev'd, but hope to see you the next Cam­pagne, as absolutely
reduc'd to reason as myself. When Love, that has so long deprived you of
Glory, shall give you no more Sighs but at the short remembrances of past
Pleasures; and that af­ter you have heard my Account of the Voyage I made to
the same place, with my more lucky one back again, (for I, since I saw you,
have been an Adventurer) you will by my Example become of my Opinion,
(notwithstanding your dismal Tales of Death and the eternal Shades,) which is,
that if there be nothing that will lay me in my Tomb till Love brings me
thither, I shall live to Eter­nity.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=9) I must
confess 'tis a great Inducement to Love, and a happy Advance to an Amour, to
be handsom, finely shap'd, and to have a great deal of Wit; these are Charms
that subdue the Hearts of all the Fair: And one sees but very few Ladies, that
can resist these good Qualities, especially in an Age so gallant as ours, yet
all this is nothing if Fortune do not smile: And I have seen a Man handsom,
well shap'd, and of a great deal of Wit, with the ad­vantage of a thousand
happy Adventures, yet finds himself in the end, fitter for an Hospital than
the Elevation of Fortune: And the Women are not contented we should give them
as much Love as they give us, (which is but reasonable,) but they would compel
us all to Present and Treat 'em lavishly, till a Man hath consumed both Estate
and Body in their Service. How many do we see, that are wretched Examples of
this Truth, and who have nothing of all they enjoyed remaining with 'em, but a
poor Idaea of past Pleasures, when rather the Injury the Jilt has done 'em,
ought to be eternally present with 'em. Heaven keep me from being a Woman's
Property. There are Cullies enough besides you or I, Lysander.

One would think now, That I, who can talk thus Learnedly and Gravely, had
never been any of the number of those wretched, whining, sigh­ing, dying Fops,
I speak of, never been jilted and cozen'd of both my Heart and Reason; but let
me tell those that think so, they are mistaken, and that all this Wisdom and
Discretion, I now seem replenish'd with, I have as dearly bought as [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=9) any keeping Fool
of 'em all. I was ly'd and flatter­ed into Wit, jilted and cozen'd into
Prudence, and, by ten thousand broken Vows and perjured Oaths, reduced to
Sense again; and can laugh at all my past Follies now.

After I have told you this, you may guess at a great part of my Story; which,
in short, is this: I would needs make a Voyage, as you did, to this fortunate
Isle, and accompanyed with abundance of young Heirs, Cadets, Coxcombs, Wits,
Block­heads, and Politicians, with a whole Cargo of Cullies all, nameless and
numberless we Landed on the Inchanted Ground; the first I saw, and lik'd, was
charming Silvia; you believe I thought her fair as Angels; young, as the
Spring, and sweet as all the Flowers the blooming Fields produce; that when
she blush'd, the Ruddy Morning open'd, the Rose-buds blew, and all the Pinks
and Dazies spread; that when she sigh'd or breath'd, Arabia's Spices, driven
by gentle Winds, perfum'd all around; that when she look'd on me, all Heaven
was open'd in her Azure Eyes, from whence Love shot a thousand pointed Darts,
and wounded me all over; that when she spoke, the Musick of the Spheres, all
that was ravishing in Harmony, blest the Adoring Listener; that when she
walk'd, Venus in the Mirtle Grove when she advanc'd to meet her lov'd Adonis,
assuming all the Grace young Loves cou'd give, had not so much of Ma­jesty as
Silvia: In fine, she did deserve, and I com­pared her to all the Fopperies,
the Suns, the Stars, the Coral, and the Pearl, the Roses and Lillies, [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=10) Angels Spheres,
and Goddesses, fond Lovers dress their Idols in. For she was all, fancy and
fine ima­gination could adorn her with, at least, the gazing Puppy thought so.
'Twas such I saw and lov'd; but knowing I did Adore, I made my humble Court,
and she, by all my trembling, sighings, pantings, the going and returning of
my Blood, found all my Weakness and her own Power; and using all the Arts of
her Sex, both to ingage and secure me, play'd all the Woman over: She wou'd be
scornful and kind by turns, as she saw conve­nient, This to check my
Presumption and too ea­sy hope; That to preserve me from the brink of despair.
Thus was I tost in the Blanket of Love, somtimes up, and somtimes down, as her
Wit and Humor was in or out of tune, all which I watch'd, and waited like a
Dog, that still the oftner kick'd wou'd fawn the more.

Oh, 'tis an excellent Art this managing of a Coxcomb, the Serpent first taught
it our Gran­dam Eve; and Adam was the first Cully: E're since they have kept
their Empire over Men, and we have, e're since, been Slaves. But I, the most
submissive of the whole Creation, was long in gaining Grace; she used me as
she meant to keep me, Fool enough for her Purpose. She saw me young enough to
do her Service, handsom enough to do her Credit, and Fortune enough to please
her Vanity and Interest: She therefore suffer'd me to Love, and Bow among the
Crowd, and fill her Train. She gave me hope enough to secure me 100, but gave
me nothing else, till she saw me lan­guish [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=10) to that degree,
she feared, to lose the Glory of my Services, by my death; only this Pleasure
kept me alive, to see her treat all my Rivals with the greatest Rigour
imaginable, and to me all sweet­ness, exposing their feblesses; and having
taken No­tice of my Languishment, she suffered me Freedoms that wholely
Ravish'd me, and gave me hopes I shou'd not be long a dying for all she cou'd
give.

But, since I have a great deal to say of my Ad­ventures in passing out of this
Island of Love: I will be as brief as I can in what arrived to me on the
Place; and tell you, That after Ten thousand Vows of eternal Love on both
sides, I had the Joy, not only to be believ'd and lov'd, but to have her put
herself into my Possession, far from all my Ri­vals: Where, for some time I
lived with this char­ming Maid, in all the Raptures of Pleasure, Youth,
Beauty, and Love could create. Eternally we loved, and lived together, no day
nor night sepa­rated us, no Frowns interrupted our Smiles, no Clouds our Sun-
shine; the Island was all perpetu­al Spring, still flowery and green, in
Bowers, in Shades, by purling Springs and Fountains, we past our hours,
unwearied and uninterrupted. I cannot express to you the happy Life I led,
during this blessed Tranquility of Love, while Silvia still was pleased, and
still was gay. We walked all day together in the Groves, and entertained
ourselves with a thousand Stories of Love; we laught at the foolish World, who
could not make their Felicity with out Crowds and Noise: We pittied Kings in
Courts in this Retirement, so well [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=11) we liked our
Solitude; till on a day, (blest be that joyful day, though then 'twas most
a-curst,) I say upon that day, I know not by what accident I was parted from
my Charmer, and left her all alone, but in my absence, there incountred her a
Woman extremely ugly, and who was however very nice and peevish, inconstant in
her temper, and no one place could continue her: The finest things in the
World were troublesom to her, and she was Shagreen at every thing; her Name is
Indifference; she is a Person of very great Power in this Island, (though
possibly you never incoun­tred her there,) and those that follow her, de­part
from the Isle of Love without any great pains. She brought Silvia to the Lake
of Disgust, whe­ther, in persuing her (at my return,) I found her, ready to
take Boat to have past quite away, and where there are but too many to
transport those Passengers, who follow Indifference over the Lake of Disgust.
I saw this disagreeable Creature too, but she appeared too ugly for me to
approach her, but forcing Silvia back, I returned again to the Palace of True
Pleasure, where some days after there ar­rived to me a Misfortune, of which, I
believed I should never have seen an end. I found Silvia in­viron'd round with
new Lovers, still adoring and pleasing her a thousand ways, and though none of
'em were so rich, so young, or so handsom as I, she nevertheless failed not to
treat 'em with all the Smiles and Caresses 'twas possible to imagin; when I
complain'd of this, she would satisfy my fears with so many Vows and
Imprecations, that I [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=11) would believe
her, and think myself unreasona­ble, but when she would be absent whole days,
in an hundred places, she would find such probable Excuse, and lye with such a
Grace, no mortal cou'd have accused her, so that all the whole Island took
notice that I was a bassled Cuckold, be­fore I could believe she would deceive
me, so hear­tily she damn'd herself: Through all the Groves I was the pointed
Coxcomb, laught at aloud, and knew not where the jest lay; but thought myself
as secure in the Innocence of my deceiving fair One, as the first hour I
charmed her, and like a keeping Cully, lavish'd out my Fortune, my plenteous
Fortune, to make her fine to Cuckold me. 'Sdeath! how I scorn the Follies of
my Do­tage; and am resolv'd to persue Love for the fu­ture, in such a manner
as it shall never cost me a Sigh: This shall be my method.

A Constancy in Love I'll prise,

And be to Beauty true:

And doat on all the lovely Eyes,

That are but fair and new.

On Cloris Charms to day I'll feed,

To morrow Daphne move;

For bright Lucinda next I'll bleed,

And still be true to Love.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=12)

But Glory only and Renown

My serious hours shall charm;

My Nobler Minutes those shall Crown,

My looser hours, my Flame.

All the Fatigues of Love I'll hate,

And Phillis's new Charms

That hopeless Fire shall dissipate,

My Heart for Cloe warms.

The easie Nymph I once enjoy'd

Neglected now shall pass,

Possession, that has Love destroy'd

Shall make me pitiless.

In vain she now attracts and mourns,

Her moving Power is gone,

Too late (when once enjoy'd,) she burns,

And yeilding; is undone.

My Friend, the little charming Boy

Conforms to my desires,

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=12) And 'tis
but to augment my Joy

He pains me with his Fires;

All that's in happy Love I'll tast,

And rifle all his store,

And for one Joy, that will not last,

He brings a thousand more.

Perhaps, my Friend, at this Account of my Hu­mor you may smile, but with a
reasonable consi­deration you will commend it, at least, though you are not so
wise as to persue my Dictates. Yet I know you will be diverted with my
Adventures; though there be no love in 'em that can resemble 'em to yours.
Take then the History of my Heart, which I assure you, boasts itself of the
Conquests it has made.

A thousand Martyrs I have made,

All sacrific'd to my desire:

A thousand Beauties have betray'd,

That languish in resistless Fire.

The untam'd Heart to hand I brought,

And fixt the wild and wandring Thought.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=13)

I never vow'd nor sigh'd in vain

But both, thô false, were well receiv'd.

The Fair are pleas'd to give us pain,

And what they wish is soon believ'd.

And thô I talk'd of Wounds and Smart,

Loves Pleasures only toucht my Heart.

Alone the Glory and the Spoil

I always Laughing bore away;

The Triumphs, without Pain or Toil,

Without the Hell, the Heav'n of Joy.

And while I thus at random rove

Despise the Fools that whine for Love.

I was a great while, (like you,) before I for­got the remembrance of my first
Languishments, and I almost thought, (by an excess of Melancho­ly,) that the
end of my Misfortunes were with my Life at hand: Yet still like a fond Slave,
willing to drag my Fetters on, I hop'd she would find Argu­ments to convince
me she was not false; and in that Humor, fear'd only I should not be handsomly
and neatly jilted. Could she but have dissembled well, I had been still her
Cully. Could she have play'd her Game with discretion, but, vain of her [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=13) Conquest, she
boasted it to all the World, and I alone was the kind keeping Blockhead, to
whom 'twas unperceived, so well she swore me into be­lief of her Truth to me.
Till one day, lying un­der a solitary Shade, with my sad Thoughts fixt on my
declining Happiness, and almost drown'd in Tears, I saw a Woman drest in
glorious Gar­ments, all loose and flowing with the wind, scour­ing the Fields
and Groves with such a pace, as Ve­nus, when she heard her lov'd Youth was
slain, hasted to behold her ruin. She past me, as I lay, with an unexpressable
swiftness, and spoke as she run, with a loud Voice. At her first approach, I
felt a strange trembling at my Heart without knowing the reason, and found at
last this Woman was Fame. Yet I was not able to tell from whence proceeded my
Inquietude. When her Words made me but too well understand the Cause: The
fatal Subject of what she cry'd, in passing by me, were these;

Poor Lycidus for sharne arise,

And wipe Loves Errors from thy Eyes;

Shake off the God that holds thy Heart;

Since Silvia for another burns,

And all thy past Indurement scorns

While thou the Cully art.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=14) I
believed, as she spoke, that I had ill under­stood her, but she repeated it so
often, that I no longer doubted my wretchedness. I leave you, who so well can
guess, to imagin, what Complaints I made, filling the Grove, where I was laid,
with my pitious Cries; somtimes I rose and raved, and rail'd on Love, and
reproached the fair Fugitive. But the tender God was still pleading in my
Heart, and made me ever end my noisy Griefs in Sighs and silent Tears. A
thousand Thoughts of revenge I entertained against this happy Rival, and the
char­ming ingrate: But those Thoughts, like my Rage, would also end in soft
reproaching murmurs and re­gret only. And I would somtimes argue with Love in
this manner.

Ah, cruel Love! when will thy Torments cease?

And when shall I have leave to dye in Peace?

And why, too charming and too cruel Maid,

Cou'd'st thou not yet thy fleeting Heart have stay'd?

And by degrees thy fickle Humor shewn,

By turns the Enemy and Friend put on:

Have us'd my Heart a little to thy scorn,

The loss at least might have been easier born.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=14) With
feigned Vows, (that poor Expence of Breath,)

Alas thou might'st have sooth'd me to my death.

Thy Coldness, and thy visible decays

In time had put a period to my days.

And lay'd me quietly into my Tomb,

Before thy proof of Perjuries had come.

You might have waited yet a little space

And sav'd mine, and thy, Honour this disgrace;

Alas I languish'd and declin'd apace.

I lov'd my Life too eagerly away

To have disturb'd thee with too long a stay.

Ah! cou'd you not my dying Heart have fed

With some small Cordial Food, till I was dead?

Then uncontroul'd, and unreproach'd your Charms

Might have been render'd to my Rival's Arms.

Then all my right to him you might impart,

And Triumph'd o're a true and broken Heart.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=15) Though I
complained thus for a good while,  [...] was not without some secret hope,
that what I had heard was not true; nor would I be persuaded to undeceive
myself of that hope which was so dear and precious to me. I was not willing to
be con­vinced I was intirely miserable, out of too great a fear to find it
true; and there were some Moments in which I believed Fame might falsly accuse
Silvia, and it did not seem reasonable to me, that, after all the Vows and
Oaths she had made, she should so easily betray 'em, and forgetting my
Services, receive those of another, less capable of rendring them to her
advantage. Somtimes I would excuse her ungratitude with a thousand things that
seem'd reasonable, but still that was but to make me more sensible of my
disgrace; and then I would accuse myself of a thousand weaknesses below the
Cha­racter of a Man; I would even despise and loath my own easiness, and
resolve to be no longer a Mark-out-fool for all the Rhiming Wits of the Island
to aim their Dogrel at. And grown, as I imagined, brave at this thought, I
resolved first to be fully convinced of the persidy of my Mistress, and then
to rent my Heart from the attachment that held it.

You know, that from the Desart of Remembrance, one does, with great facility,
look over all the Island of Love. I was resolved to go thither one day; and
where indeed I could survey all things that past, in the Groves, the Bowers,
by Rivers, or Fountains, or whatever other place, remote or ob­scure 'twas
from thence, that one day I saw the faithless Silvia, in the Palace of True
Pleasure, in [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=15) the very Bower
of Bliss with one of my Rivals, but most intimate Friend.

'Twas there, I saw my Rival take

Pleasures, he knew how to make;

There he took, and there was given,

All the Joys that Rival Heaven;

Kneeling at her Feet he lay,

And in transports dy'd away:

Where the faithless suffer'd too

All the amorous Youth cou'd do.

The Ardour of his fierce desire

Set his Face and Eyes on fire.

All their Language was the Blisses

Of Ten thousand eager Kisses.

While his ravish'd Neck she twin'd

And to his Kisses, Kisses join'd.

Till, both inflam'd, she yeilded so

She suffer'd all the Youth cou'd do.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=16) In fine,
'twas there I saw that I must lose the day. And I saw in this Lover Ten
thousand Charms of Youth and Beauty; on which the ingrate with greedy
languishing Eyes, eternally gazed with the same Joy she used to behold me when
she made me most happy. I confess, this Object was so far from pleasing me,
(as I believed a confirmation would,) that the change inspired me with a rage,
which nothing else could do, and made me say things unbecoming the Dignity of
my Sex, who ought to disdain those faithless Slaves, which Hea­ven first made
to obey the Lords of the Creation. A thousand times I was about to have rush'd
upon 'em, and have ended the Lives of the loose betray­ers of my repose, but
Love stepp'd in and stay'd my hand, preventing me from an Outrage, that would
have cost me that rest of Honour, I yet had left: But when my rage was abated,
I fell to a more in­supportable Torment, that of extream Grief to find another
possest of what I had been so long, and with so much Toil in gaining: 'Twas
thus I re­tir'd, and after a little while brought myself to make calm
Reflections upon this Adventure, which reduced me to some reason. When one day
as I was walking in an unfrequented Shade, whither my Melancholy had conducted
me, I incountred a Man, of a hauty look and meen, his Apparel rich and
glorious, his Eyes awful, and his Stature tall; the very sight of him inspired
me with coldness, which render'd me almost insensible of the infidelity of
Silvia. This Person was Pride, who looking on me, as he past, with a fierce
and disdainful Smile, [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=16) over his
Shoulder, and regarding me with scorn, said;

Why shou'd that faithless wanton give

Thy Heart so mortal pain,

Whose Sighs were only to deceive,

Her Oaths all false and vain?

Despise those Tears thou shedd'st for her,

Disdain to sigh her Name.

To Love, thy Liberty prefer;

To faithless Silvia, Fame.

I knew by his words he was Pride, or Dis­dain, and would have embraced him;
but he put me off seeing Love still by me, who had not yet abandoned me, and
turned himself from me with a regardless scorn, but I, who was resol­ved not
to forsake so discreet a Counsellor, rather chose to take my leave of little
Love; who had ever accompanyed me in this Voyage. But oh! this adieu was not
taken so easily and soon as I ima­gined. Love was not to be quitted without
abun­dance of Sighs and Tears at parting, he had been a Witness to all my
Adventures, my Confident in this Amour, and not to be deserted without a great
deal of pain; I stayed so long in bidding the dear Boy adieu, that I had
almost forgot Disdain; at last, though my Heart were breaking to part with the
dear fondling, I was resolved and said;

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=17)

Farewel, my little charming Boy!

Farewel, my fond delight,

My dear Instructer all the day,

My soft repose at night.

Thou, whom my Soul has so carest,

And my poor Heart has held so fast,

Thou never left me in my pain,

Nor in my happier hours;

Thou eas'd me when I did complain,

And dry'd my falling showrs.

When Silvia frown'd still thou woud'st smile,

And all my Cares and Griefs beguile.

But Silvia's gone, and I have torn

Her Witchcrafts from my Heart;

And nobly fortify'd by scorn

Her Empire will subvert;

Thy Laws establish'd there destroy,

And bid adieu to the dear charming Boy.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=17) In
quitting Love I was a great while before I could find Disdain, but I, at last,
overtook him: He accompanyed me to a Village, where I received a Joy I had not
known since my Arrival to the Isle of Love, and which Repose seemed the
sweeter be­cause it was new. When I came to this place, I saw all the World
Easie, Idle, and at Liberty: This Village is like a Desart, and all the
Inhabitants live within themselves, there is only one Gate, by which we enter
into it from the Isle of Love.

This place is called Indifference, and takes its Name from a Princess
inhabiting there, a Person very fair and well made; but has a Grace and Meen
of so little Wit, and seems so inutile and so silly, that it renders her even
ridiculous. As soon as I arrived there, I called to my remembrance all those
affronts and cheats of Love, that Silvia had put upon me, and which now served
for my diversion, and were agreeable thoughts to me; so that I called myself
Ten thousand Sots and Fools for resenting 'em; and that I did not heartily
despise 'em, laugh at 'em, and make my Pleasure with the false One as well as
the rest; for she dissembled well, and for ought I knew, 'twas but dissembled
Love she paid my Rivals. But I, forsooth, was too nice a Coxcomb, I cou'd not
feed as others did, and be contented with such Pleasures as she cou'd afford,
but I must ingross all, and unreasonably believe a Woman of Youth and Wit had
not a longer Race of Love to run than to my Arms alone. Well, 'tis now confest
I was a Fool, nor could I hinder my­self from saying a thousand times a day;

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=18)

That Coxcomb can ne're be at ease,

While Beauty inslaves his Soul.

'Tis Liberty only can please,

And he that's Fetter'd is an Owl.

I found it very convenient and happy to disin­gage from Love, and I have
wondred a thousand times at the Follies that God has made me commit: And
though I somtimes thought on Silvia, I thought her less charming and fair than
she was be­fore her fall; and the Humour I now was in re­presented her no more
meriting that Passion I once had for her, and I fancied she had lost all those
Gra­ces for which once I lov'd her: In fine, I was so wholly recovered of my
disease of Love for Silvia, that I began to be uneasie for want of imploying
my Ad­dresses; and a change from so violent a Passion to such a degree of
coldness, became insupporta­ble to one of my Youth and natural Gayety;
in­somuch, that I was seized with a Dulness, or Lan­guishment, and so great a
sit of Melancholy, as I had never felt the like; and my Heart, that was so
accustomed to Love, was so out of Humour, that it had no Object or Business
for thought, that it lost all its Harmony and Wit; it having nothing to excite
it to Life and Motion, passing from so vast a degree of tenderness to an
unconcern equally ex­tream. I thought it rude, ill-bred, and idle, to live so
indifferent and insignificant a Life. And [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=18) walking
perpetually by myself, (or with those of my own Sex, that could not make my
diversion,) I sung all day this following Song to a Hum-drum Tune, to myself;

Not to sigh and to be tender,

Not to talk and prattle Love,

Is a Life no good can render,

And insipidly does move:

Unconcern do's Life destroy,

Which, without Love, can know no Joy.

Life, without adoring Beauty,

Will be useless all the day;

Love's a part of Human Duty,

And 'tis Pleasure to obey.

In vain the Gods did Life bestow,

Where kinder Love has nought to do.

What is Life, but soft desires,

And that Soul, that is not made

To entertain what Love inspires,

Oh thou dull immortal Shade?

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=19) Thou'dst
better part with Flesh and Blood,

Than be, where Life's not understood.

These were my notions of Life; and I found myself altogether useless in the
World without Love; methought I had nothing to animate me to Gallant things,
without Love, or Women: I had no use of Wit or Youth without the fair, and yet
I did not wish wholly to ingage myself neither a second time, having been so
ill-treated before by Love: But I found there were ways to enter­tain one's
self agreeably enough without dying or venturing the breaking of a heart for
the matter: That there were Beauties to be obtained without the hazard of
hanging or drowning one's self: I never had tryed, but I found it natural
enough to my Humour and Constitution, to flatter and dissemble, swear and lye;
I viewed my self in my Glass, and found myself very well recovered from the
Ruins my first Amour had made, and believed myself as fit for Conquest, as any
Sir Fopling, or Sir Courtly Nice of 'em all. To this sine Person and good Meen
and Shape, (as I thought,) I ad­ded handsom Dressing, the thing that takes the
Heart infinitely above all your other Parts, and thus set out a snare for vain
Beauty; I every day went out of the City of Indifference, to see what new
Adventures I could meet withal.

One day I incountred a Woman, who, at first sight appeared very agreeable; she
had an Air ea­sie, [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=19) free, and
Galliard; such as fails not to take at first view: This was Coquettre, who,
the very first time she saw me, Addrest herself to me with very great
Complisance and good Humour, and invited me to her Apartment, where she
assured me I should not fail to be entertained very agreeably; and at the same
time pulling out of her Pocket a Paper, she shewed me these Words written;

Let Love no more your Heart inspire,

Thô Beauty every hour you see;

Pass no farther than desire,

If you'll truly happy be.

Every day fresh Objects view,

And for all have Complisance.

Search all places still for new,

And to all make some Advance;

For where Wit and Youth agree,

There's no Life like Gallantry.

Laura's Heart you may receive,

And to morrow Iulia's prise:

Take what young Diana gives,

Pity Lucia when she dies:

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=20) Portia's
Face you must admire,

And to Clorin's Shape submit.

Phillis Dancing gives you Fire,

Celia's Softness, Clara's Wit.

Thus all at once you may persue,

'Tis too little to Love two.

The powerful smiling God of Hearts

So much tenderness imparts,

You must upon his Altars lay

A thousand Offerings every day:

And so soft is kind desire;

Oh! so Charming is the Fire,

That if nice Adraste scorns,

Gentler Ariadne burns.

Still Another keep in play

(If One refuse,) to give you Joy.

Cease therefore to disturb your Hours,

For having two desires

A Heart can manage two Amours.

And burn with several Fires.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=20) The day
has hours enough in store

To visit two or half a score.

I gave her thanks for her good Counsel, and found I needed not much persuasion
to follow Co­quettre to a City that bears her Name, and I saw over the Gate of
the City at my Entrance, these Verses writ in Gold Letters;

The God of Love beholding every day

Slaves from his Empire to depart away;

(For Hearts that have been once with Love fatigu'd,

A second time are ne'r again intrigu'd:

No second Beauty e'r can move

The Soul to that degree of Love.)

This City built, that we might still obey,

Thô we refus'd his Arbitrary Sway:

'Tis here we find a grateful Recompence

For all Loves former Violence;

Tir'd with his Laws we hither come

To meet a kinder softer doom.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=21) 'Tis here
the God, without the Tyrant, Reigns,

And Laws agreeable ordains;

Here 'tis with Reason and with Wit he Rules,

And whining Passion Ridicules.

No check or bound to Nature gives,

But kind desire rewarded thrives.

Peevish uneasy Pride, the God

Has banish'd from the blest abode:

All Jealousies, all Quarrels cease,

And here Love lives in perfect Peace.

This agreeable description, gave me new desire to enter into the City; where I
incountred a thou­sand fine Persons all gloriously drest, as if they were
purposely set out for Conquest: There was nothing omitted of Cost and
Gallantry, that might render 'em intirely Charming, and they employ'd all
their Arts of Looks and Dress to gain Hearts.

It is, in a word, from these fair Creatures you are to draw your Satisfaction,
and 'tis indeed at a dear rate you buy it, yet, notwithstanding the Ex­pence,
a world of People persue 'em.

When I came into the City, I was soon percei­ved to be a Stranger there, and
while I was consi­dering whither I should go, or how to address my­self [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=21) to these fair
Creatures, a little Coquett Cupid presented himself to me for a kind
Instructer; and to explain him, this in a word is his Character:

He is of the same Race with the other Cupids, has the same Mother too, Venus:
He wears a Bow and Arrows, like the rest of the young Loves; but he has no
Bando, nothing to cover his Eyes, but he sees perfectly; nor has he any
Flambeau: And all the Laws of Coquettre he understands and observes exactly.

I had no sooner received the little Charming God, but he instructed me in all
the most power­ful Arts to please, in all his little wiles and agreea­ble
deceits; all which he admits of as the most ne­cessary Recourses to that great
end of Man, his true diversion: With all which I was so extreamly plea­sed,
that resolving to be his Votary, I followed him to the most delightful place
in the World, the City of Gallantry.

Gallantry is a City very magnificent; at the En­trance of the Gate you
incounter Liberality, a Wo­man of great Wit, delicate Coversation and
Com­plisance: This Lady gives her Pasport to all that enter, and without
which, you cannot pass, or at least, with great difficulty; and then too you
pass your time but very ill; and the more Pasports you have, the better you
are received from the fair In­habitants, and pass your time more agreeable
with the fine Conversation you meet with in this City. Love told me this, and
it was therefore that I took a great many Pasports from this acceptable Person
Liberality. But what renders you yet more Fa­voured [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=22) by the Fair and
the Young who reside at Gallantry, is, to have a delicate soft Wit, an
assi­duous Address and a tender way of Conversing; but that which best cullies
and pleases the Genera­lity of People there, is Liberality and Complisance:
This place of so great Divertisement is refrequen­ted with all the Parties of
the best and most amia­able Company, where they invent a thousand new
Pleasures every day; Feasting, Balls, Comedies, and Sports, Singing and
Serinads, are what em­ploys the whole Four and twenty hours.

By the Virtue of my Pasports from Liberality, I was introduced to all the fine
Conversations and Places that afford Pleasure and Delight: I had the good
Fortune to make Parties, insomuch, that I was soon known to all the Company in
the City, and past the day in Feasting, going with the Young and Fair to
delightful Villa's, Gardens, or Rivers in Chaces, and a thousand things that
pleas'd; and the Nights I passed in Serinading, so that I did not give myself
time for Melancholy; and yet for all this I was wearied and fatigued; for when
once one has tasted of the Pleasure of Loving and being Beloved, all, that
comes after that, is but flat and dull; and if one's Heart be not a little
inflamed, all things else are insignificant, and make but very slight touches.

I began therefore for all this to be extreamly Sha­green and out of Humour,
amid'st all these Pleasures, till one lucky day I met with an Adventure, that
war­med my Heart with a tender flame which it had not felt since my happy
beginning one for Silvia: One [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=22) day, as I said,
I was conducted by my officious Cupid into a Garden very beautiful, where
there are a thousand Labyrinths and Arbours, Walks, Grot­to's, Groves and
Thickets; and where all the Fair and the Gay resorted; 'twas here I incountred
a young Beauty called Bellinda; she was well made, and had an admirable meen,
an Air of Gayety and Sweetness; but that which charmed me most of all, was her
Wit, which was too ingaging for me to defend my Heart against: I found mine
immedi­ately submitting to her Conversation, and you may imagine I did not
part with her so long as De­cency and good Manners permitted me to stay with
her, which was as long as any Company was in the place; nor then, till by my
importunity I had gained so much upon her to suffer my Visits, which she did
with a Condescention that gave me abun­dance of hope.

I was no sooner gone, but my Cupid, who took care of me, and entertained me to
the best Advan­tage, carryed me that Evening to a Ball, where there were a
world of Beauties, among the rest one fair as imagination can conceive; she
had all the Charmes of Youth and Beauty; though not so much Wit and Air as
Bellinda. To this young ado­rable I made my Court all the time I remained
there, and fancied I never found myself so Charm­ed, I fancied all the Graces
had taken up their dwelling in her Divine Face; and that to subdue one so fair
and so innocent, must needs be an ex­tream Pleasure: Yet did I not so wholly
fix my de­sires on this lovely Person, but that the Wit of [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=23) Bellinda shared
my Heart with the Beauty and Youth of Bellimante, so was this young Charmer
called: I was extreamly well pleas'd to find I could a-new take fire; and
infinitely more, when I found I should not be subdued by one alone; nor
con­fined to dull Dotage on a single Beauty; but that I was able to attain to
the greatest Pleasure, that of Loving two amiable Persons at once: If with
two, I hoped I might with Two score if I pleas'd and had occasion; and though
at first it seemed to be very strange and improbable to feel a Passion for
two, yet I found it true, and could not determin which I had the greatest
tenderness for, or inclina­tion to: But 'tis most certain, that this Night I
found, or thought I found, more for Bellimante, who fired me with every Smile;
I confess she wan­ted that Gayety of Spirit Bellinda had, to main­tain that
fire she raised: And ever when I was thoughtful a moment, Coquettre (who is
ever in all the Conversation, and where she appears very magnificent and with
a great Train,) would, smi­ling, sing softly in my Ear this Song, for she is
ve­ry Galliard;

Cease to defend your Amorous Heart,

Against a double flame;

Where two may claim an equal Part

Without reproach or shame.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=23) 'Tis Love
that makes Life's happiness,

And he that best wou'd live

By Love alone must Life caress,

And all his Darts receive.

Coquettre is a Person, that endeavours to please and humour every Body, but of
all those who eve­ry day fill her Train, she caresses none with that Ad­dress
and Assiduity as she did me, for I was a new Face, to whom she is ever most
obliging and en­tertaining. However, notwithstanding the Advice of Coquettre,
I fancied this young Charmer had in­gaged all my Soul; and while I gazed on
her Beauty, I thought on Bellinda no more; but be­lieved I should wholly
devote myself to Bellimante, whose Eyes alone seemed capable to inflame me.

I took my leave with Sighs, and went home extream well pleas'd with this days
Adventure. All this Night I slept as well as if no tenderness had toucht my
Heart, and though I Lov'd infinitely, it gave me no disturbance; the next
morning a thou­sand pleasant things Bellinda had said to me, came into my
mind, and gave me a new inclination to en­tertain myself with that witty
Beauty; and dres­sing myself in haste with the desire I had to be with her, I
went again, the morning being very invi­ting, to the Garden, where before I
had seen her, and was so lucky to encounter her; I found her blush at my
approach; which I counted a good [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=24) Omen of my
future happiness; she received me with all the Gayety and Joy good liking and
Wit could inspire: Nor was I backward on my part, but addrest myself to her
with all imaginable res­pect, and as much Love in my Eyes as I was able to put
on; which, I found, she saw with Pleasure; she had not entertained me half an
hour, but I was so absolutely charmed, that I forgot there was a Bellaminte in
the World.

Thus for several days I lived; every day visit­ing both these attracting
Beauties, and at Night, when I was retired, was not able to inform myself
which I liked best: Both were equally beloved, and it was now, that methought
I began to tast of true Joy; I found myself in Love without any sort of
inquietude, when I was Melancholy, I went to visit Bellinda, and she with her
Gayety and Wit would inspire me with good Humour; If I were over-prest with
good Company, and too much Conversation and Noise, I would visit Belli­mante,
who by a certain softness in her discourse, and a natural Languishment in her
Eyes and Manners, charmed and calmed me to a reposed tranquillity; so that to
make me fortunate in Love, I could not have fixed my desires better: I had too
little Love to be wretched, and enough to make my happiness and Pleasure.

After I had past my time a while thus in Coquet­tre, this little Love, who was
my Guide, carried me to Declaration: I thought then upon the time of my first
Arrival on the Isle of Love; and how Respect, that awful hinderer of our
Pleasure, pre­vented [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=24) me from going to
this Place: I urg'd this very argument Respect then made me, to my Coquet Love
now, who for answer return'd me nothing but loud Laughter; and when I ask this
reason, he replyd, that Respect did not forbid any to go to Declaration, but
those only who knew not how to behave themselves well there, and who were not
so well fashion'd and bred as they ought to be, who go thither: And that it
was a mere cheat in Respect to conduct people to Love by Discretion, that
being much the farthest way about, and under favor to Monsieur Respect he is
but a troublesome companion to a Lover, who designs to cure those wounds the
fair has given him, and, if he have no better counsellor, he may languish all
his life without revealing the secret of his soul to the object belov'd, and
so never find redress. But this Sir Formal, (Respect, says Love,) is a very
great favorite of the Lady's, who is always in fee with them as a Jilt with a
Justice; who manages their Fools just as they wou'd have 'em; for it is the
most agreeable thing in the World to them, and what the most feeds their
vanity, to see at their feet a thousand Lo­vers sigh, burn, and languish; the
fair are never angry to find themselves belov'd, nor ever weary of being
Ador'd. I was extreamly pleas'd at this frank Humour of my little Love who
told me this, and without much scruple or consideration to Respect I follow'd
him towards Declaration, and in my way he gave me this Advice.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=25)

When you Love, or speak of it,

Make no serious matter on't,

'Twill make but subject for her wit

And gain her scorn in lieu of Grant.

Sneeking, whinning, dull Grimasses

Pale the Appetite, they'd move;

Only Boys and formal Asses

Thus are Ridicul'd by Love.

While you make a Mystery

Of your Love and awful flame;

Young and tender Hearts will fly,

Frighted at the very name;

Always brisk and gayly court

Make Love your pleasure not your pain,

'Tis by wanton play and sport

Heedless Virgins you will gain.

By this time we were arriv'd to Declaration, which is a very little Village,
since it is only for Passengers to pass thrô, and none live there, the Country
is very Perilous, and those that make a [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=25) false step run a
great risque of falling from some Precipice: Round about rises a very great
mist, and people have much ado to know each other; of these mists there are
two sorts: The one on the side of Denial, the other on that of Per­mission,
the first is very disagreeable and draws a very ill consequence with it; the
other directs you to a place of intire divertisment, but I had so good a guide
that the entrance gave me no trouble at all. When I came to the Village, I
found Bellimante, and Bellinda, to whom by turns I told all my heart; and
discover'd all its passion or its tenderness which was to me much better.

When to the charming Bellinda I came,

With my heart full of Love and desire,

To gain my wisht end I talkt of a flame,

Of sighing, and dying, and sire,

I swore to her charms that my soul did submit,

And the slave was undone by the force of her Wit.

To fair Bellimante the same tale I told,

And I vow'd and I swore her fair Eyes

No Heart-Ravisht mortal cou'd ever behold

But he panting and languishing Dys,

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=26) And while
I was vowing, the ardor of youth

Made myself even believe what I swore was all truth.

I confess to you, my dear Lysander, that it was a great while before I cou'd
make myself be be­liev'd by Bellinda, or gain any credit upon her heart, she
had a great deal of Wit and cou'd see farther into the designs of her Lovers
than those who had not so much, or had had so many vows pay'd them: I
perceiv'd well enough, I was not hated by her, and that she had not a heart
whol­ly insensible; so that I never quitted her till I had gain'd so much upon
her to accompany me to Permission, where for some time we pass our days very
pleasantly; and having so good fortune with Bellinda, I had now a great desire
to try my power over Bellimante: and where indeed, con­trary to my
expectation, I was not so happy: But she went from me to Denial; and I was for
that hour oblig'd to return again to Bellinda, it was some time I searcht her
in vain, but at last found her at a little Village, extreamly agreeable. There
are very few Inhabitants, but those that are live in perpetual union, yet do
not talk much, for they understand one another with half words: A sign of the
Hand, the Head or the Eye, a glance or smile is sufficient to declare a great
part of the Inclination. It is here where the Lover takes all freedoms,
without controul, and says and dos [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=26) all that soft
Love can permit: And every day they take and give a secret Entertainment,
speak­ing a particular Language, which every body does not understand, and
none but Lovers can reply too, in effect, there are as many Languages as
persons.

The Governess of this Village is very charm­ing to those that are acquainted
with her; and as disagreeable to those that are not; she is a per­son of a
great deal of Wit, and knows all things. She has a thousand ways to make
herself under­stood, and comprehends all in a moment, that you wou'd or can
say to her.

In this place, to divert, we make a thousand pretty sorts of Entertainments;
and we have a­bundance of Artifices, which signify nothing, and yet they serve
to make life Agreeable and Pleasant.

'Twas thus I liv'd at Intelligence; when I under­stood that Bellimante was
retir'd to Cruelty. This news afflicted me extreamly, but I was not now of a
humour to swell the Floods with my tears, or increase the rude winds with my
ruder sighs; to tear my hair and beat my Innocent breast as I us'd in my first
Amount to do. However I was so far concern'd, that I made it my business not
to lose this insensible fair one, but making her a visit in spight of her
retreat, I reproacht her with cruelty.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=27)

Why, fair Maid, are you uneasy,

When a slave designs to please you;

When he at your feet is lying

Sighing, languishing, and dying?

Why do you preserve your charms

Only for offensive Armes?

What the Lover wou'd possess

You maintain but to oppress.

Cease, fair Maid, your cruel sway,

And let your Lover dy a nobler way.

Who the Devil wou'd not believe me as much in love now as I ever was with
Silvia: My heart had learn'd then all the soft Language of Love which now it
cou'd prattle as naturally as its Mother Tongue; and sighing and dying was as
ready for my mouth as when it came from my very heart; and cost me nothing to
speak; Love being as cheaply made now by me as a barter for a Horse or a
Coach; and with as little concern almost: It pleas'd me while I was speaking,
and while I believ'd I was gaining the vanity and pleasure of a conquest over
an unvanquisht heart. However I cou'd yet perceive no Grist come to my Mill;
no heart to my Lure; young as it was, it had [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=27) a cunning that
was harder to deceive than all Bellinda's Wit: And seeing her persist still in
her Resolution I left her with a heart, whose pride more than Passion resented
the obduratness of this Maid, I went as well compos'd however as I cou'd to
Intelligence; and found even some pleasure in the cruelty and charming
resistance of Bellimante, since I propos'd to myself an infinite happyness in
softning a heart so averse to Love, and which I knew I shou'd compel to yeild
some time or other with very little pains and force.

Oh! what Pleasure 'tis to find

A coy heart melt by slow degrees;

When to yeilding tis inclin'd,

Yet her fear a ruin sees.

When her tears do kindly flow,

And her sighs do come and goe.

Oh! how charming tis, to meet

Soft resistance from the fair;

When her pride and wishes meet

And by turns increase her care.

Oh! how charming 'tis to know,

She wou'd yeild but can't tell how,

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=28)

Oh! how pretty is her scorn

When confus'd 'twixt Love and Shame,

Still refusing (though she burn,)

The soft pressures of my Flame.

Her Pride in her denyal lies,

And mine is in my Victories.

I feigned nevertheless abundance of Grief to find her-still persist in her
rigorous Cruelty; and I made her believe, that all my absent hours I
aban­doned myself to sorrows and despairs; though Love knows I parted with all
those things in Silia's Arms. But whatever I pretend, to appear at Cru­elty
and before Bellimante; at Intelligence I was all Galliard and never in better
Humour in my Life than when I went to visit Bellinda: I put on the Gravity of
a Lover, and beheld her with a Solemn Languishing Look: In fine, I accustomed
myself to counterfeit my Humour, whenever I found it convenient for my
Advantage: Tears, Vows, and Sighs cost me nothing, and I knew all the Arts to
jilt for Love, and could act the dying Lover, whenever it made for my
Satisfaction.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=28) He that
wou'd precious time improve,

And husband well his hours,

Let him complain and dye for Love,

And spare no Sighs or Showers.

To second which, let Vows and Oaths

Be ready at your will,

And fittest times and seasons chuse,

To shew your cozening skill.

In fine, after I had sufficiently acted the Lan­guishing Lover, for the
accomplishment of all my Wishes, I thought it time to change the Scene, and
without having recourse to Pity, I followed all the Counsels of my Cupid; who
told me, that in stead of dying and whining at her Feet, and damning myself to
obtain her Grace, I should affect a Coldness, and an Unconcern; for, Lycidus,
assure yourself, said he, there is nothing a Woman will not do, rather than
lose her Lover either from Vanity or Inclination. I thanked Love for his kind
Advice; and to persue it, the next day I drest myself in all the Gayety
imaginable: My Eyes, my Air, my Language, were all changed; and thus fortified
with all the put-on indifference in the World, I made Bellimante a Visit; and
after a thousand things all cold and unconcerned, far from Love or my former
Softness, I cried laugh­ing to her;

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=29)

Cease, cease, that vain and useless scorn,

Or save it for the Slaves that dye;

I in your Flames no longer burn,

No more the whining Fool you fly;

But all your Cruelty desie.

My Heart your Empire now disdains,

And Frown, or Smile, all's one to me:

The Slave has broke his Servial Chains,

And spight of all your Pride is free

From the Tyrannick Slavery.

Be kind or cruel every day,

Your Eyes may wear what dress they please,

'Twill not affect me either way,

How my fond Heart has found its Peace,

And all my Tears and Sighings cease.

I must confess you're wondrous fair,

And know, to conquer such a Heart;

Is worth an Age of sad despair,

If Lovers Merits were Desert:

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=29) But
you're unjust as well as fair,

And Love subsists not with despair,

No more than Lovers by the Air.

I've spar'd no Sighs nor Floods of Tears,

Nor any thing to move your Mind,

With sacred Vows I sed your Cares;

But found your rebel Heart unkind,

And Vanity had made you blind.

No more my Knees shall bow before

Those unconcern'd and haughty Eyes,

Nor be so sensless to adore

That Saint, that all my Prayers despise:

No, I contemn your Cruelty

Since in a Humor not to dye.

Having said all this with an Air of Disdain, I, smiling, took my leave, with
much less Civility and Respect than I used to do; and hasting to
In­telligence, I past my time very well with Bellinda, to whom I paid all my
Visits, and omitted nothing that might make Bellimante know I had forgot her:
But at the end of some days by a very happy change, [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=30) she finding more
inclination to Love than to Cru­elty, banishing all Obstacles in Favour of a
Lover, she came to Intelligence; where at first sight she made me some little
Reproaches, and that in so soft a manner, that I did not doubt but I had
toucht her Heart: I swore a thousand times, that all I had done, was only put
on to see if it were possible she could resent it, and force from her Heart
some little concern for my supposed loss. At this time I had abundance of
Intreagues upon my hands, for it was not with Bellinda and Bellimante, with
whom I lived in this manner; and indeed it is impossible to remain at
Intelligence and to make a Court but to two Persons only, where there are so
many of the Fair and the Young. I writ every day several Bil­lets; and
received every day as many: I had every day two or three Rendezvous; and one
ought to manage matters very discreetly, that neither Par­ty might come to the
knowledge of the others con­cern; and one ought to be a Man of great Address
and Subtilty to love more than one securely; and though this gave me some
pain, it was nevertheless an Ambaras very agreeable, and in which I could have
lived a great while; if Envy, which cannot suffer any Body to be happy in
Intelligence, had not arrived there and told a great many things which
discovered my Intreagues; so that Bellinda, with whom I had lived there with
great Tranquilli­ty a long time, and Bellimante, with whom I was but just
beginning to be happy, were both obli­ged to quit this delightful place, where
we enjoy­ed so many happy hours; and they retired till the [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=30) noise was a
little over; and with them all those who had afforded me any hope: If any one
of these had stayed, I had been contented well enough and one might have
consol'd me for the loss of the other, but in one day to lose all that made my
hap­piness, put me into such a Melancholy, I knew not for the present what to
do for myself; but Coquet Love conducted me to a Village, that gave a me new
Pleasure: The scituation of it is marvellous, the Fields and the Groves all
about it the most plea­sant in the World; the Meadows enamel'd with Rivulets,
which run winding here and there, and lose themselves in the Thickets and the
Woods. In going, Love said to me: In absence it is in vain to abandon yourself
to sorrow. Alas! What signifies it to sigh night and day; the Absent does not
hear us; nor can the most tender Affliction or Com­plaint render a Lover
happy, unless the Fair One were present to hear all his Moans, then perhaps
they might avail. There was reason in what he said, and I was pleas'd and
calm'd; and we arri­ved at the same time at this Village: All the Hou­ses were
fine, and pleasant, we saw all the Graces there by Fountains and by Flowery
Springs, and all the Objects that could be imagined agreeable; and the least
amiable ones, we saw, gave us a Joy! All the World that inhabit there
contribute to Di­version; and this place is called Amusement: Amusement is a
young Boy, who stops and gazes at every thing that meets his Eyes, and he
makes his Pleasure with every Novelty.

As soon as I arrived at this Village I thought to [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=31) divert myself,
as others did; and to hinder my Thoughts from fixing on the loss of my two
Mi­stresses, and to banish from my mind the Sha­grins their Absence gave me;
withdrawn from the fair Eyes of Bellimante, and the Charming Wit of Bellinda,
and to give my sighing Heart a little case; upon a thousand Objects I formed
my desires, and took a thousand Pleasures to divert my Melancholy: And all the
time I lived at this dear place, I passed my time without any inquie­tude; for
every day afforded me new Objects to give me new Wishes. And I now expected,
with­out much impatience, the return of Bellinda and Bellimante; nor did I
tire myself with writing to 'em every day; and when I did write, to save the
expence of thought, the same Billet served both; a thousand little tender
things I said of course to both: And somtimes, especially while I was
wri­ting, I thought I had rather have seen them than have lived at Amusemcnt,
but since it was necessa­ry they should be absent, I bore it with all the
Patience I could; somtimes we were in a fit of writing very regularly to one
another, but on a sudden I received no Letters at all; the reason of this was,
they both understood I lived at Amuse­ment, and had retired themselves to the
Palace of Spight: I no sooner received this News, but I rendered myself there
also; it is a place where there is alwaies abundance of Tumult, Outrage,
Quarrels and Noise: And Spight is a Person who eternally gives occasion of
Discontent and Broil; causing People often to fall out with those they [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=31) love most, and
to caress those they hate: But the Quarrels she occasions us with those we
love, last but a very short season, and Love reconciles those differences that
Spight obliges us to make: Thô 'tis somtime pleasant enough to see those we
Love extreamly, and violently, fall into the highest rage, and say a thousand
things injurious and un­reasonable, and to swear all the Oaths that angry Love
and Fury can inspire, never to see or con­verse with one another again, and in
a moment after to grow calm, weep, and reunite; to be perjured on both sides,
and become more fond than ever they were.

A Lovers Rage and Jealousie

One short moment do's confess:

How can they long angry be

Whose Hearts are full of tenderness?

In this Place there wou'd be eternal War, but for a person who inhabits there,
and is always the Mediator for Peace, tis he that assists to accommo­date and
bring the Lovers together. This is a very honest person, call'd Right
Vnderstanding, he brought me to Bellinda, whom I found accom­pany'd with a Man
that made her a thousand ca­resses, at my approach she made as if she knew me
not, which I took in such disdain, that I ap­ply'd myself to Spight, with a
design to be re­veng'd on this Haughty scorner. In this humour [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=32) I made a visit
to Bellimante but found her as Implacable as Bellinda, whom no excuses, no
reason, cou'd reduce to the temper I had once seen her; in a rage, ten times
more than I was before, fill'd with disdain and revenge I complain'd of this
treatment to my little Love, who immedi­ately led me into a Grove, where the
Beauties and the Graces us'd to walk, to consult upon what return to make for
my affront; from one place to another we past on till we came to a lit­tle
Thicket, on the other side of which, by a lit­tle Rivulet we cou'd hear, but
not see, two per­sons discoursing, they were women, and one seemed in a
violent Rage against her Lover, who had newly offended her, whilst the other
strove in vain to reconcile her, but she went on, vowing to revenge herself
with the next object she shou'd Incounter that had but Wit, Youth, and fortune
enough to Justifie her Love, and make her con­quest glorious; her resolution
agreeing so with mine, and her manner of speaking, gave me new hope and
pleasure, and a great curiosity to see her face; I found by her Resentment she
was young and of Quality, and that alone was enough to make me resolve upon
Addressing myself to her, and the other person had no sooner left her, but I
ad­vanced towards her, with as good a grace as I cou'd put on, she was a
little surprised, and blushing at first, but I soon reconcil'd her to my
conversation. I found her handsom enough to ingage me, and she was as well
pleased with me as I was with her, both having the same design which was that
of [[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=32)
revenge, and you may Imagin, our business be­ing the same, our entertainment
was not at first extraordinary, but as my cause of Anger was more reasonable
than hers, I began to find myself to soften into liking of this new fair one,
who was called Cemena, and who, to spight her former Lover, endeavor'd to be
seen with me in all the publick places she cou'd, which gave him Infinite
torments of Jealousie. One day as I was walking with this Cemena in a place
where the young and the fair frequent, Bellinda and Bellimante often passed by
us, and saw us both well pleas'd and in good humour, I cou'd perceive their
colour goe and come, and that they were as uneasy at this object, as my heart
cou'd wish, and by their quitting of the place immediatly after, I was
as­sured of all my hope, and believed I had gained my Point; at the end of two
or three days, one Morning walking alone in the same place I in­countered
Bellimante, who hapned to be attend­ed with her Woman onely, she chang'd
colour at my approach, and wou'd have passed me by but I stay'd her by the
Robe; and said a thousand things to her that angry Love inspir'd me with,
while she on her side did the same, till we had talk'd ourselves by degrees
into reason, and good understanding. I found her Resentment to be only the
excess of Love, and all those faults are easily forgiven, I immediatly threw
myself at her Feet, and made her a thousand protestations of my fidelity, and
she, in her turn, excused herself with all the tenderness imaginable, she made
me [[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=33) a
thousand new vowes and caresses and forgot nothing that might persuade me,
that all she did was by the Counsel of Spight.

Oh! how soft it is to see

The fair one we believe untrue,

Eagar and impatient be

To be reconcil'd a new;

When their little cheats of Love

Shall with reasons be excus'd,

Oh! how soft it is to prove,

With what ease we are abus'd!

When we come to understand

How unjust are all our fears;

And to feel the lovely hand

Wiping from our Eyes the tears.

And a thousand Favors pay

For every drop they kiss away,

Oh! how soft it is to yeild,

To the maid just reconcil'd.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=33) I found
this accommodement extreamly agree­able, and it was in these transports the
Lovely Bellimante detain'd me for some days without quit­ing her, but I found
too much Joy in a new re­conciliation not to endeavor to make one also with
Bellinda; as soon then as Bellimante grew a little off my heart by so long a
conversation with one and the same Woman, I, on pretence of some af­fairs,
left her extreamly charm'd and satisfi'd, and hasted to Bellinda, who,
methought, was now a new Beauty; at least I found her too consider­able to
lose the Glory of ingaging her intirely; tis possible that both these Ladys,
being agitated with as little faith as myself, deceiv'd me with the same
design I did them, to make their pleasure on­ly, and thô this very often came
into my thoughts, yet it gave me no great inquietude, they dis­sembl'd well,
and I cou'd not see it, I had the satisfaction and the vanity of 'em, that was
as much as I desir'd from any of the fair since Silvia toucht my heart, they
both swore they lov'd and both fear'd to displease, if they were unfaithful
they had a thousand stratagems to hide their infidelity, and took a great deal
of care to keep me, which shew'd a value in me above all the rest of my
Ri­vals, and I beheld myself with some Pride and e­steem for having so much
power; when ever they offended me they had all the Arts to mollify me, and who
wou'd be so critically in love as not to be willing to be so well abus'd? For
my part, I will not be so nice, as to penetrat into their thoughts, to find
what wou'd but displease me if [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=34) found; but
content myself with all I see and find that looks like Love at least and good
humour. Nay even in their worst I find a thousand plea­sures, those of their
quarrels which somtimes hap­pen twenty times a day, when every reconciliation
is like a new Mistress, so well they strive to please and be reconcil'd.

But all these pleasures did not satisfy me, there were greater yet behind
which I had not arriv'd to with these fair charmers, and however I liv'd at
Amusement, making a thousand Amours with a hundred of the most Beautiful,
still I had a desire to subdue intirely to my pleasure these two the most hard
to gain, but now I was pretty well se­cur'd of both their hearts and yet
neither knew, they were each others Rivals in mine. They knew one another,
converst, and play'd and walkt to­gether, yet so discreet I was in this Amour
that neither was jealous of the other, nor suspected I lov'd both with an
equal Ardor; when I hapned to be with 'em both I carried myself so equally
Gal­lant that both commended my conduct and ima­gin'd I did it to hide the
secret passion I had for herself, and so many little Arts my Coquet love had
taught me I cou'd with ease manage abundance of intregues at one and the same
time.

But as I said, this did not suffice, nor cou'd the fires, that some more
willing Beauties allay'd, hin­der me from wishing and burning and persuing
those two fair persons with an Ardor that had no appearance of decay from any
others goodness to me, but in my daily visits to'em, I eternally so­licited
[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=34) them to
suffer me to accompany them to that charming place call'd Favors, which is a
very Beautiful Castle rais'd in a Vally. I confest to you that my Coquet Cupid
advis'd me not to go, for fear of attaching myself too much to a place so
extreamly agreeable; the Mountains, that inviron this Castle, are very high
and full of hollow Rocks, which made the scituation very sullen. The Castle
itself was delicately built, and surrounded with tall Trees, so thick that one
cou'd hardly see the Edifice, nor cou'd the Sun-bearns dart throw the gloomy
shade; and eternal Night seem'd to sit there in awful state and pleasure: For
the more obscure this place is and secret from all Eyes, the better and more
acceptable it is to all that enter there, and thô this Vally have many
inhabitants, it appears to have none at all; because they love solitude, and,
banishing all Publick society, con­tent themselves only to be but two in
company together, if there be more they are receiv'd with a very ill welcome,
for a third Person in this place wou'd destroy the Pleasure and the harmony.
The Inhabitants of this Castle never shew them­selves but to those that are
very importune, and then not every day, the Ladies that command there are many
Sisters all of the name of the Castle; and all very fair, and still one more
fair than the other, and when you visit'em you see'em not all at once but by
degrees and the last you behold is the fairest, and by the pleasure you have
in seeing one, you desire to see'em all. For there are no limits to be given
to desire, and as they are [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=35) never seen by
any body altogether, it happens very often that you see but one, and you must
have address and great assiduity, abstinence, and good fortune to obtain one
of these Favors; but the last will cost you much more trouble than all the
rest put together, so very fair, so very nice and coy she is: But when once
obtain'd she brings you to the Palace of intire Pleasure; which is
neighbouring to the Castle of Favors; but I, who wou'd very fain, at once,
have brought to this delicate place both Bellinda and Bellimante, found myself
extream uneasy, because, as I said, only two can be well entertain'd at a
time! I found it against my humour and against the advice of Love to a­bandon
all, and retire with one only, for in de­cency and good manners, those, who go
to this Castle of Favors, are oblig'd to continue there some time; and I
found, I shou'd be extreamly shagrin after a little while with one alone; but
both were obstinate and wou'd not suffer a third: and having been so very
importune with both, I was asham'd to repent and recant all those things I had
said, to persuade them to go, thô in my heart I was very ill satisfi'd I had
not persu'd the counsel, Love had given me not to go to Favors at all; he
soreseeing an inconveniencie in such a retreat, which I, with all my young
desires a­bout me and fond of novelty, c [...]u'd not, so well as he, diseern,
however I had propos'd it with some ardency and wou'd not go back, but resov'd
to make the best advantage of my voyage, and wou'd not declare my regreet till
I cou'd no longer hin­der [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=35) it: So that
Bellimante, yeilding to my Implo­rings, consented next day to go with me to
this retreat of Favors.

Accordingly the next morning we set out for this amiable place; where we
arrived, and find­ing myself all alone, without interruption or fear, with
this very fair Creature, I advanced to a thou­sand. Freedoms which she, with
some resistance, per­mitted me to take: I was all Joy and Transport at every
advance, and still the nearer I approached to the last Favour, the more blest
I imagined my­self; I grew more resolved, and she more feeble: and at last, I
was the Victor and Bellimante the Vi­ctim; I remained some days with her, and
one would have imagined I should have been intirely happy in this place with
one so young and fair: But behold the fickleness of Youth, and Man's nature.

Thô my Heart were full of Passion,

And I found the yeilding Maid

Give a loose to inclination

While her Love her Flame betray'd;

Yet thô all she did impart,

Pain and Anguish prest my Heart.

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=36) Thô I
found her all o'r Charming,

Fond and sighing in my Arms;

Yet my Heart a-new was warming

For Bellinda's unknown Charms;

Thought, if Beauty pleas'd me so,

What must Wit and Beauty too?

And though next day I found myself an hundred times more in Love with
Bellimante than before, yet unless I could possess Bellinda too, I thought
myself miserable: Yet every time she charmed me a-new I was upon the point of
renouncing eternal­ly Bellinda, and sacrificing her to my Passion for
Bellimante: But I did not remain long in that Hu­mour, but every day grew more
and more unre­solved in that point; and as Bellimante grew more fond I grew
more cold; not but I had learnt to say so many kind and soft things in the
time of my real Passion with Silvia, that I found it easie to speak every day
such endearing Words as gave her no doubt of my Heart; nor was willing she
should see to the bottom of it, where she would most cer­tainly have found
Bellinda; yet with such a mix­ture of Passion for herself, that it would have
been hard to have distinguished, which had had the as­cendant there; only my
desire at present was the most considerable for the fair Object I had not yet
possest, and whom I long'd to Vanquish; perhaps, [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=36) as much for the
Glory, as the Pleasure, though my Heart did not at this moment think so.

After some time that I had lived here with Belli­mante, I made some pretext to
leave her for a lit­tle while; she, who was extreamly charmed with that
Solitude, resolved to wait there my return, so that I had some pain in
contriving how I should bring Bellinda to the same Castle as I wished to do;
but it had in it many Mansions and Apartments, and, as I said, so retired from
one another, that it was difficult to come at any time together or to meet:
This consideration made me resolved, and very pressing with Bellinda, to go to
this place, assuring her of such Diversion as she never met with in any other
part of the World: She loved and was not long in persuading, and I had the
Glory to conduct her in spight of all her Wit and Gayety, to this retreat of
Solitude with me; where, unperceived, I obliged her to render me all that Love
could allow, and more than Honour would permit: And I was for some days
extreamly hap­py, and possibly had continued so, (going from one Apartment to
another, and, like the Great Sul­tan, visiting by turns my Beauties,) had not
a ma­licious fate prevented my Grandeur and Pleasure.

It hapned one day that I had sued a repetition of Favours from Bellinda; she
seeming resolved to grant me no more, repenting of those I had taken, and with
a charming Sorrow reproaching me, making me a thousand times more pressing
than before: At last her force growing weaker, her denials fainter, and my
importunities more ra­ging; [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=37) I found her
yeilding, the Lilly in her Face gave place to the Roses, and Love and
Trembling made her Eyes more fair, and just ready to render me all. We saw
approaching us Bellimante, who, having heard how I sometimes past my hours,
re­solved to surprise me in my perfidie; and accor­dingly found us in a gloomy
Arbour with all the Transports of Love in both our Faces, which it was too
late to resettle and hide from this too sen­sible and jealous fair One: In
vain I strove with all the Arguments of Love and Tenderness to appease her,
or, if by any thing I said, I found her incli­ned to pardon me, on the other
side it but served to incense and inrage Bellinda, to whom I had made equal
Vows (at her coming to that place,) of eternal Fidelity. I am not able to
express to you, my dear Lysander, what confusion I found myself in, I divided
my Heart and my Intreaties between 'em, and knew not to which I most ar­dently
meant 'em; I was very sensible, that while I treated both with equal Love and
Respect, that I should gain neither, and yet if what I said to both had been
addrest to any one of 'em, it would have prevailed; and I found it easie to
have kept either, if I would resolve to quit the other; but my heart not
inclining to that, or if it wou'd, not knowing which I shou'd chuse, made me
re­main between 'em both the most out-of-countenan­ced coxcomb, that ever was
taken in the cheats of Love, while both were on either side reproach­ing me
with all the malice and noise imaginable, so that not being able longer to
endure the [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=37) clamour, I took
my flight from 'em both, and ran with all the force I cou'd to a Village
call'd Irre­solution; and where Coquet Love abandon'd me saying that place was
not proper for him.

The Houses of this Village are for the most part not half built, but all
appears very desolate and ruinous: It appertains to a Lady very fantastique of
the same name. She maks a Figure pleasant enough, she never dresses herself,
because she can­not determin what habit to put on; she is ever tormenting
herself, still turning to this side and to that, yet never stirs from the
place, because undetermin'd she knows not whither nor which way to go: And
having so many in her mind re­solves to go to neither; one always sees an
Agi­tation in her Eyes, that keeps them in perpetual motion and fixt on
nothing. You see her perpetu­ally, perplext with a thousand designs in her
head at once, but puts none of them in execution.

I found myself in this place Ambarassed with a thousand confusions and
thoughts, for Bellinda and Bellimante had equally shar'd my soul, and I knew
not for which I shou'd declare; nor whether the Wit and extream good Humour of
the first were more powerful upon my heart, than the Beauty and softness of
the last, so that I was wholly un­able to determin which I shou'd quit, having
the same sentiments for one as for the other, and re­solv'd to abandon both
rather than content myself with one: And the fear of losing one was the
oc­casion of my losing both, in fine I was in the most [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=38) cruel
incertainty in the World. And I cou'd not forbear saying a thousand times to
myself,

When Love shall two fair objects mix,

And in the Heart two passions fix:

'Tis a pleasure too severe,

Cruel Joy we cannot bear.

Too much Love for two I own,

But too little flame for one.

While I was thus perplext betwixt these two vi­olent passions, when no reason
cou'd resolve me which to choose, as I was one day meditating what to do in
this extreamity, a Woman presented her­self to me, whose Beauty was infinitely
transcend­ing all I had ever beheld; she had a noble and Majestick meen, a
most Divine Air, and her charms cast so great a Lustre that I was dazl'd with
Gazing on her; she struck me with so profound a respect at the first sight of
her Glory's, that I cou'd not forbear throwing myself at her feet, imploring I
might be eternally permitted to Adore her; and to become her slave. When
raising me from the ground, and looking on me with Eyes more Majestick than
kind, she said to me in a loud voyce.

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=38)

Fly, Lysidus, this hated Place,

Too long thou'st bin a slave to Love.

Thy youth has yet a nobler Race

In more Illustrious paths to move.

Glory your fonder flame controuls,

Glory, the life of generous Souls.

Once you must Love to learn to live,

'Tis the first lesson youth shou'd learn;

Useful instructions Love will give,

If you avoid too much concern:

Loves flame, thô in appearance bright,

Deceives with false and glittering light.

But, Lysidus, the time is come

You must to Beauty bid adieu;

Recal your wandering passions home,

And only be to Glory true;

She is a Mistress that will last

When all Loves fires are gone and past.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=39) Those
words, repeated to me with an Air haughty and imperious, toucht me to the very
Soul, and made me blush a thousand times with shame to behold myself in that
ridiculous state, al­most reduc'd to the same tenderness for Bellinda and
Bellimante I had before had for Silvia; but I soon found my error and in an
instant became more in Love with Glory than I had ever been in my life.
Insomuch that I resolv'd to leave Irresolution and follow her. I confess at
first it gave my heart som little pain to withdraw and disingage it from so
long and so fond a custom, and I was more than once forc'd to parly thus with
my imtractable and stubborn heart.

Oh! fond remembrance! do not bring

False notions to my easy heart.

And make the foolish tender thing

Think, that with Love it cannot part;

Or dy when e're the charming God

Forsak's his old and kind abode.

And thou, my heart, be calm and Pleas'd,

For better hours thou now shalt see,

Of all thy Anxious torments eas'd

From all thy toyles and slavery free,

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=39) From
Beauties Pride and peevish scorns

From Wits Intregueing false returns.

'Tis Honour now thou shalt persue,

Her dictates only shalt obey;

Yet Beauty en Passant may view

And be with all loves Pleasures Gay,

Quench when you please resistless fires,

But make no business of desires.

Thus, my dear Lysander, following Glory, I soon arriv'd at the extent of the
Island of Love, and there I incounter'd a thousand Beauties, At­tractions,
Graces and Agreements; all which en­deavor'd a new, but in vain, to engage me.
I past by 'em all without any regard only sight, as I be­held 'em with the
remembrance, how once the meanest of those Beauties wou'd have charmd me. I
lookt back on all those happy shades, who had been conscious of my softest
pleasures, and a thou­sand times I sighing bid'em farwel, the Rivers, Springs
and Fountains had my wishes that they might still be true and favor Lovers, as
they had a thousand times done me. These dear remem­berance, you may believe,
stay'd some time with me, yet I wou'd not for an Empire have return'd to 'em
again, nor have liv'd that life over a new I had so long and with so much
pleasure persu'd.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=40) After
this I took a Vessel and put off from that shore, where, thô I had met with
many Misfor­tunes, I had also receiv'd a thousand joys: While it was in view I
found myself toucht with some re­gret, but being fail'd out of sight of it, I
sigh'd no more, but bid adieu to fond Love for ever.

All you Beauties and Attractions,

That make so many hearts submit;

Soft inspirers of affection

Mistresses of dear bought wit.

To whose Empire we resigning

Prove our homage justly due

After all our sighs and whining

Dear delight we bid adieu.

After all your fond Caprices,

All your Arts to seem Divine,

Painting, Patching and your Dresses,

Easy votaryes to incline.

After all your couzening Billets

Sighs and tears, but all untrue,

To your Gilting tricks and quillets,

I for ever bid adieu.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=40)

## 2\. A Miscellany OF POEMS.

### 2.1. To a Fair Lady, sent with a Miscellany of Poems.

FAir Charmer see how various Poets meet

To lay their several Labours at your Feet;

Whose different Fancies different Passions move,

The grinning Satyr, and the smiling Love,

And sure there's somthing that you may approve.

The Volume like a Landskip will appear,

Some parts less Beautiful, some Bright and Clear;

But where Defects i'th Picture you shall spy,

Be pleas'd their want of Lustre to supply,

And gild it with a Beam from your bright Eye.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=41)

### 2.2. To Urania in Mourning.

SEE where she sits in mourning Robes aray'd,

Like Night's bright Goddess shining thro' a shade.

What Charms has this fair Mourner that can make

The sable dress of Grief such Beauty take.

Dull Custom has prescrib'd this sad Attire,

When Sorrow reigns, and Beauty wou'd retire.

But Sorrows self when by Vrania worn,

Looks, fair and charming as the rising Morn.

Thus when descending Angels would disguise

Their bright celestial Form from human Eyes;

Their Splendor thro' the borrow'd shape will shine,

And we perceive an Excellence Divine.

But while this lovely mourning Nymph we view,

We sigh, weep, languish, and turn Mourners too;

Yet with this difference, that while others weep

For Friends expir'd, and lodg'd in Death's calm Sleep,

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=41) A restless
waking Passion makes our Grief

That ne're can dye, nor ever hope Relief:

Yet would Vrania from her Sorrows spare

To my Distress one balmy pitying Tear;

That Charity wou'd make me bless my Pain,

And never wish to be at Ease again.

### 2.3. SONG.

AS wretched, vain, and indiscreet

Those Matches I deplore,

Whose Bartering Friends in Counsel meet,

To huddle in a Wedding Sheet

Some miserable Pair that never met before.

Poor Love of no account must be,

Tho' ne're so fixt and true,

No Merit but in Gold they see,

So Portion and Estate agree,

No matter what the Bride and Bridegroom do.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=42)

curst may all covetous Husbands be

That Wed with such Design,

And Curst they are; For while they ply

Their Wealth, some Lover by the By

Reaps the true Bliss, and digs the richer Mine.

### 2.4. On Beauty.  
A PINDARIC.

SAY all ye Judging wise,

Who into Nature's Secrets dive,

And can her unknown Reasons give

From whence great Beauties wond'rous power do's rise,

Whose Universal Tyranny

Subdues the Tributary Would, and brings

In equal Fetters Slaves and Kings,

To languish in a soft Captivity.

It triumphs o're the Strong and Proud,

It calms the Stormy and the Loud.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=42) The
stubborn and the frozen Cold dissolves,

Perverts the wise Mans best Resolves.

The Genius of the Wits, and Braves imploys

In the important Subject of its Praise.

The Fool and Coward too inspires

This with prevailing Wit, that with Heroick Fires.

Iudah's wise King, when he

Had studied Nature o're and o're,

Surveying all her hidden Store,

Even from the Reed to the triumphant Tree,

Thro' all the spacious Universal round,

Soft Beauty was the only good he found

Worth setting his select Affections on.

'Twas there he bounded his Delights,

His chearful Days, and charming Nights,

On that most perfect Bliss beneath the Sun.

Beauty alone inspir'd him with the Theme

Of the bright Virgins of Hierusalem.

From that alone his Divine Raptures sprung,

Beauty his Business was, and Love was all his Song.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=43)

When Alexander had his Conquest hurl'd

O're all the yielding Tributary World,

And found no more that could afford

New Business for his Glory, and his Sword,

'Tis said, He wept; but when the Persian Maid

(With greater Charms) the Hero had survey'd,

He found the toil of Conquering her much more

Than all his worthless Worlds before.

He sigh'd and bow'd, lookt pale and red by turns,

To serve her was his whole delight,

Thinks it as brave, while thus he burns

Under soft Venus, as rough Mars to fight.

And Sieges lays of Sighs and Tears,

And tells soft Stories of his Heart,

Of restless Nights, and Days of Cares,

Of Pains, and Flames, and wild Despairs,

Of bleeding Wounds and Smart,

And found that no Fatigues of War

Were half so great as vanquishing the Fair!

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=43) But oh, no
Victory cou'd so Charming prove,

As that of the dear Maids confessing Love!

David, whose harmonious String

Cou'd Saul's infernal Tempest calm,

And by the Musicks strange mysterious Balm,

Appeas'd the Frenzies of a raging King;

Yet stranger Charms in the fair Hittite found,

Which kindled to a softer Fire

His cold and languishing Desire.

And strugling Virtue in strong Fetters bound,

That pow'rful Aid was useless now,

When yet more pow'rful Beauty was in view,

He found no Musick cou'd appease

The troubled Spirits her fair Eyes did raise.

The Musick of her Voice did but inspire

A more tormenting Fire;

So great a Sympathy

There is between soft Love and Harmony.

In the wild darkness of Idolatry

Did Clodovaeus see

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=44) 'Twas more
than vulgar Light

That made the fair Clotilda look so bright,

When from her conquering Eyes

Surpriz'd, he saw such sparkling Flames arise,

And therefore wisht to know

The Spring from whence such streams of Light did flow.

Why then shou'd I,

Ye learned Stoicks tell me why?

Think it unworthy of my Name

To own a Generous and a Noble Flame,

Since Love's Almighty Pow'r

To whom the Young, the Great and Brave,

The Wise, the Politick and Grave,

Have bow'd to as their Conqueror.

What reasonable Man desires to pass

For one more great and good than David was?

Or who for Wisdom ever hop'd Renown

Like wise, like sacred Solomon?

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=44) Or who in
glorious Arms cou'd ever dare

Like the fam'd Son of Iupiter?

Or if thou ly'st beneath the common Curse

Of being Bad, what than a Heathen worse;

Yet Clodovaeus by Beauties piercing fight

Was brought from his Egyptian Night,

Directed by so fair a Hand,

He cou'd not miss the promis'd Land.

Then ye fond Stoicks flie

Your Learn'd, your Dull-School Foolery,

And lay your Speculation by,

Or you are greater Fops than I.

Lay by your Books, and this believe

By charming Beauty 'tis alone,

That true and false are to be known,

'Tis Beauty is alone Superlative.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=45)

### 2.5. SONG.

FReedom is a real Treasure,

Love a Dream, all false and vain,

Short, uncertain is the Pleasure,

Sure and lasting is the Pain.

A sincere and tender Passion

Some ill Planet over-rules,

Ah how blind is Inclination,

Fate and Women dote on Fools.

### 2.6. SONG.

AH how Dull it is to love,

Ah how Dull is past Desire,

How insipidly we move

In the flames of dying Fire.

Maidens if you will be Wise,

Rather dye than lose the Prize.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=45)Ah what
Angel things are Men

Ere the last Desires obtained,

But alas are Devils when

Cold forc'd Kisses are but fained.

Maidens ah be warn'd by me,

Rather Dye than Conquer'd be.

### 2.7. To the Heroick Antonia.

Madam,

WHen first I saw your Conquering Face,

You appear'd so Charming, and so full of Grace,

My Soul was into a new Wonder wrought,

'Which took increase from every look and thought.

In all your Actions all the Virtues shin'd,

And every Word confest your generous Mind.

The Number of such gallant Maids are few,

Our Ages Birth has but produc'd us two,

The fam'd Astrea, and more famous you.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=46)Thou
Monarch of your Sex alone dost Reign,

And their lost Glory Nobly dost regain;

Thou shewst the Paths that do to Honour guide,

How to be Great without the Vice of Pride.

That vanity of a Spirit basely born,

Thy Nobler Flights thy Sexes Arts do scorn.

In thy gay Temper more true Graces lie,

Than all their boasted fond Formality.

Would they arrive at an Immortal Fame,

And at the Amazonian Glory's aim,

They must your generous Presidents persue,

Tho' still alas they must submit to you.

With the learn'd Pen of some fam'd ancient Wit,

In thy high Praise a Volume might be writ;

But humbler I with Blushes do confess,

The Muses never did my Fancy bless

To dip in Helicon have no pretence,

And aim no higher than to praise with Sense;

Since at your Feet no Scepters I can lay,

Let a mean Wreath of Flowers the Tribute pay.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=46)

### 2.8. To Laurinda.

PRoduce aspiring Muse thy Noblest strain,

To sing the Charmer of our Court and Plain,

No common one Laurinda's Praise can fit

Empress of Beauty, Patroness of Wit.

'Twere Sacrilege this Tribute to defer,

For Wit was born and flourishes with her.

She makes Wits Court where ere she do's repair,

The Muses and the Sacred Train are there.

Where ere she moves the Graces lead the way,

And just Devotion to their Goddess pay.

This is the she, whose Praise we must Indite,

Transcending mortal Verse, and common Flight.

Here then industrious Muse, and understand

The vast important Task thou hast in hand.

Fetch me the Beauties of the blooming Spring,

The richest Odors spicy Gales can bring.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=47)All
Nature's scatter'd Glories join'd in one,

A Present to the bright Laurinda's Throne.

The Smiles that did the Infant World adorn,

The fairest Lustre of the Rising Morn,

The Calm, the Joy that breaking Day inspires,

When it to Anthems wakes the fether'd Quires,

The Souls of Stars are yet more pure and bright,

Abstracted Beams, and Empyrean Light.

The Pride of Halcyon Seas, unclouded Air,

All these my Muse with wond'rous skill prepare

A Diadem for bright Laurinda's hair.

Desist deluded Muse, we vainly toil,

All these will prove but fair Laurinda's Foil.

In vain thou seekst abroad the blooming Year,

The Beauties of the Spring are all in her.

All Nature's scatter'd Glories thou wilt find

Already center'd in her Form and Mind.

The Smiles that did the Infant World adorn,

Less bright than those that on her Face are worn.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=47) Her
Presence Joy and Summer calm, supplies,

And Day is always breaking in her Eyes,

Herself the sweetest Anthem will inspire,

And teach us to excel the fether'd Quire.

Her Charms excel the pride of Earth and Air,

No Sea-born Venus e're was half so fair.

Thus slender Muse thy daring Course is crost.

And in the Ocean of Perfection lost.

Yet somthing thou art still oblig'd to say,

Thy grateful Offering on her Altar lay,

And own at least the Debt thou canst not pay.

Seize the Occasion, and this Boon obtain

To be the humblest Waiter in her Train.

### 2.9. On a Lady singing.

HOw like Elizium is the Grove

When chaste Dorinda sings of Love,

It charms the troubled Soul to rest,

And makes a Calm in every Breast,

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=48)With
various kinds of Harmony

She strikes at once the Ear and Eye;

So soft a Voice, and she so Fair,

Gives double sweetness to the Air.

The wretched Strephon dumb with Pain

And Grief, too heavy to complain

When young Dorinda tunes her Voice,

Forgets his Woes, and dreams of Joys,

Ah lovely Charmer be so kind

To ease somtimes a tortur'd Mind,

His Groans with gentle Sighs controul,

And breathe a Calm into my Soul.

### 2.10. To Mr. W.

WHY this talking still of Dying,

Why this dismal Look and Groan,

Leave fond Lover, leave your Sighing,

Let these fruitless Arts alone,

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=48)Love's the
Child of Joy and Pleasure,

Born of Beauty, nurst with Wit,

Much amiss you take your measure,

This dull whining way to hit.

Tender Maids you fright from loving

By th' effect they see in you.

If you wou'd be truly moving,

Eagerly the Point persue.

Brisk and gay appear in Woing,

Pleasant be if you wou'd please;

All this Talking, and no Doing,

Will not Love, but Hate, increase.

### 2.11. Armida: Or, The Fair Gill.

NOT Circe nor Medea had such Art,

Or pow'rful Charms to captivate a Heart;

Nor Syren's Voices with so pleasing sound,

Lull those asleep whom they design to wound.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=49)For a new
Conquest all her Skill she tries,

But yet by different ways to gain the Prize,

As Time and Humors fit, Her Looks appear

Bashful somtimes, and full of Virgin fear.

Then earnest and lascivious as she finds

Her Beauty work upon her Lovers minds,

When e're the bashful Youth fears his Success:

She gives the Trembler hopes by soft Address,

Advances with more sweetness in her Face,

And fires him with some kind peculiar Grace,

Sooths his fond Heart, and dissipates his Fear,

And thaws the Ice her Scorns had gather'd there.

But if the God of Love infuse his Dart,

And captivate a bold and forward Heart.

Her Eyes assume their state, and her neglect

Creates a doubtful Fear mixt with respect.

Yet lest, too much of Scorn produce Despair,

Some glance of kindness in her Eyes appear,

While hardly gain'd she makes the blessing dear.

But still the Cloud she cunningly declines,

And fits her Looks to second her Designs.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=49) Somtimes
she seems to smother Sighs with Pain,

And calls up Tears, then turns 'em back again.

As if the softning Tide she wou'd not shew,

But that in spite of all her Pride, they flow.

And all to make a thousand easie Hearts

To weep in earnest by her coz'ning Arts.

And with the flames of Pity tempers so

The Darts of Love, none can resist the Blow.

And when she finds a Lover coming on,

Yet not so fast to be too soon undone,

There all her Arts of Languishment she tries,

Sweetens her whispering Voice, softens her Eyes,

Touches his hand as if it were by chance,

And yields herself to every kind advance.

Looks on his Eyes, then strait declines her own,

And seems to love, as not to have it shewn.

And having thus proceeded in her Art,

Breaks forth, as if she cou'd not guard her Heart.

Too long, she cries, I have supprest my Fire,

Take all my Heart, and all Love can desire.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=50)Thus while
she softly speaks, and sweetly smiles,

And doubly charms the Senses by these Wiles,

She do's a Faith in strongest Souls create,

And gains a Conquest in despite of Fate.

Ah cruel Love! the Honey and the Gall,

Which thou afford'st, do equally Enthral;

And all our Ills, and all our Cures from Thee,

Are mortal to us in the same degree:

If any of Inconstancy complain

Of broken Vows and her unjust disdain,

She faines herself unpractis'd in Loves Arts,

And that she wants the charmes should vanquish hearts.

And looks with such a Blushing Modesty,

As undeceives your fancy'd Injury.

And thus the Thorne lies hid that she does bear

Under the Roses which her Beauties wear.

So in the earliest rise of day, we spy

The ruddy Morning mingled with the Sky.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=50)While
shame and anger in her looks appear,

Both seem confus'dly mixt together there

Thus in delusive Dream the time being spent,

Weary with cozenage and discontent,

Even hope itself he scarcely now retaines,

But like a Hunter at the last remaines,

Who having to no purpose spent the day,

At last loses the track of the lost Prey.

Such were the Practices and such the Arts,

By which she can insnare ten thousand hearts;

Or rather such the pow'rful armes do prove,

By which she conquers and makes slaves to Love.

### 2.12. Predictions for Saturday next.

ON Saturday the twenty fourth,

(The wind fresh blowing from the North,)

Two glorious Stars their Spheres shall change,

And into other Climats range.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=51)Then tell
me, Muse, and tell me true,

What Alterations shall ensue:

Predict at least, what weather shall

Our Dark Horizon then befal.

Tempests and Earth-quakes, I presage,

Shall at that Dreadful season rage.

A Cloud of dark desponding Fears,

A storm of Sigh's and slood of Teares;

And many a wretched Lovers heart

Be wreckt and torne, when they depart.

### 2.13. To Astrea, on her sending me a Bottle of Orange-floure Water.

COu'd I but half so rich a Verse invent,

As was the Cordial which Astrea sent;

My Muse herself the Messenger wou'd prove,

Born on the wings of Poetry and Love:

But all the Muses spring can ne're repay

The Present my Astrea did convey.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=51)Now,
Strephon, hope, Astrea does incline

To Pity thee, since Cordials so Divine

Are only sit for hearts that bleed, like mine.

### 2.14. To Cloris going into the Country.

OH, tell me Cloris, tell me, why

You take delight to see men dy.

And, Parthian-like, kill, while you fly.

Return, if not for charity,

At least for Pride, return to see

The Trophies of your Victory.

Can you such crueltie persue?

And make your Eyes those mischeifs do,

Which they despise, or fear to rue?

Ah Nymph, if you persist to take

This course, and every place forsake,

Assoon as you a Lover make.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=52)No
Residence for Cloris can be found,

Since where soere she goes she's sure to wound.

### 2.15. SONG.

IN vain does Hymen with Religious Vows

Oblige his Slaves to wear his chaines with ease,

A Privilege alone that Love allows,

Tis Love alone can make our Fetters please.

The Angry Tyrant lays his Yoke on all,

Yet in his flercest Rage is charming still:

Officious Hymen comes whener'e we call,

But haughty Love comes only when He will.

### 2.16. To a Lady, (whom he never saw, nor had any description of,) to prove
he Loves her.

By a Person of Quality.

BRightest of Virgins! Whose high Race and Name

Bespeaks you worthy of the Noblest flame,

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=52)Armes you
with power Divine, that can dispense

Its Influence beyond the reach of sence,

Making us frame of you, as Heaven above,

Idea's of our Ignorance and Love.

Disdain not, fairest, such Devotions then

As the best worshippers offer to Heav'n.

Nor think 'em feign'd, since things above do grow

(Concealed and distant) more admir'd below.

Absence creates esteem, and makes that fire

(Which the Suns near approaches quench) aspire,

While those who do enjoy perpetual rays

Curse those bright Beames that Crown our Halcyon day.

Know then, my Passion Real is and Great,

Not such as from dull sence derives its heate,

But Sympathy; that Royal Law that binds

In a close vnion things of different kinds,

That secret charm of Nature which inspires

The whole creation with Harmonious fires.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=53)Heads
Cupids Arrows, guides his Roving Bow,

Extends its Empire o're all things below.

Since then you know I Love, how much, and how,

If of my Passion you still disallow,

Know then the Lot is cast, the Gods approve

The Fates Decree, and have pronounc'd, I Love?

### 2.17. Song by the same hand.

SOme Brag of there Cloris, and some of their Phyllis,

Some cry up their Celia's and bright Amarillis,

Thus Poets and Lovers their Mistresses Dub,

And Goddesses frame from the Wash-boul and Tub;

But away with these fictions, and counterfait folly,

There's a thousand more charmes in the name of my Dolly.

I cannot describe nor her Beauty and Wit,

Like Manna to each she's the Relishing Bit

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=53)She alone
by enjoyment the more does prevail,

And still with fresh pleasure does hoist up your sail,

N [...]y had you a surfeit took of all others

One Look of my Doll Strait your stomach recovers.

But when I consider her Humour and feature,

I'm apt to suspect she's inclin'd to the creature,

What contrary winds in my Breast then arise,

What hopes and what fear and what doubt do surprise?

What Storms do I feel of trouble and care,

While my wishes themselves at variance are?

For somtimes I wish her more cruel, less fair,

But then I should either not Love, or despair:

I'd have her to Love too, not Amorous be,

I'd have her be coy, but kinder to me.

But should she in me this Humour discover,

She'd quickly discard her Impertinent Lover.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=54)

### 2.18. Sleeping on her fair hand.

IF custom those for Poets dos allow,

That once have slept upon Parnassus brow,

Why may not I to that Ambition grow,

Who Slept upon this fairer Hill of Snow.

At least in this our fancies do agree

They of their Mountain write, and I of thee.

And as they beg the favor of the nine,

To match their noblest flights I aske but thine.

### 2.19. To Gloriana on saying I had a tough heart.

FIrst let the Lyon dread the bleating Sheep,

The winds be husht, the Sea's and Fountains sleep.

The day's bright Empire to the night resign,

And water freez beneath the burning Line,

These contradictions sooner shall be found

Than Gloriana's Beauty fail to wound.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=54)Allow,
fair charmer, that (as you have said,)

My heart were of the toughest Temper made,

What privilege can thence to me befal,

'Gainst those prevailing powers, that conquer all.

If feebler charmes the force of Love can shew,

Then how much deeper must his Arrows goe

When Gloriana's Eye-brow is the Bow.

### 2.20. Sent with Ovids Epistles, to a fair Lady.

AIuster Present sure was never made,

Than these Epistles to your hand convey'd.

For there the Loves of Ladys most appear.

These cuplets only Strephons Passion bear.

A Passion true as theirs, more full of heart

And brings in substance, what it wants in Art.

But if in slighted Flames they ever burn'd

Their wrongs upon our sex are now return'd

For never they their Lovers did persue

With half that Passion that I sigh for you;

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=55)Of Love,
the only Picture there you see

But have the true Original in me.

Your Justice therefore must this truth approve,

They better write of Love, I better Love.

### 2.21. Sent with a Basket of Fruit:

THe Streets with flowry Garlands we shou'd croun

To welcom fair Astrea to the Town.

Officious Cupids at her feet shou'd lay

The fairest Treasures of the Blooming May;

But now we seek the Summers store in vain,

For these Autumnal Fruits alone remain,

Which mourning Loves shou'd to Astrea bear,

As Legacies of the departed year.

But when the little Messengers shall spye

The Charming Nymph, transported they will cry,

No more my Mates, your Winter Presents bring,

For we have found the Goddess of the Spring.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=55)

### 2.22. Love cannot be indifferent.

INdifference in Love? it cannot be,

'Tis contradiction to the last degree?

Cool temp'rate Passion is an empty name,

And greater nonsence than a freezing flame:

Hope, fear, and joy may with degrees dispense,

These Passions but by halves affect our sense,

But when we love, 'tis still with violence.

And that dull Shepherd, who this truth denies

Sure never must have seen Astrea's eyes;

Half Beauties may perhaps half Passions move,

But She still wounds with all the force of Love:

Yet whilst such rigorous flames she does inspire,

Preserves herself Unmov'd by any fire:

Who gaze upon her Charms are sure to burn,

And are as certain to have no return,

Yet ne're repent them of their destiny,

But count it greater Bliss for her to dye

Than in the Armes of other Beauties lye.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=56)

### 2.23. To Astrea, On her absence, during which I cou'd not write.

IF e're I had a sparke o'the Poets flame

From fair Astrea's quickning Beams it came.

And since the meanest Writer will aspire

To call his faculty a sacred fire;

Why may not I presume that mine is so,

That from a cause so excellent did grow?

But its not strange, since it was born so high

That like an earthly vapour it shou'd dye.

No, no, Astrea, tis my greatest Pride,

That in appearance for a while it dy'd:

This seeming weakness proves its birth was true,

And that the noble flame was caus'd by you:

'Twas in your absence, that my Muse lay dead

But at the sight of you lifts up its head:

She wakes Astrea's Graces to rehearse,

And pay the tribute of a thankful verse;

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=56)So the
Springs Bird, the Swallow's seen no more

When Winters stormy Blasts begin to roar.

But with the Springs return, she sings again

And takes her nimble flight o're ev'ry Plain.

Yet tho the Poets fire grew cold, my breast

Retain'd one flame, that cou'd not be supprest,

A flame, that like the other did arise,

And first was kindled by Astrea's Ey's.

But, This no Absence can destroy, 'twill burn

Thô with despair opprest and sure of no Return.

### 2.24. To the most accomplisht Heroick, and incom­parable, the Lady
Antonia.

Madam,

YOur charming sex, tis true, can only claim

By native right th' exalted Poets flame.

But nature has so frugally to most

Dispens'd her gifts, that few perfection boast.

Beauty for one she thinks a Portion fit,

Where Beauty failes she makes amends with wit.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=57)But where
her niggard hand does neither grant,

A generous soul supplys the double want.

On all the rest her favours singly fall,

Antonia only has engrost them all.

Thus when my Muse wou'd shew herself with Grace

I bid her Copy from Antonia's face,

And when with wit she wou'd my verse inspire,

Take from your Eyes the brisk enlivening fire.

Or if she wou'd present an Empress part,

Than to consult Antonia's generous heart.

Oh! had Apelles, when he Venus drew

And robb'd the Sex to make his Picture true,

Had the great Artist once Antonia seen,

Once view'd her Beauty and Heroick Meen,

The whole sex to his Aid he need not call

To glean the several charmes—

For in your Person he had found them all.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=57)

### 2.25. Sent with Cowleys workes to Astrea.

THe Gentle Cowley, in a mournful strain,

Once of Injurious fortune did complain.

But thought not then, that our obliging times

Wou'd recompence his unrewarded Rhimes;

For now presented at Astrea's feet

His noble Muse her full reward does meet:

The Mistress, whose bright charmes such fame did gain,

Was but a fair creation of his Brain.

And nature griev'd, to see the Art of thought

Exceed the finest Pieces, she had wrought,

Resolv'd to try the best her Power cou'd do,

Expressing all his fancy'd charmes in you:

Since then in you those reall beauties live,

That to those Poems such applause cou'd give,

No wonder that I feel a flame for you,

Beyond what Cowley e're describ'd or knew,

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=58)Think
therefore, when his tender lines you see,

Your self the Mistress, and the Lover me.

### 2.26. To my Heart.

WHat ail'st thou, oh thou trembling thing

To Pant and Languish in my Breast,

Like Birds that fain wou'd try the callow wing

And leave the Downy nest?

Why hast thou fill'd thyself with thought

Strange, new, fantastick as the Air?

Why to thy Peaceful Empire hast thou brought

That restless Tyrant, Care?

But oh alas, I ask in vain

Thou answer'st nothing back again,

But in soft sighs Amintor's name.

Oh thou betrayer of my liberty,

Thou fond deceiver, what's the youth to thee!

What has he done, what has he said

That thus has conquer'd or betray'd?

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=58)He came
and saw but 'twas by such a light,

As scarce distinguisht day from night;

Such as in thick-grown shades is found

When here and there a peircing Beam

Scatters faint spangl'd Sun-shine on the ground

And casts about a melancholy gleam,

But so obscure I cou'd not see

The charming Eyes that wounded thee,

But they, like gems, by their own light

Betray'd their value through the gloom of Night.

I felt thee heave at every look,

And stop my Language as I spoke.

I felt thy Blood fly upward to my Face,

While thou unguarded lay

Yeilding to every word, to every Grace,

Fond to be made a prey.

I left thee watching in my Eyes

And listning in my Eare.

[[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=59)Discovering
weakness in thy sighs

Uneasy with thy fear.

Suffering Imagination to deceive,

I found thee willing to believe,

And with the treacherous shade conspire,

To let into thyself a dangerous fire.

Ah foolish wanderer, say, what woudst thou do.

If thou shou'dst find at second view,

That all thou fanciest now were true,

If thou shou'dst find by day those charms,

Which thus observ'd threaten undoing harms.

If thou shou'dst find that awful meen,

Not the effects of first Address,

Nor of my conversation disesteem

But noble native fullenness;

If thou shouldst find that soft good natur'd voyce

(Unused to insolence and noise,)

Still thus adorn'd with modesty.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=59)And his
minds virtues with his wit agree,

Tell me, thou forward lavish fool,

What reason cou'd thy fate controul,

Or save the ruin of thy Soul?

Cease then to languish for the coming day,

That may direct his wandering steps that way,

When I again shall the loud form survey.

### 2.27. DIALOGVE  
Thirsis and Clarona,

Thirsts.

HAil, Clarona, clear as Morning

In its brightest gay attire,

Love and Beauties cheif adorning

Mistress of all soft desire;

Hail, Clarona, Joy of Swains,

Charmer of the Fields and Plaines.

Clarona.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=60)

Thirsis, often have you crown'd me

In the Shady Cyprus Grove,

And your flowing sighs did wound me,

When you wept and talk't of Love.

And when for kisses you have strove,

Thô I cha'ft and thô I cry'd,

With much ado you were deny'd.

But, Thirsis, if you will be true,

I can Love as well as you,

Thô once I said I wou'd deceive ye,

Yet, my Thirsis, dont believe me.

Thirsis.

Oh, Clarona, Joy attend thee

All the Gods and powers defend thee;

Sweeter are thy words, than Song,

Melting Musick's in thy Tongue.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=60)

Chorus.

Now we'll chant, we'll live and love

And welcome in the Spring.

Our Pleasures we will still improve,

In every Thicket, Shade and Grove,

With Love and Musicks trembling string.

### 2.28. SONG.

BEneath a cool shade, where some here have been,

Convenient for Lovers, most pleasant and green;

Alexis and Cloris lay pressing soft Flowers,

With Kissing and Loving they past the dull hours.

She close in his Arms with her head on his brest,

And fainting with pleasure; you guess at the rest:

She blusht and she sigh'd with a Ioy beyond measure,

All ravisht with Billing and dying with Pleasure.

But while thus in Transports extended they lay,

A Hansom young Shepherd was passing that way!

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=61)She saw
him and cry'd—oh Alexis, betray'd!

Oh what have you done—you have ruin'd a Maid;

But the Shepherd being modest discreetly past by,

And fest 'em again at their leisure to dy.

And often they Languish'd with Ioy beyond measure.

All Ravisht with Billing and dying with Pleasure.

### 2.29. Strephon to his three Mistresses.

SEE, fair Astrea, what your charms can do,

To make a Lover and a Poet two.

Where yours and Gloriana's Powerful Beams

With Beautiful Eliza are the Theams,

The heaviest fancy to a Height must soar,

So easie 'tis to write when we adore.

Each like a Planet singly and apart

Can thro' the Soul your piercing fancy's dart;

How strangely then must you affect the mind,

When thus in Glorious constellation joyn'd?

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=61)Ah! too
like Planets each her powr employs,

Bright while she wounds; and shines while she destroys.

Each is the dazling object of desire,

But oh! alike creates a hopeless fire.

Astrea, alwaies Airy, Witty, Gay,

As Nymphs that by Diana's fountain play,

Against th' assaults of Love her heart maintains,

And ne're regards the sighs of dying Swains.

In vain I gaze on Gloriana's Eyes

Already made another Shepherds prize.

One truely happy Swain injoys intire

Those precious charms for which the rest Expire.

And thô Eliza's free, I'm wretched still:

For what availes the powr without the will.

How strange a fate ha's Love for me decreed,

For one I burn, and for other Bleed,

Dy for the third, and yet with none succeed.

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=62)

### 2.30. To the Fam'd Antonia, on her Dwelling.

THou Glory of the Age, best of thy kind,

An Angels fabrick, and an Angels mind.

Thou, whose Heroick vertues may atone

For all the vice thy frailer sex have shewn:

To more than common greatness thou wer't born

No scanty Glories did thy fame adorn,

Thy Soul all Man; soft Woman all thy Form.

At once his Arms possess, who thee embrace,

A Heroin Venus, and a Love-sick Mars.

All that thy sex cou'd ever render fair

All that fond man thinks worthy of his care,

In thy bright Mind and Body center'd are,

Some power Divine still dwells upon thy Tongue,

And all thou speak'st is one Immortal Song;

[[Page 45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=62)Angels and
Gods of Love do listning sit,

Charm'd with the Musick of thy voyce and wit.

A wit uncircumscrib'd by femal rules,

That nice, that dull, excuse for silent Fooles.

You never speak, but like the sacred Word

It does a blessing to mankind afford;

Use and instruction tis, that never fails,

A Rhetorick, that in spight of force prevailes▪

Generous as nature, when first Spring she bred,

And o're the new-born World her Bounties shed,

Like Heaven dispensing goodness all a round,

And thy large Soul, like that, admits no bound.

Oh hadst thou liv'd in those Illustrious days,

When Rome did Statues to vast Merits raise,

Thine in their Temples had Triumphant stood,

And found an equal worship with some God.

Fondly they now adore their Portia's name,

Who for one single wound atchiev'd such fame,

When 'twas but female cunning at the best,

To buy the secret from her Husbands breast.

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=63) 'Twas
Lust of curiosity alone,

Thy undesigning valor's all thy own.

Born in thy mighty Soul, and lives and Reigns

Scorning returns of mercenary gains.

Had'st thou bin Portia, thou had'st farther gone,

And not content the great design t'have known

Had'st help't the Generous youth the deed to do,

And 'mongst the number fixt thy Dagger two;

She but th' indulgent Wife exprest alone,

But thou much more the Wife and Friend had'st shewn.

And with a just disdain of Tyrannie

Assisted in the noble Victory,

On thy firm faith great Brutus might rely,

Who seeing him conquer'd cou'd as bravely dy:

Let Rome adore recorded Portia's fame,

While Britain boast's alone thy mightier na▪

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=63)

### 2.31. SONG.

ALL Ioy to mortals! Ioy anol mirth on occasion.

Eternal Io's sing,

The Gods of Love descend to Earth

Their Darts have lost the sting.

The Youth shall now complain no more

On Silvias needless scorn,

But she shall Love, if he Adore;

And melt when he shall Burn.

The Nymph no longer shall be shy,

But leave the gilting Road;

And Daphne now no more shall fly

The wounded panting God!

But all shall be serene and fair,

No sad complaints of Love

Shall fill the gentle whispering Air;

No Ecchoing sighs the Grove.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=64)

Beneath the shade's young Strephon lies,

Of all his wish possest,

Gazing on Silvia's charming Eyes,

Whose Soul is there confest.

All soft and sweet the Maid appears,

With looks that know no Art;

And tho' she yield with trembling fears,

She yeilds with all her Heart.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=64)

### 2.32. On an ungrateful and undeserving Mistress, whom he cou'd not help
Loving.  
Being a Paraphrastical Translation of Ovid's 10th Elegie Lib. 3. Amorum.

I Have too long endur'd her guilty scorn,

Too long her falsness my fond love has born:

My freedom and my Wit at length I claim,

Be gon, base Passion! dy, unworthy flame!

My lifes sole torment, and my honours stain,

Quit this tir'd heart and end my lingring pain.

I have resolv'd to be myself once more;

Long banisht reason to her rights restore.

And throw off Loves Tyrannick sway, that still incroching powr.

My growing shame I see at last, thô late,

And my past follies both despise and hate;

Hold out, my heart, nor let her Beauti's move,

Be constant in thy Anger, as thy Love.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=65)Thy
present pains shall give thee future ease,

As bitter Potions cure, thô they displease.

'Tis for this end, for freedom more assur'd,

I have so long such shameful pains endur'd.

Like a scorn'd slave before her door I lay,

And proud repulses suffer'd every day.

Without complayning, banisht from her sight,

On the cold ground I spent the tedious night.

While some glad Rival in her Arms did lye,

Glutted with Love and surfeited with Joy.

Thence have I seen the tir'd Adulterer come,

Dragging a weak exhausted Carkass home;

And yet this curse a blessing I esteem,

Compar'd to that of being seen by him!

By him descry'd attending in the street,

May my Foes onely such disgraces meet.

What toyl and time has this false Woman cost,

How much of unreturning Youth has for her sake bin lost?

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=65)How long
did I, where fancy, led or fate,

Unthank'd, unminded, on her Rambles waite;

Her steps, her looks, were still by mine persu'd,

And watch'd by me, she charm'd the gazing crowd.

My diligent Love and over-fond desire

Has bin the means to kindle Others fire.

What need I mention every little wrong,

Or curse the softness of her soothing Tongue:

The private love-signs that in publick pass

Between her and some common staring Ass,

The Coqutes Arts her faithless heart allows,

Or tax her with a thousand broken vowes.

I hear she's sick and with wild haste I run,

Officious haste, and visit Importune.

Entring, my Rival on her bed I see,

The Politique sickness onely was to me,

With this and more oft has my Love been try'd,

Some other Coxcomb let her now provide,

To bear her jilting and maintayn her pride.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=66)My
batter'd Bark has reach'd the Port at last,

Nor fears again the billows, it has past.

Cease your soft Oaths and that still ready showre,

Those once dear words have lost their wonted Power.

In vain you flatter, I am now no more

That easy fool you found me heretofore.

Anger and Love a doubtful fight maintain,

Each strive by turns my staggering heart to gain

But what can long against Loves Power contend?

My Love, I fear, will Conquer in the end.

I'll do what e're I can to hate you still;

And if I Love, know 'tis against my will.

So the Bull hates the Plowmans Yoke to wear,

Yet what he hates his stubborn neck must bear.

Her Manners oft my indignation raise,

But streight her Beauty the short storm always.

Her Life I loath, her Person I adore,

Much I condemn her, but I Love her more:

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=66)Both with
her and without her, I'm in pain,

And rage to lose what I shou'd blush to gain,

Uncertain yet at what my wishes aim:

Loth to abandon Love, or part with Fame.

That Angel-Form ill suits a Soul all sin,

Ah! be less fair without, or more within.

When those soft smiles my yeilding powers invade,

In vain I call her Vices to my Ayd.

Thô now disdaining the disguise of Art,

In my esteem her conduct claims no part,

Her Face a natural right has to my heart.

No crimes so black are to deform her Eyes,

Those Clouds must scatter when these Suns shall rise.

Enough, fair Conquerour, the day's your own;

See at your feet Lov's Uanquish'd Rebel thrown.

By those dear Joys, Joys dear thô they are past,

When in the kindest links of Love we held each other fast.

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=67)By the
injur'd Gods, your false Oaths did profane,

By all those Beauties that inspire disdain,

By that Lov'd face from the whole sex elect,

To which I all my Vows and Pray'rs direct.

And equal with a Power divine respect,

By every feature of a form so fine,

And by those Eyes that charm and dazle mine,

Spare from new triumph, cherish without Art

This ever faithful, this too tender, heart.

A heart, that was respectful while it strove,

But yeilding is all blind impetuous Love.

Live as you please, torment me as you will,

Still are you fair, and I must Love you still,

Think only if with just and clement Reign,

A willing subject you wou'd chuse to gain,

Or drag a Conquer'd Vassal in a chain.

But to what ever conduct you incline

Do, suffer, be, what my worst fears divine;

You are, you ought, you must, you shall be Mine.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=67)Reason,
for ever the vain strife give o're,

Thy cruel wisdom I can bear no more;

Let me indulge this one soft Passions rule,

Curb vexing Sence, and be a happy fool.

With ful-spread Sayls the tempting gale obey,

That down Loves-current drives me fast away.

### 2.33. On the Death of Melantha.

WEep, all you Virgins, meet o're this sad Hearse,

And you, great Goddess of Immortal Verse:

Come here a while and Mourn,

Weave not with Rosy Crowns your hair,

Let tears be all the Gems you wear.

And shed them plentifully on this Urne,

For 'tis Melantha, 'tis that lovely fair,

That lys beneath this weeping M [...]ble here.

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=68)But wou'd
you know, why she has took her flight

Into the Bosom of eternal night,

Before her Beauties scarce had shew'd their light.

Hark, and lament her fate;

As the young God of Love one day

Sate on a Rock at play,

And wantonly let fly his darts

Among the Nymphs and Shepherds hearts.

Melantha by unhappy chance came by,

Love jesting cry'd, I'le make her prove

The Godhead, she contemn'd, of Love.

In scorn she bad him strike and did his shaft defy,

While the boy slightly threw a dart

To wound, but not destroy, her Heart,

But greedy Death, fond of this Beauteous prey,

Caught the swift Arrow as it flew,

And added to't his own strength too,

Whch made so deep a wound, that, as she lay,

In silent sighs she breath'd her Soul away.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=68)Then all
the little Gods begun to weep,

Oh let your sighs with theirs due measure keep:

For fair Melantha she is dead.

Her Beauteous Soul to Deaths dark Empire's fled.

Flora, the Bounteous Goddess of the Plains,

Who in fresh Groves and sweetest Meadows raigns,

Hearing the fair Melantha dead,

Brought all her Odorous wealth to spread

Over the grave where she was laid.

Then straight the Infant Spring began to fade,

And all the Fields where she did keep,

And fold he bleating Flocks of Sheep,

Their influence lost, with her fair Eyes, decayed;

For fair Melantha, by whose cruel pride

So many sad despairing Swains had dy'd,

Felt Love at last, but death she rather chose

Than own she Lov'd, or the hid flame disclose.

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=69)Speak,
Muses, for you hold immortal state

With Gods and know the Mysteries of fate,

You all what ever's past or present see,

And read the unwritten Pages o're

Of times great Chronicle before

Events, and time, had writ what fate resolv'd shou'd be.

Tell me, what Beauty is, whose force controuls

Reason and Power, and over mankind rules:

Kings stoop to Beauty and the Crowns they wear

Shine not with so much lustre, as the fair.

Beauty a larger Empire do's command

Than the great Monarch of the Seas and Land.

She can the coldest Anchorits inflame,

Cool Tyrants rage, and stroke their passions tame,

She can call youth to her forsaken seat

In wither'd Veines and give new life and heat.

She can subdue the fierce, the proud, and strong,

Give courage to the weak, the fearful and the young.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=69)Beauty,
the only Deity, we know,

With fear and aw we to her Altars go,

And there our purest zeal of Prayers, and vows, bestow.

Sure then it onely seems to dy,

And when it leaves us, mounts above

To the Eternal roof of Jove,

To be a Constellation and inrich the Sky,

But shou'd I search the spangled sphear

For Metamorphets Beauty there,

Nothing of Helen now is seen,

Nor the fair Egyptian Queen:

Or thou, whose Eyes were constellations here,

Oh then thy fate we can't enough deplore

With thee thy Beauty dy'd and 'tis no more,

Then let us give Melantha's fate 'its due;

Strew Cyprus on her Hearse, and wreaths of Yew,

For fair Melantha, poore Melantha's dead,

Her sighing Soul to deaths eternal Empire's fled.

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=70)

### 2.34. To the NIGHTINGAL coming in the Spring.  
To invite Cloe From the Tumults of the Town to the innocent retreat in the
Country.

Written by a Person of Quality in 1680.

LIttle Songster, who do'st bring

Ioy and Musick to the Spring,

Welcome to our grateful Swains,

And the Nymphs, that grace the Plains.

How the Youths thy absence mourn?

What their Joy at thy return?

For their mirth and sports are done

All the year that thou art gone,

But at thy approach, their joys

Take new date from thy dear voyce.

[[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=70)Every
Shepherd chuses then

Some fair Nymph for Valentine.

While the Maid with equal Love

Do's the happy choyce approve:

Underneath some shade he sits,

Where soft silence Love begets

And in Artless sighs he beares

Untaught passion to her Eares.

No deceit is in his Tongue,

Nor she fears, nor suffors wrong;

But each others faith believe,

And each hour their Loves revive.

Often have I wisht to be,

Happy Damon, blest as thee,

Not that I for Silvia pine,

Silvia, who is onely thine,

But that Cloe cannot be

Kind, as Silvia is to thee.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=71)Thou, dear
Bird, whose voice may find

Charms perhaps to make her kind,

Bear a message to her Breast,

And make me happy as the rest.

[London in the Plot-time.

In the Place where Tumult dwells,

Treasons Lurk, Ambition swells,

Pride erects her monstrous head,

And Perjury swears the guiltless, dead,

Powr oppresses, envy pines,

Friends betray, and fraud designs.

Fears and Jealousie surprise

Rest and slumber from our Eyes,

And where vice all Ill contains,

And in gloomy glory reigns;

Where the Loyal, Brave aud Just

Are victims to Phanatick Lust,

Where the noble Staffords blood

Calls from Heaven Revenge aloud.

In this place there lives a Maid,

Bright as nature ever made.

[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=71)Fair
beyond dull Beauties name

Can express her lovely frame.

In her charming Eyes reside

Love, disdain, desire, and pride.

Such, we know not which to call▪

But has the excellence of all.

The first blushes of the Day

Or the new-blown Rose in May,

Or the Rich Sidonian dy

Wrought for Eastern Majesty,

Is not gayer than the Red,

Nature on her cheeks has spread.

Her soft Lips still feed new wish

Of a thousand fancy'd kisses.

Gently swelling, plump and round,

With young smiles▪ and graces crown'd;

Her round Breasts are whiter far

Than the backs of Ermins are.

Or the wanton Breast of Iove,

When a Swan for Leda's Love.

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=72)Eyes that
charm when e're they Dart,

And never miss the destin'd heart.

Woud'st thou have me tell thee more,

And describe her Beauties o're;

I perhaps might make a Rape

On my Ideas naked shape,

Therefore fly, you'l quickly see

By this Picture which is Shee.

Tell her the loud winds are Dumb,

Winter's past and Spring is come,

The delightful Spring! that reigns

Sweets and plenty o're the Plains.

And with shady Garlands crown'd

All the Woods and Groves around.

If she see the wing'd Quire,

Chuse this season to retire

To the shelter of the Grove,

'Tis by Instinct (say) of Love.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=72)If she see
the Herds and Flocks

Wanton round the Meads and Rocks,

Thus their wishing Males to move,

'Tis the Instinct (say), of Love.

If she see the Bull among

Crowds of Fem [...]ls sleek and young,

Fight His Rival of the Drove,

'Tis by Instinct (say,) of Love.

If she see the blooming vines.

In their season, fold their twines

Round the Oake that neer her grows,

Say, 'tis nature mixt their boughs:

Then if Instinct these do move,

We by reason ought to Love.

Tell the fair one, every day

Youth and Beauty steale away,

And within a little space

Will destroy her charming face.

Every grace and smile, that lyes

Languishing in Lips and Eyes,

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=73)First he'l
make his prey, and then,

Leave to Death, what do's remain.

Who old Time do's only send

To begin what he must end.

If she ask, what hour and place,

Where and when, Time wounds the face?

Say, it is not in the Night,

Nor when Day renews her light.

In the Morning, or at noon

Or at Evening when alone,

Or when entertained at home,

Or abroad this hour will come,

But swift time is always by,

First to perfect, then destroy.

And in vain you seek a cure

Since his wounds are every hour▪

Bid her view Aurelia's brow,

Naked of her Glories now,

Yet she once cou'd charm the throng,

Conquering with her Eyes and tongue.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=73)Now,
only's left this weak relief,

(To support her years and grief,)

When she cou'd she us'd her prime

And enjoy'd the fruitis of time:

And where ever she profest

Love, or hate, she kill'd, or blest.

While the neighbouring Plains were fill'd

With their names she Lov'd and kill'd.

Oh, when youth and Beautie's past,

That poor pleasure that do's last

Is to think they were admir'd,

And by every youth desir'd,

While the Dotage of each Swain

She return'd with scorn again.

Oh then let my Cloe know,

When her youth is faded so,

And a race of Nymphs appears,

Gay and sprightly in their years,

Proud and wanton in their Loves,

While the Shepherds of the Groves

[[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=74)Strive
with Presents who shall share

Most the favors of the fair;

And herself she do's behold

Like Aurelia now grown old,

Sighing to herself she'l say

I was once ador'd, as they!

Yet with Pleasure think, that she

Lov'd and was belov'd by me.

Therefore bid her haste and prove,

While she may, the joys of Love.

I will lead her to a soyle

Where perpetual Summers smile,

Without Autumn which bereaves

Fairest Cedars of their leaves;

Where she shall behold the Meads

Ever Green, the Groves with Shades:

Lasting Flowrs the banks shall wear,

And Birds shall warble all the year.

Where the rustick swain do's ow

Nothing to the Spade and Plow.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=74)For their
Harvest, natures care

Without toyle relieves 'em there,

And no differing seasons bring

Changes to the constant Spring.

In the Morn she shall awake

With the noyse the Shepherds make,

Cheering, with the Ecchoing sounds

Of their Horns, the eager Hounds.

Nymphs, as well as Shepherds too

In these Groves the chase persue.

While at their backs their flowing hair

Loosely wantons in the Air;

Guilded Quivers on their thighs,

With Darts less fatal than their Eyes.

Each the others sloth do's blame,

While they seek the Hart for game.

Who, poor Fool, his Feet employs

And thr'ow Woods and dales he flys.

Over plains and Rivers bounds,

And out-flies the Winds and Hounds.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=75)When
perhaps some Nymph, whose Eyes

Makes both men and Beast her Prize,

Swifter than Camilla's pace

Soon o'retakes the winged race,

And with one bright Glance she wounds,

And his fancy'd hope confounds.

Who, reflecting his faint Eyes

On her Face, with pleasure dy's.

When the sports are done, they rest

Underneath some shade, and feast

On sweet Beds of Violets crown'd

With sweet Roses on the ground.

Where they Garlands weave and Poses

Of Green Mirtle, Pinks and Roses:

For which grace the ravisht Swains

Pay soft kisses for their Pains.

Thus they Dally till the Light

Falls behind the Scene of Night.

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=75)

### 2.35. A PASTORAL  
On the Marriage of the right Honourable the Earle of Ossery to the Lady Mary
Somerset.  
In a Dialogue between Damon and Menal­cas, written by Mr. Edmond Arwaker. M.
A.

Damon.

WHat mighty Joy affects Menalca's breast,

Who's Extasie is in his face exprest?

Sure his Laurinda now to smile begins,

Or his full Ews increase his Flocks with twins.

Men.

Laurinda's frowns or smiles are now despis'd,

Far less her favors than this bliss are pris'd.

And all my Ews henceforth may barren be,

'Tis wealth enough this happy day to see.

Dam.

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=76)

What has this day produc'd to make it blest?

Men.

Joy too transporting to be well exprest!

Joys which to Damon should not be unknown,

Since they concern the lovely Celladon.

Dam.

The lovely Celladon! ah courteous swain!

Repeat and bless me with that name again!

Say, what new Triumph, what deserv'd success,

Do the large volume of his fame encrease:

Has he at wrastling purchas't more Renown

Or won some other Race and weares the Crown!

Men.

He has, and justly, won a Nobler Prize,

The Dazling Joy of all beholders Eyes,

For what can Heav'n inlarge to him beside,

Now the admir'd Clorinda is his bride.

Dam.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=76)

Clorinda, his? then for this happy day

A sacrifice of six choyce Lambs I'le pay,

That Ewe with twins shall recompence thy news,

Or, cull my Flocks, and, what thou fancyest, chuse,

I'm so o're joy'd that should'st thou take'em all,

I still shall think it a reward too small.

Men.

The Gods do merit sacrifice, 'tis true,

But the bright pair deserve an offering too;

To them we'll now an humble Tribute bring:

Clorinda you, I Celladon will sing.

Dam.

'Tis well propos'd, and now the Song begin.

Men.

Then rouse, my Muse, and let thy subject be

Gay, soft, and fair, yet lofty too as he;

To Celladon thy verse is justly due,

Thou learn'd thy Art, whence his first Honours grew.

Killkeny School.

[[Page 74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=77)From his
great Ancestors magnificence,

And ow'st thy growth to that blest influence:

Then what that gave, thou must return again,

And to his service consecrate thy pen.

Young Celladon, the glory of our Plains,

Joy of the Nymphs and envy of the Swains;

Whose charming voyce each melting passion moves

As gentle Zephyrs bend the yeilding Groves.

To him the Nymphs their easy hearts resign,

For him despairing Shepherdesses pine.

Serene his face, as a rejoycing sky,

And Glorious, as a rising Sun, his Eye.

Dam.

Sweet, as a blooming Spring, Clorinda's face,

More sooth and clear than her own chrystal Glass;

For her with folded Armes and heads hung low

The hopeless Shepherds vent their restless woe;

While o're the Plains their flocks neglected stray,

As in loves maze themselves have lost the way.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=77) But she
do's all for Celladon despise,

And at his heart alone, the noblest Prize,

She darts the poynted Glories of her Eyes.

Men.

The God of Love had not another Dart,

Able to peirce the wondrous Shepherds heart.

Had he alone attack't th' Heroick Swain

The mighty Conqueror had been captive ta'ne,

For Calladon inur'd to wars Alarms

And, thô all peaceful, takes delight in Arms,

Best pleas'd when most expos'd, with noble heat

He danger seeks and dares the hand of Fate.

Once he persu'd it to a foreign shore,

Where his great Fathers name was fear'd before.

France.

But all the damage by that terror done

Has ample reparation from the Son:

The favor, they from his Access receiv'd,

Aton'd for routed Troops and Towns releiv'd.

Monts.

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=78)Not only
glory did engage his Sword,

Duty unsheath'd it too to serve his Lord.

When bold Rebellion did the Throne invade

With broken faith, and fortune for 'its aid.

The Western War.

With early zeal the Shepherd did appear;

His valor now had found 'its proper sphear;

Call'd to the Battle by these loud Alarms.

He broke away even from Clorindas Armes.

Death, in the Royal cause had more, than Beauty, charms.

Dam.

He left Clorinda's Armes but not her heart,

There he was still, nor thence cou'd ever part:

That, to the bloody field marcht bravely out,

And there with pious prayers and wishes fought.

While she at home was never free from fear,

For the rich venture she had trusted there;

Yet hop't him safe in her great Fathers care.

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=78)Nor could
she justly any danger dread

For him who fought along with Diomed:

Duke of Beaufort.

Eternal Laurels Crown that happy name,

The dear, the sweet, the noble theme of fame;

To all his proofes of Loyalty before

The glorious Hero still is adding more.

Firme to his Prince and faithful to his trust

And daring to be hazardously just:

Profuse of Life in his great Masters cause,

And better pleas'd with service than applause.

Some happy Muse, worthy a Theme so great,

In lofty strains thy same shall celebrate.

Whose noble blood, which no corruption stains,

Gives the rich Tincture to Clorinda's veines.

Men.

While Diomede with Armes protects the Throne,

Nestor with Councel do's support the Crown;

Duke of Ormond.

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=79) Nestor,
no less couragious still than wise,

And able once to act as to advise.

Nestor, the partner of his Master's fate,

Did all his injuries participate,

When usurpation banisht him the Throne,

Nestor indur'd not he shou'd go alone,

His Kingdom lost, and loyal subjects few,

Himself a King in Nestors heart he knew;

The Monarchy for which he was design'd

Was there preserv'd as thither 'twas confin'd.

Nor were his limits scant, for his large soul

Has 'its unbounded sphear above the pole.

One subject of such vast Magnificence

Might make at any time a Glorious Prince.

But time sits heavy on his shoulders now,

And his declining head begins to bow;

Yet still so gracefully he treads the stage,

He makes th' admiring World in love with age,

Long may he cause their wonder and delight,

Long be his day and far remote his night,

[[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=79)The night,
when he to us shall disappear,

Call'd hence to gild some other Hemisphear.

Excellent Prince! in whom the World do's see

A Species of untainted Loyalty.

May Heav'n indulge our wishes long in thee,

But if the fates deny this bliss to give,

The Phaenix will in Celladon revive:

To him our Homage we must then transfer,

As much thy virtues, as thy fortunes, Heir.

Dam.

See, Swain, the Sun exalts his shining head,

Brisk as a Bridegroom from Aurora's Bed,

While, like a blushing Bride, the dawning morn

Do's in her Gay attire herself adorn.

'Tis time the lovely pair, like them, shou'd rise,

And we their presence want to bless our Eyes;

The expecting World 'its patience has outstay'd,

Lets hast and wake 'em with a ferinade.

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=80)

### 2.36. A Song by Robert Wolseley Esq

A! Blame me not, if no despair,

A passion you inspire, can end.

Nor think it strange, too charming fair,

If Love, like other flames, ascend.

If to approach a Saint with Prayer

Vnworthy votarys pretend,

Above all merit Heaven and you

To the Sincere are only due.

Long did respect awe my proud aim

And fear t' offend my madness cover,

Like you it still reprov'd my flame

And in the friend wou'd hide the Lover.

But by things that want a name

I the too bold truth discover.

My words in vain are in my powr

My looks betray me every hour.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=80)

### 2.37. A PASTORAL  
On the Death of His late Majesty written by Mr. Otway.

WHat horrors this that dwells upon the Plain,

And thus disturbs the Shepherds peaceful Reign?

A dismal sound breaks thro' the yeilding air

Forewarning us some dreadful storm is neer,

The bleating flocks in wild confusion stray

The early Larks forsake their wandring way

And cease to welcome in the new-born day.

Each Nymph possest with a distracted fear

Disorder'd hangs her loose dishevell'd hair,

Diseases with her strong convulsions reign,

And deities not known before to pain

Are now with Apoplectick seizures slain:

Hence flow our sorrows, hence increase our fears

Each humble plant do's drop her silver tears.

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=81)Ye tender
Lambs stray not so fast away,

To weep and mourn let us together stay,

O're all the universe let it be spread

That now the Shepherd of the flock is dead.

The Royal Pan, that shepherd of the sheep,

He, who to leave his flock did dying weep,

Is gone, ah gone, ne're to return from deaths Eternal sleep.

Begin, Damela, let thy numbers fly

Aloft, where the safe milkey way does ly,

Mop'sus who Daphnis to the Stars did sing

Shall joyn with you and hither waft our King.

Play gently on your Reeds a mournful strain

And tell in notes thro' all th' Arcadian Plain

The Royal Pan, the Shepherd of the sheep

He who to leave his Flock did dying weep

Is gone! is gone, ne're to return from death's eternal sleep.

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=81)

### 2.38. SONG.

NO more will I my Passion hide

Tho' too presuming it appear,

When long despair a heart has try'd

What other torment can it fear?

Vnlov'd of her I would not live

Nor dy till she the sentence give.

Why shou'd the fair offended be

If vertue charm in Beauty's dress:

If where so much divine I see

My open vows the Saint confess.

Awak'd by wonders in her Eyes

My former Idols I despise.

[[Page 84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=82)

### 2.39. Strephons complaint banisht from Sacarisa.

HOW long shall I thus live condemn'd to mourn

In vain my Sacarisa's cruel scorn?

For ever let these Eyes be shut to light,

Since the bright Nymph has robb'd me of her sight

All other objects dull and useless grow

No more their wonted form of colour shew.

In glooming shades may I for ever live

Sad as my sorrows, silent as my grave.

Since Sacarisa's Eyes withdraw their light

Darkness to me is Day, the Morning Night.

No more the Sun, the Worlds majestick Eye,

Shall dart his golden Beams thrô th' Azure Sky:

Let sullen darkness on the Earth display

His sable wings t' eclips the hated day

As when in Chaos, uncreated night

Sat Brooding on the seeds of Infant-light,

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=82)And no
kind Beams did on the surface play

Till the Sun rose and made a perfect day;

So till my Nymph brings back her sparkling light

Darkness to me is Day, the Morning Night.

### 2.40. An Elegie written by Mr. W. O. Damon, and Thirsis.

Dam.

WElcome, dear Thirsis far above,

The sweetest Emphasis of Love.

More welcome than the fairest Dame

That ever crost this awful Plain,

With all her tender Virgin Train.

Thirs.

I thank thee, Shepherd, for thy Love,

But how canst thou so soon remove

The Passion which inrag'd thy brest,

And kept thy better part from rest?

Dam.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=83)

Believe me, Thirsis, for tis true

They that Love long are very few,

I pip'd, I sung, I liv'd in pain,

In hope the Shepherdess to gain;

Now vain my sute, in vain I cry,

I sigh in vain, unhappy me,

Condemn'd to such a Destinie

Only to see the once lov'd Deitie.

Thirs.

Tell me, Damon, prithee do,

Who's this Nymph that grieves thee so,

By great Pan's all sacred name

The wildest heart for thee i'le tame:

Dam.

Oh my friend! she's gone too far,

Thou can'st not reach the charming fair:

She's fled into the wisht for place,

Where Love is acted o're in every grace.

Thirs.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=83)

Whats her name? I can't contain,

My blood runs swift in every veine.

I'le ravage all the Woods and Groves,

Th' intreguing Court for billing Lov's:

No pains nor toyle for thee I'le spare,

Come— let me know the cruel fair.

Dams.

Phillis, the Glory of our Isle,

Who charm'd my Soul with every smile,

Ah shee! the lovely torturing maid

H'as now my heart, my all, betray'd;

And my adoring Love with scorn repaid.

Unhappy swain! dejected and forlorn,

Ah me! how sadly am I left alone,

To envy those Transporting charms

She yeilds up to my happy Rivals Armes.

Thirs.

Ile go—

Dam.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=84)

Stay, Shepherd, tis in vain to try

To disappoint the Nuptial tye.

No, no, shes gone to make my Rival blest,

And left her Image only in my brest.

Hence forth in Lovers tales let it be said,

That thy poor friend, thy Damon, dy'd a maid.

While no one part of me remains with her,

But constant wishes and this humble Pray'r.

Fairest of Nymphs—

May all your Glorys, like the youthful Sun,

Beame forth and in their purest lustre Burn.

May all your days be as a day of bliss,

And all your sorrows close still with a kiss;

Happy the God, that succor'd your desire,

And set the Hymenean Lamp on fire:

May he, in whole blest Armes you slumbringly,

Be sensible of the vast envyed joy,

While I who lost you lay me down and dy.

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=84)

### 2.41. A PINDARICK  
To Mrs. Behn on her Poem on the Coronation.

Written by a Lady.

HAil, thou sole Empress of the Land of wit,

To whom all conquer'd Authors must submit,

And at thy feet their sading Laurels lay,

The utmost tribute that a Muse can pay,

To thy unlabour'd Song o'th' Coronation day.

The subject was Divine we all confess,

Nor was that flame, thy mighty fancy, less.

That cloth'd thy thought in such a pleasing dress,

As did at once a Masculine wit express,

And all the softness of a Femal tenderness.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=85)No more
shall men their fancy'd Empire hold,

Since thou Astrea form'd of siner mould,

By nature temper'd more with humid cold,

Doth man excel—

Not in soft strokes alone, but even in the bold.

And as thy purer Blood,

Thrô more transparent vessels is convey'd

Thy spirits more fine and subtil do thy brain invade.

And nimbler come uncall'd unto thy aide;

So the gay thought—

Which thy still flowing fancy does inspire

New, uncontroul'd, and warm, as young desire,

Have more of kindling heat and fiercer fire;

Not to be reach't, or prays'd, unless by such

As the same happy temperament possess;

Since none with equal numbers can reward thy Lays,

May the just Monarch, which you praise,

Daine to acknowledg this.

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=85)Not with a
short applause of crackling Bays

But a return that may revive thy days;

And thy well-meaning grateful loyal Muse

Cherisht by that blest theam its zeale did chuse.

Maist thou be blest with such a sweet retreat,

That with contempt thou maist behold the great;

Such as the mighty Cowlys well-known seat.

Whose lofty Elms I wou'd have all thy own,

And in the mid'st a spacious shady Throne,

Rais'd on a Mount that shou'd Parnassus be,

And every Muse included all in thee.

On whose coole top alone thou shoud'st dispense

The Laws of Wit, Love, Loyalty and Sense:

The new Arcadia shou'd the Grove be nam'd

And for the guift our grateful Monarch fam'd.

Amidst the shade, I'd wish a well built House,

Like Sidneys Noble Kalendar shou'd stand,

Raising its head and all the rest command.

Its out-side gay, its inside clean and neat

With all of lifes conveniencies replete,

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=86)Where all
the Elements at once conspire

To give what mans necessities require,

Rich soyle, pure Aire, streams coole, and useful fire.

The fertil spot with pleasure shou'd abound

And with Elizium-Spring be ever crown'd.

When thou thy mind unbend'st from thoughtful hours,

Then shou'dst thou be refresht with Fruits and Flowrs,

The Gods and Nymphs of Woods and Springs

Shall Dance in Antique Rural Rings:

While scaly Trytons and grim Satyrs play

Such Tunes, as Birds compose, to welcome day.

Till the glad noyse to distant shores resound,

And flying Birds joyn in th' Harmonious sound.

Which listning Echo's catch at the rebound.

Here without toyle, or pining want perplext

Thy Body easy and thy mind at rest,

With all Lifes valu'd pleasures blest,

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=86)Thy
largest wishes still thou shoud'st enjoy

Inviron'd with delights that ne're can cloy.

Accept, thou much lov'd Sappho of our Isle,

This hearty wish, and grace it with a smile,

When thou shalt know that thy Harmonious Lire

Did me, the meanest of thy sex, inspire.

And that thy own unimitable lays

Are cause alone that I attempt thy praise.

Which in unequal measure I rehearse

Because unskill'd in numbers Grace, or Verse;

Great Pindars flights are fit alone for thee,

The witty Horace's Iambicks be

Like Virgils lofty strains, alas too hard for me.

And if enough this do not plead excuse,

Pity the failings of a Virgin Muse.

That never in this kind before essai'd,

Her Muse till now was, like her self,—a Maid.

Whose Blooming labours thus she dedicates to you,

A Tribute justly to your merits due;

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=87)At least
her part of gratitude to pay

For that best Song o'th' Coronation day.

How bad wou'd the Ill-natur'd World requite

Thy noble labours if they do not write,

Who have, perhaps, been happy in this kind

To own thou'st now out-done all that they e're design'd.

Sure none with malice e're was so accurst,

This to deny but will with envy burst,

Since even thy own more envious sex agree

The glorious theam had right alone from thee;

The femal Writers thou haft all excell'd,

Since the first mother of mankind rebell'd.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=87)

### 2.42. To Mr. Wolseley on his Preface to Valen­tinian.

By a Lady of Quality.

TO you, the generous task belongs alone

To clear the injur'd and instruct the Town:

Where, but in you is found a mind so brave

To stretch the bounds of Love beyond the grave?

Anger may last, but friendships quickly dy,

For anxious thoughts are longer-liv'd than joy.

Yet those, whom active fancies have misled

So far as to assault the mighty dead;

Now, taught by your reproofes a noble shame,

Will strive by surer ways to raise their fame.

But from our sex what praise do you deserve?

We by your help may all our rights preserve,

While others rob the Deities they serve,

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=88)For never
sacriledge cou'd greater be

Than to steal Honour from a Deitie.

Such are the paths to fame, in which you tread,

You bafle envy, while you nobly aide

The helpless living and more helpless dead.

### 2.43. Mr. Wolsely's Answer to the forgoing Copy.

WHile soaring high above Orinda's flights,

Equal to Sappho fam'd Vrania writes;

And feareless of an Host of byast men

In my defence draws her all-conquering pen.

While forcing every caviller to submit,

Her approbation stamps my question'd wit.

And a new way, by all the Nine inspir'd,

Commending mine she makes her own admir'd.

While that kind Balme's restoring virtue cures

The Criticks bite and lasting life assures.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=88)Delight
extream rewarding all my pain,

Spirits my genius and improves my vein.

A useful pride the unhop'd Honour brings,

Like that which from a sense of virtue springs.

While thrô her Sexes finer mould she pours

Thoughts of the substance and the strength of ours.

And in her draughts, grac'd with a sweeter Air,

The Poet borrows softness from the fair:

While with a wit that does the Age surprise,

Just as her heart and powerful as her Eyes,

My Panegyrick's fame she do's intend,

Her easyer turn instructs me how to mend,

Her still-fresh flights inriching every Theam

Flow equal, like a smooth untroubl'd stream,

Whose cheerful current, without tides is strong

And thrô green Meadows purling glides along.

How rare is praise in fitting words exprest

With judgment heighten'd and with skill addrest

Those who deserve it most can give it best.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=89)How flat
and tastless is a fool's applause,

Whose want of knowledge do's his wonder cause?

More fulsom is the fawning of a knave

Whose narrow mind his little ends enslave:

Whose Pen for ever fear and int'rest guide

Whom each his stage which like contemning Pride

All wealthy fops and prosperous villains ride;

Who can to none but fortune faithful be,

False to desert, and Prostitute as she.

But just Vrania, truth and virtues friend,

Quick to discern, and sparing to commend,

Whom in-born worth above mean aimes does raise

Can no more give than need such hackney Bays.

Her mind to Earth, wits rightful Soveraign came,

By Heaven instructed to distribute fame;

What Stoick soul has temper to refuse

Th' uncommon favors of so chast a Muse?

While her soft strain, in which no toyl appears,

With divine Musick bribes our ravisht eares.

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=89)And her
wit varying a thousand ways

With that strong Philtre baits her powrful praise,

Her flowing lines such skilful measures bound,

The sense is not more charming than the sound:

So does her verse in words well-plac'd and chose

Her rich Invention's beauteous store disclose.

As calm Favonius with his gentle wing

Opens the Flowers and spreads the sweets of spring.

When stopt by Trees, chance into arbour weaves

His murmuring voyce, some Lovers care deceives,

And breathing Roses whistles thrô the leaves

When thus like Her's which no rich Rogue can share

Praise comes both from the knowing and sincere,

Just is the pride, as the delight is rare.

Like Hope, it flatters; like Ambition, warms;

And like a Lovers happy moment, charms.

When first to ease the long unpitied swain

His cruel fair confesses equal pain,

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=90)When
first he sees within her kindling Eyes

A guilty care and Bashful sweetness rise.

Oft when perplext with timorous doubts unrest,

I read her praise in which my Muse is drest

With all the grace and all the power of Poetry exprest.

Raptures so strong my happier thoughts employ,

As pain perception, and oppress with Joy.

The rich Ragoust, wit's too profuse expence,

A flavor gives that conquers human sense;

A tast too high for weak man to digest,

Ambrosia 'tis, on which Immortals feast,

The Fruit of life's fair Tree to Martyrs given

When  [...]in'd from flesh and purg'd of Earths dull Leaven

Their frames can bear the Luxury of Heaven.

Cease England, thy late loss so high to rate,

Here learn thy mighty sorrow to abate,

By her instructive gentle song half reconcil'd to sate.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=90)Your
tender moan, you tuneful Nine give o're,

Lament your darling Bion's death no more.

In her lov'd Lays his better part survives,

He dyes not all, while soft Vrania lives.

Her Heaven has warm'd,

The Earl of Rochester, her Vncle,

with the same pleasing fires

In her like noble blood, like noble thoughts inspires.

His perishing goods to others let him leave,

To Her his deathless Pen he did bequeave;

And if my humble Muse, whose luckless strain

Was us'd alone of Beauty to complain

And sing in melancholy notes love's unregarded pain,

Rais'd by that theme, above her usual height

Cou'd clear his fame, or do his virtue right,

How well do's she the trifling debt acquit,

She whose resembling Genius shews her fit

To be his sole Executrix in wit.

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=91)

### 2.44. On the Honourable Sir Francis Fane, on his Play call'd the
Sacrifice. by Mrs. A. B.

LOng have our Priests condemn'd a wicked Age,

And every little criticks sensless rage

Damn'd a forsaken self-declining stage:

Great 'tis confest and many are our crimes,

And no less profligate the vitious times,

But yet no wonder both prevail so ill,

The Poets fury and the Preachers skill;

While to the World it is so plainly known

They blame our faults, with greatones of their own,

Let their dull Pens flow with unlearned spight

And weakly censure what the skilful write;

You, learned Sir, a nobler passion shew,

Our best of rules and best example too.

Precepts and grave instructions dully move,

The brave Performer better do's improve,

[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=91)Ver'st in
the truest Satyr you excel

And shew how ill we write by writing well.

This noble Piece which well deserves your name

I read with pleasure thô I read with shame,

The tender Laurels which my brows had drest

Flag, like young Flowers, with too much heat opprest.

The generous fire I felt in every line

Shew'd me the cold, the feeble, force of mine.

Henceforth I'le you for imitation chuse

Your nobler flights will wing my Callow Muse;

So the young Eagle is inform'd to fly

By seeing the Monarch Bird ascend the sky.

And thô with less success her strength she'l try,

Spreads her soft plumes and his vast tracks persues

Thô far above the towring Prince she views:

High as she can she'll bear your deathless fame,

And make my song Immortal by your name.

But where the work is so Divinely wrought,

The rules so just and so sublime each thought,

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=92)When with
so strict an Art your scenes are plac'd

With wit so new, and so uncommon, grac'd,

In vain, alas! I shou'd attempt to tell

Where, or in what, your Muse do's most excel.

Each character performs its noble part,

And stamps its Image on the Readers heart.

In Tamerlan you a true Hero drest,

A generous conflict wars within his breast,

This there the mightyest passions you have shew'd

By turns confest the Mortal and the God.

When e're his steps approach the haughty fair

He bows indeed but like a Conqueror,

Compell'd to Love yet scorns his servial chain,

In spight of all you make the Monarch reign.

But who without resistless tears can see

The bright, the innocent, Irene die:

Axalla's life a noble ransom paid,

In vain to save the much-lov'd charming maid,

Nought surely cou'd but your own flame inspire

Your happy Muse to reach so soft a fire.

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=92) Yet with
what Art you turn the pow'rful stream

When trecherous Ragallzan is the theam:

You mix our different passions with such skill,

We feel 'em all and all with pleasure feel.

We love the mischief, thô the harms we grieve,

And for his wit the villain we forgive.

In your Despina all those passions meet,

Which womans frailties perfectly complent.

Pride and Revenge, Ambition, Love and Rage,

At once her wilful haughty Soul engage;

And while her rigid Honour we esteem,

The dire effects as justly must condemn.

She shews a virtue so severly nice

As has betray'd it to a pitch of vice.

All which confess a God-like pow'r in you

Who cou'd form woman to herself so true.

Live, mighty Sir, to reconcile the Age

To the first glories of the useful Stage.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=93) 'Tis you
her rifl'd Empire may restore

And give her power she ne're cou'd boast before.

### 2.45. Cato's Answer to Labienus, when he ad­vis'd him to consult the
Oracle of Jupiter Ammon.  
Being a Paraphrastical Translation of part of the 9th Book of Lucan, beginning
at —Quid quaeri, Labiene, Iubes, &c.

WHat shou'd I ask my friend, which best wou'd be

to live inslav'd, or thus in Armes die free?

If any force can Honour's price abate?

Or virtue bow beneath the blows of fate?

If fortunes threats a steady Soul disdains,

Or if the Joys of Life be worth the pains?

If it our happiness at all import

Whether the foolish scene be long, or short.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=93) If when
we do but aim at noble ends

The attempt alone Immortal fame attends?

If for bad accidents, which thickest press

On merit, we shou'd like a good cause less?

Or be the fonder of it for success?

All this is clear, wove in our minds it sticks,

Nor Ammon, nor his Priest's can deeper fix;

Without the Clergy's venal cant and pains

Gods never-frustrate Will holds ours in chains,

Nor can we Act but what th' All-wise ordains.

Who needs no voyce, nor perishing words to aw

Our wild desires, and give his creatures Law:

What e're to know, or needful was or fit.

In the wise frame of human souls 'tis writ,

Both what we ought to do, and what forbear,

He once for all, did at our births declare.

But never did he seek out Desart Lands

To bury truth in unfrequented Sands;

Or to a corner of the World withdrew,

Head of a sect and partial to a few.

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=94) Nature's
vast fabrick is his house alone,

This Globe his foot-stool, and high Heav'n his throne.

In Earth, Air, Sea, and in who e're excells

In knowing heads and honest hearts he dwells;

Why seek we then among these barren sands,

In narrow shrines and temples built with hands,

Him whose dread presence does all places fill?

Or look but in our reason for his will?

All we e're saw is God! in all we find

Apparent Prints of the eternal mind;

Let floating fools their course by Prophets steer

And always of the future live in fear;

No Oracle, or Dream the crowd is told

Can make me more or less resolv'd and bold.

But surer death, which equally on all

Both on the coward and the brave must fall.

This said, and turning with disdain about,

He left scorn'd Ammon to the vulgar Rout.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=94)

### 2.46. To his Grace the Duke of Ormond, upon his leaving the Government of
Ireland.

HAve we a farther trouble yet in store,

And can our destinie afflict us more?

To lose our Prince we thought too great a blow,

And must we lose his glorious Image too?

Ireland for more than twice seven years has bin

Envy'd without, for being so blest within;

While Plague, Fire, Famin, War abroad has Reign'd,

This only was the safe and happy Land;

Which happiness, great Sir, to you we owe

Next to the God above and God below.

The Irish Harp, which long abus'd had lain,

Your skilful hand first brought in tune again.

And when some others by our King were sent

To play upon the noble Instrument,

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=95) Such was
their Ignorance, or their Error such

They prov'd but foyles to your Melodious touch.

Into your hands then, which before it grac'd,

The noble Instrument again was plac'd,

On which a long, soft tune again you play'd,

When Jarring discord did all else invade,

And we rejoyc'd to think you wou'd play on:

But Heavens and the Kings will must still be done,

While we submit as humbly to that power

Which can the bliss, it takes away, restore,

More we can't have, nor do we wish for more.

Adieu then, much lov'd Prince,

With mournful hearts we make this Prayer for you,

Greatest and best of uncrown'd Heads adieu,

And since you must goe hence—

We'll waft you o're with steady Gales of Prayers,

And bear you on a Sea of humble tears,

All the Amends which for your mighty toyle,

Can be return'd by a poor widow'd Isle.

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=95) Such now
alas, She is, and ne're till now

That Ormonds noble house did wholly from her go,

Not leaving to support her mighty Mind,

An Arran, or an Ossory behind.

May Heavens choice blessings on 'em all attend,

And bring'em to a calm and glorious end.

Glorious and calm may all their passage be

As was the hour in which they put to Sea.

And landed, wheresoere her Ormond goes,

May England doat on him as Ireland do's.

### 2.47. SONG.

BReak, Break, sad heart, unload thy grief,

Give, give, thy sorrows way.

Seek out thy only last relief,

And thy hard Stars obey.

Those Stars that doom thee to revere

What do's themselves outshine.

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=96) And
plac'd her too in such a Sphear

That she can ne're be mine.

Because Endymion once did move

Nights Goddess to come down,

And listen to his tale of Love,

Aim not thou idly at the Moon.

Be it thy pleasure and thy Pride

That wreckt on stretch't desire,

Thou canst thy fiercest torments hide,

And silently expire.

### 2.48. To Damon.  
To inquire of him if he cou'd tell me by the Style, who writ me a Copy of
Verses that came to me in an unknown Hand, by Mrs. A. B.

OH, Damon, if thou ever wers't

That certain friend thou hast profest,

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=96) Relieve
the Pantings of my heart,

Restore me to my wonted rest.

Late in the Silvian Grove I sat,

Free as the Air, and calm as that;

For as no winds the boughs opprest,

No storms of Love were in my breast.

A long Adieu I'd bid to that

Ere since Amintas prov'd ingrate.

And with indifference, or disdain,

I lookt around upon the Plain.

And worth my favor found no sighing Swain:

But oh, my Damon, all in vain

I triumph'd in security,

In vain absented from the Plain.

The wanton God his power to try

In lone recesses makes us yeild,

As well as in the open feild;

For where no human thing was found

My heedless heart receiv'd a wound.

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=97) Assist
me, Shepherd, or I dye,

Help to unfold this Mystery.

No Swain was by, no flattering Nymph was neer,

Soft tales of Love to whisper to my Ear.

In sleep, no Dream my fancy fir'd

With Images, my waking wish desir'd.

No fond Idea fill'd my mind;

Nor to the faithless sex one thought inclin'd;

I sigh'd for no deceiving youth,

Who forfeited his vows and truth;

I waited no Assigning Swain

Whose disappointment gave me pain.

My fancy did no prospect take

Of Conquest's I design'd to make.

No snares for Lovers I had laid,

Nor was of any snare afraid.

But calm and innocent I sate,

Content with my indifferent fate.

(A Medium, I confess, I hate.)

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=97) For when
the mind so cool is grown

As neither Love nor Hare to own,

The Life but dully lingers on.

Thus in the mid'st of careless thought,

A paper to my hand was brought.

What hidden charms were lodg'd within,

to my unwary Eyes unseen,

Alas! no Human thought can guess;

But ho! it robb'd me of my peace.

A Philter 'twas, that darted pain

Thrô every pleas'd and trembling vein.

A stratagem, to send a Dart

By a new way into the heart,

Th' Ignoble Policie of Love

By a clandestin means to move.

Which possibly the Instrument

Did ne're design to that intent,

But only form, and complement.

While Love did the occasion take

And hid beneath his flowres a snake

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=98) O're
every line did Poyson fling

In every word he lurk't a sting.

So Matrons are, by Demons charms,

Thô harmless, capable of harms.

The verse was smooth, the thought was fine,

The fancy new, the wit divine.

But fill'd with praises of my face and Eyes,

My verse, and all those usual flatteries

To me as common as the Air;

Nor cou'd my vanity procure my care.

All which as things of course are writ

And less to shew esteem than wit.

But here was some strange somthing more

Than ever flatter'd me before;

My heart was by my Eyes misled:

I blusht and trembl'd as I read.

And every guilty look confest

I was with new surprise opprest,

From every view I felt a pain

And by the Soul, I drew the Swain.

[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=98) Charming
as fancy cou'd create

Fine as his Poem, and as soft as that.

I drew him all the heart cou'd move

I drew him all that women Love.

And such a dear Idea made

As has my whole repose betray'd.

Pigmalion thus his Image form'd,

And for the charms he made, he sigh'd and burn'd.

Oh thou that know'st each Shepherds Strains

That Pipes and Sings upon the Plains;

Inform me where the youth remains.

The spightful Paper bare no name,

Nor can I guess from whom it came,

Or if at least a guess I found,

'Twas not t'instruct but to confound.

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=99)

### 2.49. SONG of Basset, by Sir George Ethrege.

LEt Equipage and Dress despair,

Since Basset is come in,

For nothing can oblige the fair

Like Money and Morine.

Is any Countess in distress

she flys not to the Beau,

'Tis only cony can redress

Her grief with a Rouleau.

By this bewitching Game betray'd

Poor Love is bought and sold.

And that which shou'd be a free Trade,

Is now ingross'd by Gold.

Even sense is brought into disgrace,

Where company is met

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=99) Or
silent stands, or leaves the place,

While all the talk's Basset.

Why, Ladys, will you stake your hearts,

Where a Plain cheat is found,

You first are rookt out of those Darts,

That gave your selves the wound.

The time, which shou'd be kindly lent

To plays and witty men,

In waiting for a knave is spent

Or wishing for a ten.

Stand in defence of your own charms,

Throw down this Favorite,

That threatens with his dazling Arms

Your Beauty and your Wit.

What pity tis, those conquering Eyes,

Which all the World subdue,

Shou'd while the Lover gazing dyes

Be only on Alpue.

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=100)

### 2.50. To the Lord Bishop of Rochester, on His History of the Plot written
by His late Majesties command. And an Apologie for these Verses call'd the
Advice to a Pain­ter, by the same Author.

My Lord,

WIth humble hope your goodness will ex­cuse

The hasty zeal of an aspiring Muse;

I with unequal pace your steps persue,

And thought I trod securely following you,

Repenting now, like Phaeton, too late

I feebly sink beneath the Glorious weight.

And own the work for all but you too great:

The hand that rivall'd Heaven took thence its fire

Er'e he the sensless Machin cou'd inspire;

And the rash Author wou'd attempt in vain,

Unless he borrow'd your diviner Pen;

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=100) To
imitate or praise with equal flight

What only Charles cou'd Dictate, only you cou'd Write.

If trouble past by repetition please,

Thô meaner tongues the grateful tale reherse,

What mighty Raptures must these Ills create,

Which bravely, as he conquer'd, you relate;

Our joys without our sufferings had been less,

And for the remedy, the wound we bless.

So did not Catilines defeated rage

Your much-lov'd Tullies daring Pen engage,

His Rome wou'd want one Glory of his tongue,

The World a Master-peece, and Fame a Song.

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=101)

### 2.51. Upon the Arrival of his Excellency Henry Earle of Clarendon, And his
entring up­on the Government of Ireland, Ian: 1685/6. by a M. of A.  
Mart: Ep:  
Phosphore, redde diem, quid Gaudia no­ster moraris, Caesare venturo,
Phosphore, redde Diem.

WHen Glorious Ormond, as belov'd as Great,

His gentle course of Government being run,

With the Day's ruler in the Ocean set

And layd the burden of his Empire down.

Like Northern Mariners, our longing Eyes

A thousand times towards the East were sent,

Expecting still the same bright Sun wou'd rise,

And bring us back the joys that with him went.

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=101) Meane
while, the wisht-for blessing to ensure,

Our earthly God design'd for us below,

His absence that we better might endure,

Two shining Planets did on us bestow.

Stars to benighted Travellers still dear,

Benign and Joyful, as the God of Light,

Who whensoer'e together they appear,

Quickly remove all terrors of the Night.

Ever Immortal Castor first did shine,

The Churches Angel and the kingdoms Eye,

With whom our Jove did noble Pollux joyn,

To share in Castor's Immortality.

The Radiant pair both now and hereto fore

Have made us safe with their united Beam.

We fear'd no Rocks, nor heard we Tempests roar,

Enlighten'd once and influenc'd by them.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=102)

Perhaps some noysy bug-bears of the Night

Or stalking shade, which dares not see the Day

May howl and menace and the feeble fright

And huff the timorous—because they may.

Such empty Mormo's possibly might scare

The unexperienc'd Mariners awhile,

But these bright Stars such happy omens are,

As make the knowing at their threatnings smile.

For now the shining Twins about to set

Point out to us another rising Sun,

Which will the fantôms of the Night defeat

And make grim Specters from his presence run.

Not the Illustrious Ormond, whose bright ray

So long had cheer'd us, we desir'd it still.

But a new Sun will walk in Ormonds way

And all that Princes brave desire fulfil.

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=102)

Sprung from a Loyal Sire! Renoun'd, and wise;

Akin to Princes and to Crowns allied:

Whom Great men Honor and whom Good men prise.

How happy are we in so blest a guide!

Hail, Glorious light! long lookt for Sun, all Hail,

Welcome as Day to Winter Passengers,

Whose warm and powerful influence will not fail

To raise our Spirits and repress our fears.

He with wise conduct and resistless Art

Will charm our foes and all our doubts will clear,

Fresh vigor and new courage will impart,

A frighted Church and fainting Kingdom cheer.

Then, Ireland, once more lift thy drooping head,

And read thy safety in thy Rulers face;

His Power which cou'd ev'n raise thee from the Dead

Will soon restore thee to thy former grace.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=103)

From forth an Orbe of able Statesmen chose

By our discerning Monarch, wise, and just.

He's judg'd most fit thy troubles to compose,

And to make good thy Princes mighty trust.

Our Churches firm support, and friend he'l prove,

The Laws Instructor, Learnings Patron too,

The good will cherish, and the Loyal love,

All this, and more than this he'l be, and do.

Arise then, Gracious clarcndon, and sway

That People who have long'd for your Arrive

Who love your Person, and with joy obey

Even while the God-like Ormond is alive.

The Sun and you do now together get,

And give new life, new influence to men,

May you, (unlike to him,) or never set,

Or like him ever rise to us agen.

[[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=103)

### 2.52. A Poem against fruition written on the read­ing in Mountains Essay:
By Alexis.

AH wretched Man! whom neither fate can please

Nor Heavens indulgent to his wish can bless,

Desire torments him, or fruition cloys,

Fruition which shou'd make his bliss, destroys;

Far from our Eyes th' inchanting objects set

Advantage by the friendly distance get.

Fruition shews the cheat, and views 'em near,

Then all their borrow'd splendours plain appear,

And we what with much care we gain and skill

An empty nothing find, or real ill.

Thus disappointed, our mistaken thought,

Not finding satisfaction which it sought

Renews its search, and with much toyl and pain

Most wisely strives to be deceiv'd again.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=104)Hurried
by our fantastick wild desire

We loath the present, absent things admire,

Those we adore, and fair Idea's frame,

And those enjoy'd we think wou'd quench the flame

In vain, the Ambitious feaver still returns

And with redoubled fire more fiercely burns.

Our boundless vast desires can know no rest,

But travel forward still and labour to be blest.

Philosophers and Poets strove in vain

The restless anxious Progress to restrain,

And to their loss soon found their Good supream

An Airy notion and a pleasing Dream.

For happiness is no where to be found,

But flys the searcher, like enchanted ground.

Are we then masters or the slaves of things?

Poor wretched vassalls, or terrestial Kings?

Left to our reason, and by that betray'd,

We lose a present bliss to catch a shade.

[[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=104)Unstasify'd
with Beauteous natures store

The universal Monarch Man is only poor.

### 2.53. To Alexis in Answer to his Poem against Fruition.  
ODE. by Mrs. B.

AH hapless sex! who bear no charms,

But what like lightning flash and are no more,

False fires sent down for baneful harms,

Fires which the fleeting Lover feebly warms

And given like past Beboches o're,

Like Songs that please, (thô bad,) when new,

But learn'd by heart neglected grew.

In vain did Heav'n adorn the shape and face

With Beautyes which by Angels forms it drew:

In vain the mind with brighter Glories Grace,

While all our joys are stinted to the space

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=105)Of one
betraying enterview,

With one surrender to the eager will

We're short-liv'd nothing, or a real ill.

Since Man with that inconstancy was born,

To love the absent, and the present scorn.

Why do we deck, why do we dress

For such a short-liv'd happiness?

Why do we put Attraction on,

Since either way tis we must be undon?

They fly if Honour take our part,

Our Virtue drives 'em o're the field.

We lose 'em by too much desert,

And Oh! they fly us if we yeild.

Ye Gods! is there no charm in all the fair

To fix this wild, this faithless, wanderer.

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=105)

Man! our great business and our aim,

For whom we spread our fruitless snares,

No sooner kindles the designing flame,

But to the next bright object bears

The Trophies of his conquest and our shame:

Inconstancy's the good supream

The rest is airy Notion, empty Dream!

Then, heedless Nymph, be rul'd by me

If e're your Swain the blise desire;

Think like Alexis he may be

Whose wisht Possession damps his fire;

The roving youth in every shade

Has left some sighing and abandon'd Maid,

For tis a fatal lesson he has learn'd,

After fruition ne're to be concern'd.

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=106)

### 2.54. To Alexis, On his saying, I lov'd a Man that talk'd much. by Mrs. B.

ALexis, since you'l have it so

I grant I am impertinent.

And till this moment did not know

Thrô all my life what 'twas I ment;

Your kind opinion was th' unflattering Glass,

In which my mind sound how deform'd it was.

In your clear sense which knows no art,

I saw the error of my Soul;

And all the feebless of my heart,

With one reflection you controul,

Kind as a God, and gently you chastise,

By what you hate, you teach me to be wise.

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=106)

Impertinence, my sexes shame,

(Which has so long my life persu'd,)

You with such modesty reclaim

As all the Woman has subdu'd.

To so divine a power what must I owe,

That renders me so like the perfect—you?

That conversable thing I hate

Already with a just disdain,

Who Prid's himself upon his prate

And is of word, (that Nonsense,) vain;

When in your few appears such excellence,

They have reproacht, and charm'd me into sense.

For ever may I listning sit,

Thô but each hour a word be born:

I wou'd attend the coming wit,

And bless what can so well inform:

Let the dull World henceforth to words be damn'd,

I'm into nobler sense than talking sham'd.

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=107)

### 2.55. A PASTORAL Pindarick.  
On the Marriage of the Right Honourable the Earle of Dorset and Midlesex, to
the Lady Mary Compton.  
A DIALOGUE. Between Damon and Aminta.

By Mrs. Behn.

Aminta.

WHither, young Damon, whither in such hast,

Swift as the Winds you sweep the Grove,

The Amorous God of Day scarce hy'd so fast

After his flying Love?

Damon.

Aminta, view my Face, and thence survey

My very Soul and all its mighty joy!

[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=107)A joy
too great to be conceal'd,

And without speaking is reveal'd;

For this eternal Holyday.

A Day to place i'th' Shepherds Kalendar,

To stand the glory of the circling year.

Let it's blest date on every Bark be set,

And every Echo its dear name repeat.

Let 'em tell all the neighbouring Woods and Plains,

That Lysidus, the Beauty of the Swains,

Our darling youth, our wonder and our Pride,

Is blest with fair Clemena for a Bride.

Oh happy Pair! Let all the Groves rejoyce,

And gladness fill each heart and every voyce!

Aminta.

Clemena! that bright maid for whom our Shepherds pine,

For whom so many weeping Eyes decline!

For whom the Echos all complain,

For whom with sigh and falling tears

The Lover in his soft despairs

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=108)Disturbs
the Peaceful Rivers gliding stream?

The bright Clemena who has been so long

The destinie of hearts and yet so young,

She that has robb'd so many of content

Yet is herself so Sweet, so Innocent.

She, that as many hearts invade [...],

As charming Lysidus has conquer'd maids,

Oh tell me, Damon, is the lovely fair

Become the dear reward of all the Shepherds care.

Has Lysidus that prize of Glory won

For whom so many sighing Swains must be undon?

Damon.

Yes, it was destin'd from Eternity,

They only shou'd each other's be,

Hail, lovely pair, whom every God design'd

In your first great Creation shou'd be joyn'd.

Aminta.

Oh, Damon, this is vain Philosophie,

'Tis chance and not Divinity,

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=108)That
guides Loves Partial Darts;

And we in vain the Boy implore

To make them Love whom we Adore.

And all the other powers take little care of hearts,

The very Soule's by intr'est sway'd,

And nobler passion now by fortune is betray'd;

By sad experience this I know,

And sigh, Alas! in vain because tis true.

Damon.

Too often and too fatally we find

Portion and Joynture charm the mind,

Large Flocks and Herds, and spacious Plains

Becoms the merit of the Swains.

But here, thô both did equally abound,

'Twas youth, 'twas wit, was Beauty gave the equal wound;

Their Soules were one before they mortal being found,

Iove when he layd his awful Thunder by

And all his softest Attributes put on,

[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=109)When
Heav'n was Gay, and the vast Glittering Sky

With Deities all wondering and attentive shone,

The God his Luckyest heat to try

Form'd their great Soules of one Immortal Ray,

He thought, and form'd, as first he did the World,

But with this difference, That from Chaos came,

These from a beam, which, from his God-head hurl'd

Kindl'd into an everlasting flame.

He smiling saw the mighty work was good,

While all the lesser Gods around him gazing stood.

He saw the shining Model bright and Great

But oh! they were not yet compleat,

For not one God but did the flames inspire,

With sparks of their Divinest fire.

Diana took the lovely Female Soul,

And did its fiercer Atoms cool;

Softn'd the flame and plac'd a Chrystal Ice

About the sacred Paradise,

Bath'd it all or'e in Virgin Tears,

[[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=109)Mixt
with the fragrant Dew the Rose receives,

Into the bosom of her untoucht leaves,

And dry'd it with the breath of Vestal Prayers,

Iuno did great Majestick thought inspire

And Pallas toucht it with Heroick fire.

While Mars, Apollo, Love and Venus sate,

About the Hero's Soul in high debate,

Each claims it all, but all in vain contend,

In vain appeal to mighty Iove,

Who equal Portions did to all extend.

This to the God of wit, and that to Love,

Another to the Queen of soft desire,

And the fierce God of War compleats the rest,

Guilds it all or'e with Martial fire;

While Love, and Wit, Beauty and War exprest

Their finest Arts, and the bright Beings all in Glory drest.

While each in their Divine imployments strove

By every charm these new-form'd l'ghts t'improve,

They left a space untoucht for might yer Love.

[[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=110)The
finishing last strokes the Boy perform'd▪

Who from his Quiver took a Golden Dart

That cou'd a sympathizing wound impart,

And toucht 'em both, and with one flame they burn'd.

The next great work was to create two frames

Of the Divinest form,

Fit to contain these heavenly flames.

The Gods decreed, and charming Lysidus was born,

Born, and grew up the wonder of the Plains,

Joy of the Nymphs and Glory of the Swains.

And warm'd all hearts with his inchanting strains;

Soft were the Songs, which from his lips did flow,

Soft as the Soul which the fine thought conceiv'd.

Soft as the sighs the charming Virgin breath'd

The first dear night of the chast nuptial vow.

The noble youth even Daphnis do's excel

Oh never Shepherd pip'd and sung so well.

Aminta.

[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=110)

Now, Damon, you are in your proper sphear,

While of his wit you give a character.

But who inspir'd you a Philosopher?

Damon.

Old Colin, when we oft have led our Flocks

Beneath the shelter of the shad's and Rocks,

While other youths more vainly spent their time,

I listen'd to the wonderous Bard;

And while he sung of things sublime

With reverend pleasure heard.

He soar'd to the Divine abodes

And told the secrets of the Gods.

And oft discours'd of Love and Sympathy;

For he as well as thou and I

Had sigh't for some dear object of desire;

But oh! till now I ne're cou'd prove

That secret mystery of Love;

Ne're saw two hearts thus burn with equal fire.

Aminta.

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=111)

But, oh! what Nymph e're saw the noble youth

That was not to eternal Love betray'd?

Damon.

And, oh! what swain e're saw the Lovely maid,

That wou'd not plight her his eternal faith!

Not unblown Roses, or the new-born day

Or pointed Sun-beams, when they gild the skys,

Are half so sweet, are half so bright and gay,

As young Clemena's charming Face and Eyes!

Aminta.

Not full-blown flowrs, when all their luster's on

Whom every bosom longs to wear,

Nor the spread Glories of the mid-days sun

Can with the charming Lysidus compare.

Damon.

Not the soft gales of gentle breez

That whisper to the yeilding Trees,

Nor songs of Birds that thrô the Groves rejoyce,

Are half so sweet, so soft, as young Clemena's voyce.

Aminta.

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=111)

Not murmurs of the Rivulets and Springs,

When thrô the glades they purling glide along

And listen when the wondrous shepherd sings,

Are half so sweet as is the Shepherds song.

Damon.

Not young Diana in her eager chase

When by her careless flying Robe betray'd,

Discovering every charm and every Grace,

Has more surprising Beauty than the brighter maid.

Aminta.

The gay young Monarch of the cheerful May

Adorn'd with all the Trophies he has won,

Vain with the Homage of the joyful day

Compar'd to Lysidus wou'd be undone.

Damon.

Aminta, cease; and let me hast away,

For while upon this Theam you dwell,

You speak the noble youth so just, so well,

I cou'd for ever listning stay.

Aminta.

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=112)

And while Clemena's praise becoms thy choyce,

My Ravisht soul is fixt upon thy voyce.

Damon.

But see the Nymphs and dancing swains

Ascend the Hill from yonder Plains,

With Wreathes and Garlands finely made,

To crown the lovely Bride and Bridegrooms head,

And I amongst the humbler throng

My Sacrifice must bring

A rural Hymeneal song,

Alexis he shall pipe while I will sing.

Had I been blest with Flocks or Herd

A nobler Tribute I'd prepar'd,

With darling Lambs the Altars I wou'd throng:

But I, alas! can only offer song.

Song too obscure, too humble verse

For this days glory to reherse,

But Lysidus, like Heav'n, is kind,

And for the Sacrifice accepts the Humble mind.

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=112)If he
vouchsafe to listen to my Ode

He makes me happyer than a fancy'd God.

### 2.56. On Desire  
A Pindarick.

By Mrs. B.

WHat Art thou, oh! thou new-found pain?

From what infection dost thou spring?

Tell me—oh! tell me, thou inchanting thing,

Thy nature, and thy name;

Inform me by what subtil Art,

What powerful Influence,

You got such vast Dominion in a part

Of my unheeded, and unguarded, heart,

That fame and Honour cannot drive yee thence.

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=113)

Oh! mischievous usurper of my Peace;

Oh! soft intruder on my solitude,

Charming disturber of my ease,

That hast my nobler fate persu'd,

And all the Glorys of my life subdu'd.

Thou haunt'st my inconvenient hours

The business of the Day, nor silence of the night,

That shou'd to cares and sleep invite,

Can bid defyance to thy conquering powers.

Where hast thou been this live-long Age

That from my Birth till now,

Thou never coud'st one thought engage,

Or charm my soul with the uneasy rage

That made it all its humble feebles know?

Where wert thou, oh, malicious spright,

When shining Honour did invite.?

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=113)When
interest call'd, then thou wert shy,

Nor to my aid one kind propension brought,

Nor wou'd'st inspire one tender thought,

When Princes at my feet did lye.

When thou coud'st mix ambition with my joy,

Then peevish Phantôm thou wer't nice and coy,

Not Beauty cou'd invite thee then

Nor all the Arts of lavish Men!

Not all the powerful Rhetorick of the Tongue

Not sacred Wit cou'd charm thee on;

Not the soft play that lovers make,

Nor sigh cou'd fan thee to a fire,

Not pleading tears, nor vows cou'd thee awake,

Or warm the unform'd somthing — to desire.

Oft I've conjur'd thee to appear

By youth, by love, by all their powrs,

Have searcht and sought thee every where,

In silent Groves, in lonely bowrs:

[[Page 148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=114)On
Flowry beds where lovers wishing lye,

In sheltering Woods where sighing maids

To their assigning Shepherds hye,

And hide their blushes in the gloom of shades:

Yet there, even there, thô youth assail'd,

Where Beauty prostrate lay and fortune woo'd,

My heart insensible to neither bow'd

Thy lucky aid was wanting to prevail.

In courts I sought thee then, thy proper sphear

But thou in crowds we'rt stifl'd there,

Int'rest did all the loving business do,

Invites the youths and wins the Virgins too.

Or if by chance some heart thy empire own

(Ah power ingrate!) the slave must be undone.

Tell me, thou nimble fire, that dost dilate

Thy mighty force thrô every part,

What God, or Human power did thee create

In my, till now, unfacil heart?

[[Page 149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=114)Art thou
some welcome plague sent from above

In this dear form, this kind disguise?

Or the false offspring of mistaken love,

Begot by some soft thought that faintly strove,

With the bright peircing Beautys of Lysanders Eyes?

Yes, yes, tormenter, I have found thee now;

And found to whom thou dost thy being owe,

'Tis thou the blushes dost impart,

For thee this languishment I wear,

'Tis thou that tremblest in my heart

When the dear Shepherd do's appear,

I faint, I dye with pleasing pain,

My words intruding sighing break

When e're I touch the charming swain

When e're I gaze, when e're I speak.

Thy conscious fire is mingl'd with my love,

As in the sanctify'd abodes

Misguided worshippers approve

The mixing Idol with their Gods.

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=115)

In vain, alas! in vain I strive

With errors, which my soul do please and vex,

For superstition will survive,

Purer Religion to perplex.

Oh! tell me you, Philosophers, in love,

That can its burning feaverish fits controul,

By what strange Arts you cure the soul,

And the fierce Calenture remove?

Tell me, yee fair ones, that exchange desire,

How tis you hid the kindling fire.

Oh! wou'd you but confess the truth,

It is not real virtue makes you nice:

But when you do resist the pressing youth,

'Tis want of dear desire, to thaw the Virgin Ico,

And while your young adorers lye

All languishing and hopeless at your feet,

Raising new Trophies to your chastity,

Oh tell me, how you do remain discreet?

[[Page 151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=115)

How you suppress the rising sighs,

And the soft yeilding soul that wishes in your Eyes?

While to th' admiring crow'd you nice are found;

Some dear, some secret, youth that gives the wound

Informs you, all your virtu's but a cheat

And Honour but a false disguise,

Your modesty a necessary bait

To gain the dull repute of being wise.

Deceive the foolish World—deceive it on,

And veil your passions in your pride;

But now I've found your feebles by my own,

From me the needful fraud you cannot hide.

Thô tis a mighty power must move

The soul to this degree of love,

And thô with virtue I the World perplex,

Lysander finds the weekness of my sex,

So Helen while from Theseus arms she fled,

To charming Paris yeilds her heart and Bed.

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=116)

### 2.57. SONG. By a person of Quality.

AH cruel Beauty, cou'd you prove

More tender or less fair.

You neither wou'd provoke my Love

Nor cause me to despair.

But your dissembling charming Eyes

My easy hope beguiles,

And thô a Rock beneath'em lys

The tempting surface smiles.

To what your sex on ours impose

My humble Love comply'd,

And when my secret I disclos'd

Thought modesty deny'd;

Yes sure, said I, her yeilding heart

Pertakes of my desire,

But nicer Honour feigns this part

To hide the rising fire.

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=116)

Against your mind my sute I told,

And slighted vows renew'd,

Yet you insensibly were cold

And I but vainly woo'd.

Then for return a scorn prepare

Or lay that frown aside,

Affected coyness I can bear

But hate insulting Pride!

### 2.58. SONG. By a person of Quality.

UNder the Beams of Celia's Eyes,

See the fair Shepherd panting lys,

For whom all other Beauty dys?

Him thô she burn with equal fire

She suffers at her feet t' expire

Preferring glory to desire.

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=117)

Dye then, oh dye, unhappy swain,

And leave her to lament in vain

The cruel sports of her disdain;

You fall a Publique sacrifice

Since she will weep away those Eyes

By whose each look a lover dyes.

### 2.59. SONG. I. by the same hand.

WHen sable night had conquer'd day,

And Beauteous Cynthia rose,

As I in tears reflecting lay

On Cloe's faithless vows.

The God of Love appear'd to me

To heal my wounded heart,

The Influencing Deity

With pleasure arm'd each Dart.

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=117)Fond
man, said he, here end thy wo,

Till she my power and Iustice know,

The foolish sex shall all do so.

2.

And for thy ease, believe no bliss

Is perfect without pain,

The fairest Summer hurtful is

Without some showrs of Rain.

The Ioys of Heaven who wou'd prise

If men too cheaply bought,

the dearest part of mortal Ioys

Most charming is when sought.

And thô with dross true Love they pay,

Those that know finest metals say,

No Gold will coyn without allay.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=118)

3.

But that the generous Lover may

Not always sigh in vain,

The cruel Nymph that kills to day

To morrow shall be slain.

The little God no sooner spoke,

But from my sight he flew,

And I that groan'd with Cloe's yoak,

Found Loves revenge was true.

Her proud hard heart too late did turn;

With fiercer flames than mine did burn;

While I as much began to scorn.

[[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=118)

### 2.60. A Pastoral Song on the late King.

WHy, Phillis, in this mournful dress,

Ah! why so full of Tears,

These sighs, my dearest Shepherdess,

Suit not thy tender years.

Thy sheep lye panting on the plain

Not one of them will feed;

Thy Lambs in peircing crys complain

Whence, whence, does this proceed?

Ah, Strephon, we are all undone,

With trembling voyce, she said,

The best of Men to Heaven is gone,

The great Amintor's dead.

What will become of thou and I,

Of these dear Flocks that moan,

They will be Stole, and we shall dye,

Now wise Amintor's gone?

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=119)Best
blessings rest upon his Soul,

The Loyal Swain reply'd,

Yet let this thought thy greif controul,

Pan does for us provide;

And thô the brave Amintor's gone,

Alexis does remain,

Since he is left we're not undone,

Nor ought we to complain.

In him our loss is made amends,

He'll us in safty keep

From whigish Swains he'll us defend,

From the French Fox our Sheep;

Then cheer thy Flocks and weep no more,

But stop that pious tide,

With Voice and Pipe lets Pan adore,

For sending such a guide.

[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=119)

### 2.61. The Departure.

[by Damon: Nouem. 78.]

I Never knew what 'twas to mourn,

Ere the too hasty glass had run

Which measur'd every thought of mine:

Still as I offer'd at Loves shrine

My heart a bleeding Sacrifice,

The conquest of Aminta's Eyes.

Those shining objects of my Love,

How did the searching passion rove,

O're all my soul its quickning fire

Melted my heart with soft desire,

While my Aminta blest this plain,

I never felt another pain

Than Love; which always do's belong

To the gentle Amorous throng;

[[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=120)But now—

Oh! wonder not, great God of Love,

If the strong passion cease to move

Within my soul; Aminta's gone,

And left me here to sigh alone.

How vain do's the vast Globe appear

No sweetning pleasures can live here,

While bright Aminta is not neer.

No warbling notes which fill the Wood,

Nor murmurs which the streams afford,

Can raise in me that harmony

Which ravisht with such extasie.

When the fair she approacht, each charm

Guarded my humble soul from harm,

Nothing can now transport or cheer

A tortur'd soul that's fill'd with fear;

Since lov'd Aminta quits the place,

Which she with Innocence did Grace.

Then will I wander to some Grove

Where I'le lament my absent Love,

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=120)And with
cold Winter still complain

Till the lost spring return again.

### 2.62. To Amintas,  
Upon reading the Lives of some of the Ro­mans, by Mrs. B.

HAd'st thou, Amintas, liv'd in that great age,

When hardly Beauty was to nature known,

What numbers to thy side might'st thou engage

And conquer'd Kingdoms by thy looks alone?

That age when valor they did Beauty name,

When Men did justly our brave sex prefer,

Cause they durst dye, and scorn the publick shame

Of adding Glory to the conqueror.

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=121)

Had mighty Scipio had thy charming face,

Great Sophonisbe had refus'd to dye,

Her passion o're the sense of her disgrace

Had gain'd the more obliging victory.

Nor less wou'd Massanissa too have done,

But to such Eyes, as to his Sword wou'd bow,

For neither sex can here thy fetters shun,

Being all Scipio, and Amintas too.

Had'st thou great Caesar been, the greater Queen,

Wou'd trembling have her mortal Asps lay'd by

In thee she had not only Caesar seen,

But all she did adore in Antony.

Had daring Sextus had thy lovely shape,

The fairest Woman living had not dy'd.

But blest the darkness that secur'd the Rape,

Suffering her Pleasure to have debauch't her Pride.

[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=121)

Nor had he stoln to Rome to have quencht his fire,

If thee resistless in his Camp he'd seen,

Thy Eyes had kept his virtue all intire,

And Rome a happy monarchy had been.

Had Pompey lookt like thee, tho he had prov'd

The vanquisht, yet from Egypts faithless King

He had receiv'd the vows of being belov'd.

In stead of Orders for his murdering.

But here, Amintas, thy misfortune lys,

Nor brave nor good are in our age esteem'd,

Content thee then with meaner victorys,

Unless that Glorious age cou'd be redeem'd.

A. B.

[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=122)

### 2.63. On the first discovery of falseness in Amintas.

By Mrs. B.

MAke hast! make hast! my miserable soul,

To some unknown and solitary Grove,

Where nothing may thy Languishment controle

Where thou maist never hear the name of Love.

Where unconfin'd, and free, as whispering Air,

Thou maist caress and welcome thy despair:

Where no dissembl'd complisance may veil

The griefes with which, my soul, thou art op­prest.

But dying, breath thyself out in a tale

That may declare the cause of thy unrest:

The toyles of Death 't will render far more light

And soon convey thee to the shades of night.

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=122)

Search then, my soul, some unfrequented place,

Some place that nature meant her own repose:

When she her-self with-drew from human race,

Displeas'd with wanton Lovers vows and oaths.

Where Sol cou'd never dart a busy Ray,

And where the softer winds ne're met to play.

By the sad purling of some Rivulet

O're which the bending Yew and Willow grow,

That scarce the glimmerings of the day permit,

To view the melancholy Banks below,

Where dwells no noyse but what the murmurs make,

When the unwilling stream the shade forsakes.

There on a Bed of Moss and new-faln leaves,

Which the Triumphant Trees once proudly bore,

Thô now thrown off by every wind that breaths,

Despis'd by what they did adorn before,

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=123)And who,
like useless me, regardless lye

While springing beautys do the boughs supply.

There lay thee down, my soul, and breath thy last,

And calmly to the unknown regions fly;

But e're thou do'st thy stock of life exhaust,

Let the ungrateful know, why tis you dye.

Perhaps the gentle winds may chance to bear

Thy dying accents to Amintas ear.

Breath out thy Passion; tell him of his power

And how thy flame was once by him approv'd.

How soon as wisht he was thy conqueror,

No sooner spoke of Love, but was belov'd.

His wonderous Eyes, what weak resistance sound,

While every charming word begat a wound?

Here thou wilt grow impatient to be gone,

And thrô my willing Eyes will silent pass,

Into the stream that gently glides along,

But stay thy hasty flight, (my Soul,) alas,

[[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=123)A
thought more cruel will thy  [...]light secure,

Thought, that can no admittance give to cure.

Think, how the prostrate Insidel now lys,

An humble suppliant at anothers feet,

Think, while he begs for pity from her Eyes.

He sacrifices thee with-out regreet.

Think, how the faithless treated thee last night,

And then, my tortur'd soul, assume thy flight.

### 2.64. SONG.

REason at last has got the day,

To Silvia's yoke no more I bow,

The harder 'twas to break away,

The sweeter is my freedome now,

Yet I resolve the scornful Nymph to see,

And tell her, I'm as unconcern'd as she.

[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=124) But why
shou'd I a visit make,

To her whose charms I did admire,

Unless my soul her part d'ost take,

Unknowing of i'ts amorous fire?

Alas! my flames are greater than before,

For he loves most, who thinks he loves no more.

### 2.65. On a Blew spot made in a Ladys neck by Gun­powder, by a person of
Quality.

WHat blew is that that do's so charming shew,

A Hill of Saphire in a Field of Snow.

Where Loye in ambush lys to shoot his Darts,

And make a prey of the beholders hearts.

Of that fine spot what cause can be assign'd,

Was it by nature or by art design'd?

Nature so busie was to make your face,

In beautyfying it with every grace,

Shee cou'd not mind any inferior part,

So that this needs must be the work of Art:

[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=124)Powder,
which first was for destruction meant,

Was here converted into ornament;

But yet retains its wonted nature still,

And from your neck, as from a Port do's kill.

### 2.66. On Dydo.

UNhappy Dydo, all her life

As well a Mistress, as a Wife,

No sooner dys her Husband, but she flys;

No sooner flys her Lover, but she dys.

### 2.67. SONG.

AS the inamour'd Thirsis lay

With his Silvia reconcil'd,

whose Eyes did brighter beams display,

While the lovely charmer smil'd.

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=125)

With Ioy transported cry'd, my dear,

Let us, let us, often jar,

Peace always sweetest do's appear

After sharpe fatigues of War.

No, said the Nymph, mistaken swain,

'Tis best our quarrels to give o're.

Kingdoms may jar, and close again,

But broken Love cements no more.

### 2.68. The Choyce.

SIlvia, of all your Amorous train

The Black, the Brown, or Fair,

The wealthy Lord, or humble Swain

For whom will you declare?

If wealth or Beauty do prevail,

My claim I then resign;

If truth and love, I cannot faile,

And Silvia must be mine.

[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=125)

### 2.69. A Letter to Asfrea.

THe Muse, which fair Astrea first inspir'd,

Has droopt and lost its flame since she retir'd;

And to the feather'd Poets which belong

To Groves resigns her fainting Song.

Nor is this Lethargy her fate alone

For general dulness has possest the Town,

The Town that now can boast no crowded street,

Where none but sharp set younger Brothers meet alas!

For well they know their mirth and Wit,

Their only coyn,) will not i'th country pass.

Yet in a cloud of smoke o're Coffee dry,

What pleasure tis to hear the Sharpers cry.

Pox o' this business, that still sticks and dwells

Upon my hands and keeps me from the Wells,

But I resolve a bold escape to make,

And to throng'd Tunbridg a short Iorney take;

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=126)My
humblest service to Eliza give,

And when your Gloriana shall receive

Your next, let my respects have then a place.

Let fair Astrea last be pleas'd to grace

These lines with her acceptance, and excuse

The broken Language of a dying Muse.

Since she's already drawing to a close,

To write in verse I can no more propose,

What next I send expect in honest prose.

### 2.70. To Mrs B. from a Lady who had a desire to see her, and who complains
on the ingra­titude of her fugitive Lover.

KInd are my Stars indeed but that so late

And I stranger to a gentle fate,

If such a one I meet and chance to know,

I have not proper words to call it so,

Wondering at happiness, surpris'd as far

As a rough General always train'd to War,

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=126)Snatch'd
from the midst of cruel fierce alarms,

Into a thousand unexpected charms;

A joy like this, how shall I entertain,

With a heart wounded, and a soul in pain;

In my laborious enterprises crost,

My life near Finis, and the Day quite lost.

Cleone had a Swain, and lov'd the youth,

Not for his Beauty but his seeming truth,

Not for a goodly herd or high descent,

(Ah that no God my ruin would prevent,)

What thô the Swain had neither Sheep nor land,

I scorn'd the goods of fortunes partial hand;

So generous was my passion for the slave,

Because I equally suppos'd him brave.

Oh! give me leave to sigh one sad adieu,

Then wholly dedicate myself to you.

I have no business here but to complain

Of all the treasons of an ingrate Swain,

Since my inhumane perjur'd Shepherd's gone,

Night four seven times has put her mantle on,

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=127)And
three seven times Aurora has appear'd,

Since last I from the cruel Strephon▪ heard▪

Whither he lives, is dead, or on what shore,

(Patience, ye Gods! ala I know no more,

Then why my Stars do my destruction press,

Send me your pity, bounteous Shepherdess;

That I the face of grief no more may know,

If I deserve it that cou'd Love so low;

Consult not that, but charity and give

One tender pittying sigh that I may live:

(That I may thus make my complaint to you,)

Kind are my Stars indeed at last 'tis true;

Let not my rude and untam'd griefs destroy,

The early glimmerings of an infant joy:

And add not your neglect, for if you doe,

Cleone finds her desolation too!

Know this it yet remains in your fair breast,

To render me the happy or unblest.

You may act miracles if you'l be kind,

Make me true joys in real sorrows find;

[[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=127)And
bless the hour I hither did pursue

A faithless Swain and found access to you▪

Accept the heart I here to you present,

By the ingratitude of Strephon rent,

Till then gay, noble, full of brave disdain,

And unless yours prevent shall be again;

As once it was, if in your generous brest,

It may be Pensioner at my request

No more to Treasons subject as before

To be betray'd by a fair tale no more,

As large as once, as uncontroul'd and free,

But yet at your command shall always be.

### 2.71. To the fair Clarinda, who made Love to me, imagin'd more than Woman.

By Mrs. B.

FAir lovely Maid, or if that Title be

Too weak, too Feminine for Nobler thee,

Permit a Name that more Approaches Truth:

And let me call thee, Lovely Charming Youth.

[[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=128)This
last will justifie my soft complaint,

While that may serve to lessen my constraint;

And without Blushes I the Youth persue,

When so much beauteous Woman is in view.

Against thy Charms we struggle but in vain

With thy deluding Form thou giv'st us pain,

While the bright Nymph betrays us to the Swain.

In pity to our Sex sure thou wer't sent,

That we might Love, and yet be Innocent:

For sure no Crime with thee we can commit;

Or if we shou'd—thy Form excuses it.

For who, that gathers fairest Flowers believes

A Snake lies hid beneath the Fragrant Leaves.

Thou beauteous Wonder of a different kind,

Soft Cloris with the dear Alexis join'd;

When e'r the Manly part of thee, wou'd plead

Thou tempts us with the Image of the Maid,

While we the noblest Passions do extend

The Love to Hermes, Aphrodite the Friend.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=128)

## Appendix A The Table

  * TO a fair Lady, sent with a Miscellany of Poems. P. 1
  * To Urania in Mourning. 2
  * SONG. 3
  * On Beauty, A Pindarick. 4
  * SONG. 10
  * SONG. Ibid.
  * To the Heroick Antonia. 11
  * To Laurinda. 13
  * On a Lady singing. 15
  * To Mr. W. 16
  * Armida: Or, the fair Gill. 17
  * Predictions for Saturday next. 21
  * To Astrea, on her sending me a Bottle of Orange Flower Water. 22
  * To Cloris, going into the Country. 23
  * SONG. 24
  * To a Lady, (whom he never saw, nor had any description of,) to prove he loves her, By a Person of Quality. 24
  * Song by the same hand. 26
  * Sleeping on her fair hand. 28
  * To Gloriana, on saying I had a tough heart. Ibid.
  * Sent with Ovid's Epistles to a fair Lady. 29
  * Sent with a Basket of Fruit. 30
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=129) Love cannot be indifferent. 31
  * To Astrea. On her absence, during which I could not write. 32
  * To the most accomplisht Heroick, and incomparable, the Lady Antonia. 33
  * Sent with Cowley's Works to Astrea. 35
  * To my Heart. 36
  * Dialogue. Thirsis and Clarona. 39
  * SONG. 40
  * Strephon, to his three Mistresses. 42
  * To the Fam'd Antonia. On her Duelling. 44
  * SONG. 47
  * On an ungreateful and undeserving Mistress, whom he could not help loving. 49
  * On the Death of Melantha. 55
  * To the Nightingal coming in the spring. 60
  * A Pastoral on the Marriage of the Right Honourable the Earl of Ossory, to the Lady Mary Somerset. By Edw. Arwaker, M. A. 71
  * A SONG. 80
  * A Pastoral on the Death of His late Majesty, writtet by M. Otway. 81
  * SONG. 82
  * Strephons complaint banisht from Sacarisa. 84
  * An Elegie written by Mr. W. O. 85
  * A Pindarick to Mrs. Behn, on her Poem on the Coronation written by a Lady. 89
  * To Mr. Wolseley on his Preface to Valentinan. By a Lady of Quality. 95
  * Mr. Wolseley's Answer to the foregoing Copy. 96
  * To the Honourable Sir Francis Fane on his Play called the Sacrifice, by Mrs. A. B. 102
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=129) Cato's Answer to Labienus, when he advis'd him to consult the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon. 106
  * To his Grace the Duke of Ormond upon his leaving the Government of Ireland. 109
  * SONG. 111
  * To Damon. 112
  * Song of Basset, by Sir George Etherege. 118
  * To the Lord Bishop of Rochester on his History of the Plot. 120
  * Vpon the arrival of his Excellency the Earl of Cla­rendon in Ireland, by a M. of A. 122
  * A Poem against Fruition, by Alexis. 127
  * To Alexis in Answer to his Poem against Fruition. 129
  * To Alexis, on his saying, I lov'd a man that talkt much by Mrs. B. 132
  * A Pastoral on the Marriage of the Right Honourable the Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, to the Lady Mary Compton by Mrs. Behn. 134
  * On desire. A Pindarick by Mrs. B. 145
  * Song. By a Person of Quality. 152
  * Song. By a Person of Quality. 153
  * Song. By the same hand. 154
  * A Pastoral Song on the late King. 157
  * The departure, by Damon: Novemb. 78\. 159
  * To Amintas, upon reading the lives of some of the Romans by Mrs. B. 161
  * On the first discovery of falseness in Aminta, by Mrs. B. 164
  * SONG. 167
  * On a Blow spot made in a Ladys neck by Gun-powder, by a Person of Quality. 168
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=130) On Dido. 169
  * SONG. Ibid.
  * The Choice. 170
  * A Letter to Astrea. 171
  * To Mrs. B. from a Lady who had a desire to see her. 172
  * To the fair Clarinda, who made Love to me, imagin'd more than Woman. By Mrs. B. 175

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=98886&page=130)

[Home](/)

Tallemant, Paul, 1642-1712.. Date: 1688  

