## (unknown project)

# The tryals of VVilliam Ireland, Thomas Pickering, & John Grove, for
conspiring to murder the King who upon full evidence were found guilty of high
treason at the session-house in Old-Bailye, Dec. 1, 1678, and received
sentence accordingly.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=1)

THE TRYALS OF VVILLIAM IRELAND, THOMAS PICKERING, & JOHN GROVE, For Conſpiring
to Murder the KING: Who upon Full Evidence were found Guilty of High Treaſon,
At the SESSION-HOUSE in Old-Bailye, Dec. 17\. 1678, and received Sentence
accordingly:

Reprinted at Dublin, M: DC. LXXVIII.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The TRYALS of William Ireland, Thomas Pickering, and John Grove.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=2)

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=2)

## 1\. The TRYALS of William Ireland, Thomas Pickering, and John Grove.

ON Tueſday the Seventeenth day of December, One Thouſand Six Hundred Seventy
and Eight, Thomas White alias Whitebread, William Ireland, John Fenwick,
Thomas Picker­  [...]ng [...]nd John Grove were brought from his Majeſties
Gaol of Newgate, to the Seſſions-houſe  [...]t  [...]ſtice-Hall in the Old-
Baily, being there Indicted for High Treaſon, for contriving and  [...]ot
[...]iring to Murder the King, to receive their Tryal; and the Court proceeded
thereupon  [...]s  [...]lloweth.

The Court being Set, Proclamation was made for Attendance, Thus. Clerk of
Crown, Cry [...]r make Proclamation.

Cryer,

O yes, O yes, O yes, All manner of Perſons that have any thing to do at this
General Seſſions of the Peace, holden for the City of London, Seſſions of Oyer
and Termi­  [...]er and Gaol Delivery of Newgate, holden for the City of
London and County of Middleſex, draw near and give your attendance, for now
the Court will proceed to the Pleas of the Crown for the ſame City and County.
God Save the King.

Clerk of Crown,

Cryer make proclamation.

Cryer,

O yes, All manner of Perſons are commanded to keep Silence upon pain of impri­
[...]onment. Peace about the Court.

Clerk of Crown,

Cryer make Proclamation.

Cryer,

O yes, You Good men of the County of Middleſex that are Summoned to appear
[...]ere this day, to Enquire between our Soveraign Lord the King, and the
priſoners that are  [...] ſhall be at the Bar. Anſwer to your names as you
ſhall be called every one at the firſt  [...]all and Save your iſſues.

The Jurors being called and the Defaults recorded, the Clerk of the Crown
called for  [...]he Priſoners to the Bar, viz. Thomas White alias Whitebread,
William Ireland, John Fenwick, Thomas Pickering, and John Grove, and Arraigned
them thus,

Clerk of Crown,

Thomas White alias Whitebread, hold up thy hand, Which he did.

William Ireland,

hold up thy hand. Which he did.

John Fenwick,

hold up thy hand. Which he did.

Thomas Pickering,

hold up thy hand. Which he did.

John Grove,

hold up thy hand. Which he did.

You ſtand indicted by the names of Thomas White alias Whitebread, late of the
Pariſh of St. Giles in the fields in the County of Middleſex, Clerk: William
Ireland, late of the ſame Pariſh and County, Clerk: John Fenwick, late of the
ſame Pariſh and County, Clerk: Tho­  [...] Pickering, late of the ſame Pariſh
and County Clerk: and John Grove late of the ſame  [...]h and County, Gent.
For that you five as falſe Traitors. &c. againſt the peace of our So
[...]raign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and againſt the Form of the
Stature in  [...]hat Caſe made and Provided. How ſayſt thou Thomas VVhite
alias Whitebread, art thou Guilty of this H [...]gh Treaſon whereof thou
ſtandeſt Indicted or not Guilty?

Whitebread,

Not Guilty.

Clerk of the Crown,

Culprit how wilt thou be Tryed?

Whitebread,

By God and my Country.

Clerk of Crown,

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=3)

God ſend thee a good deliverance. How ſayſt thou William Ireland, a [...] thou
Guilty of the ſame High Treaſon or not Guilty?

Ireland

Not Guilty.

Clerk of Crown,

Culprit how wilt thou be tryed?

Ireland,

By God and my Countrey.

Clerk of Crown,

God ſend thee a good Deliverance. How ſaiſt thou John Fenwick, a [...] thou
guilty of the ſame High Treaſon or not Guilty?

Fenwick,

Not Guilty.

Clerk of Crown,

Culprit how wilt thou be Tryed?

Fenwick,

By God and my Countrey.

Clerk of Crown,

God ſend thee a good deliverance. How ſaiſt thou Thomas Pickering, a [...]
thou Guilty of the ſame High Treaſon or not Guilty.

Pickering,

Not Guilty.

Clerk of Crown,

Culprit how wilt thou be Tryed?

Pickering,

By God and my Country.

Clerk of Crown,

God ſend thee a good deliverance, How ſaiſt thou John Grove, art tho [...]
Guilty of the ſame High Treaſon or not Guilty?

Grove

Not Guilty.

Clerk of Crown,

Culprit, how wilt thou be Tryed?

Grove,

By God and my Countrey,

Clerk of Crown,

God ſend thee a good Deliverance. You the Priſoners at the Bar thoſe men that
you ſhall hear called and do Perſonally appear, are to paſs between o [...]
Soveraign Lord the King and you: upon Tryal of your ſeveral Lives and deaths;
if therefore you or any of you will Challenge them or any of them, your time
is to ſpeak unto them as they come to the Book to be Sworn, before they be
ſworn.

Sir Philip Mathews to the Book.

Sir Philip Mathews.

I deſire Sir William Roberts may be called firſt. Which was granted.

Clerk of Crown,

Sir William Roberts to the Book. Look upon the Priſoners. you ſhall wel [...]
and truly Try and true deliverance make between our Soveraign Lord the King,
and th [...] Priſoners at the Bar, whom you ſhall have in your charge
according to your Evidence. S [...] help you God:

The ſame Oath was adminiſtred to th the Reſt, the Priſoners challenging none,
and thei [...] Names in Order were thus.

JURY.

  * Sir William Roberts, Baronet.
  * Sir Philip Mathews, Bar,
  * Sir charles Lee, Knight.
  * Edward VVilford, Eſq
  * John Foſter, Eſq
  * Joſhua Galliard, Eſq
  * John Byfield, Eſquire.
  * Thomas Egglesfield, Eſq
  * Thomas Johnſon, Eſq
  * John Pulford, Eſq
  * Thomas Earnesby, Eſq
  * Richard VVheeler, Gent.

Clerk of Crown,

Cryer count theſe. Sir VVillam Roberts.

Cryer,

One, &c,

Clerk of Crown,

Richard VVheeler.

Cryer,

Twelve, Good Men and True, ſtand together and hear your Evidence.

Clerk of Crown,

Cryer make Proclamation.

Cryer,

O yes, If any one can inform my Lords the Kings Juſtices, the Kings Serjeant,
the Kings Attorney▪ or this Inqueſt now to betaken▪ between our Sovereign Lord
the King and the Priſoners at the Bar, let them come forth and they ſhall be
heard, for now the Pri­ſoners ſtand at the Bar upon their deliverance: and all
others that are bound by Recogni­zance to give Evidence againſt any of the
Priſoners at the Bar, let them come forth and give their Evidence [...] or
elſe they forfe [...]t their Recognizance▪ And all Jury men of Midd [...]eſex
[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=3) that have
been ſummoned and have appeared & are not ſworn, may depart the Court and take
their eaſes.

Cl: of Crown.

Make proclamation of Silence.

Cryer,

O yes, All manner of Perſons are commanded to keep Silence upon pain of
impri­ſonment.

Cl: of Crown,

Thomas white alias Whitebread hold up thy hand which he did, and ſo of the
reſt.

You that are ſworn look upon the Priſoners and harken to their Cauſe.

You ſhall underſtand, that they ſtand Indicted by the names of Thomas White,
otherwiſe Whitebread, late of the Pariſh of St. Gyles in the Fields, in the
county of Middleſex Clerk, William Ireland, late of the ſame Pariſh in the
County aforeſaid, Clerk; John Fenwick, late of the ſame pariſh in the County
aforeſaid, Clerk, Thomas Pickering, late of the ſame pariſh in the County
aforeſaid Clerk; and John Grove, late of the ſame pariſh in the County
aforeſaid Gentleman; For that they as falſe Traytors of the moſt Illuſtrious,
Se [...]ene, and moſt Excellent Prince, Our Soverign Lord Charles the II. by
the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of
the Faith, &c. Their ſupreme and natural Lord, not haveing the Feare of God in
their hearts, nor the Duties of their Allegeance any ways weighing, but being
moved and Seduced by the inſtigation of the Devil, the cordial love, and true,
due, and natural obedience, which true and faithful Subjects of our ſaid
Soveraign, Lord the King, towards our ſaid Soverign Lord the King, ſhould and
of Right ought to bear, altogether withdrawing & endeavouring, and with their
whole ſtrength intending the peace and common tranquillity of this Kingdom of
England to di­ſturbe, and the true worſhip of God within this Kingdom of
England, uſed and by Law eſtabliſhed to overthrow, and to move, ſtir up, and
procure Rebellion within this King­dom of England, and the cordial love, and
true and due obedience, which true and ſaith­ful Subjects of our ſaid
Soveraign Lord the King, towards our ſaid ſoveraign Lord the King ſhould and
of Right ought to bear, wholly to withdraw, vanguiſh and extinquiſh, and our
ſaid Sovereign Lord the King to death, and final deſtruction to bring and put
the 24th. day of April. in the year of the Reign of our ſaid Sovereign L:
Charles the II by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
King defender of the ſaith, &c. the 30th. at the Pariſh of St. Gyles in the
Fields aforeſaid, in the County of Middleſex aforeſaid, falſly, maliciouſly,
deceitfully, adviſedly and Trayterouſly, they did propoſe, compa [...]e
imagine, and intend, to ſtir up, move, and procure ſedition and Rebellion
within this Kingdom of England, and to procure and Cauſe a miſerable ſlaughter
among the Subjects of our ſaid So­vereign L. the King. and wholly to deprive
depoſe, throw down, and diſinher it our ſaid Sovereign Lord the King from his
Royal State, Title, Power, and Government of this his Kingdom of England, and
him our ſaid Soveraign Lord the King to put to death, and ut­terly to deſtroy,
the Government of this Kingdom of England, and the ſincere Religion & worſhip
of God in the ſame Kingdom, rightly and by the Laws of the ſame Kingdom
eſta­bliſhed, for their will and pleaſure to change and alter, and wholly to
ſubvert and deſtroy the ſtate of the whole Kingdom, being in all parts thereof
well inſtituted and ordered, and to Levy War againſt our ſaid Soveraign Lord
the King within this his Realm of England, And to fulfil and bring to paſs
theſe their moſt wicked Treaſons and Trayterous deſigns and purpoſes
aforeſaid, they the ſaid Thomas White allas Whitebread, William Ireland, John
Fenwick, Thomas Pickering, & John Grove, and other falſe Tr [...]ytors unknow
[...], the ſaid ſo  [...] and Tweentieth day of April, in the ſaid 30th. year
of the Reign of our ſaid Lord the King, [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=4) with force and
arms, &c. at the pariſh of St. Giles in the Fields aforeſaid, in the County of
Mideleſex aforeſaid, falſly, maliciouſly, deceitfully, adviſedly, devilliſh
[...]y and traiterouſly did aſſemble, unite and gather themſelves together,
and then and there falſly, maliciouſly, de­ceitfully, adviſedly, devilliſhly
and traiterouſly they did conſult and agree to put and bring our ſaid
Soveraign Lord the King to death & final deſtruction, and to alter and change
the Religion rightly and by the Laws of the ſame Kingdom eſtabliſhed, to the
ſuperſtition of the Church of Rome, and that ſooner to bring to paſs and
accompliſh the ſame, their moſt wicked Treaſons and traiterous imaginations
and purpoſes aforeſaid, they the ſaid Thomas White otherwiſe Whitebread,
William Ireland, John Fenwick, Thomas Pickering, John Grove and other falſe
Traitors of our ſaid Sovereign Lord the King unknown, afterwards (to wit) the
ſaid 24th day of April, in the ſaid 30th year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord the King, at the ſaid pariſh of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County of
Midleſex aforeſaid, falſly, deceitfully, adviſedly, maliciouſly, devilliſhly
and traiterouſly they did conſult and agree, that they the ſaid Thomas
Pickering and John Grove ſhould kill and murther our ſaid Sove­reign Lord the
King: And that they the ſaid Thomas White otherwiſe Whitebread, William
Ireland, John Frenwick, and other falſe Traitors unknown, ſhould therefore
ſay, celebrate and perform a certain number of Maſſes, (then and there agreed
on among them) for the good of the ſoul of the ſaid Thomas Pickering, and
ſhould therefore pay to the ſaid John Grove a certain ſum of money, (then and
there alſo agreed on among them:) And further that the ſaid Thomas Pickering
and John Grove upon the agreement aforeſaid, then and there falſly▪
deceitfully, adviſedly, maliciouſly, devilliſhly & traiterouſly did undertake,
and to the ſaid Thomas White otherwiſe Whitebread, William Ireland, John
Fenwick, and other falſe Traitors of our ſaid Sovereign Lord the King unknown,
then and there falſly, deceitfully, adviſedly, maliciouſly, devilliſhly, and
traiterouſly they did then and there promiſe, that they the ſaid Thomas
Pickering and John Grove our ſaid Sovereign Lord the King would kill and
murther: And further, that they the ſaid Thomas White otherwiſe Whitbread,
William Ireland, John Fenwick, Thomas Pickering and John Grove, and other
falſe Traitors of our ſaid Sovereign Lord the King unknown, afterwards (to
wit) the ſaid 24th day of April, in the thirtieth year of the Reign of our
ſaid Soverign Lord the King, at the ſaid pariſh of St. Giles in the Fields in
the County of Middleſex aforeſaid, falſly, deceitfully, adviſedly,
mali­ciouſly, devilliſhly and traiterouſly did ſeverally plight their Faith
every one to other of them, and did then and their ſwear and promiſe upon the
Sacrament, to conceal, and not to divulge their ſaid moſt wicked Treaſons, and
traiterons compaſſings, conſultations, and purpoſes aforeſaid, ſo among them
had traiterouſly to kill and murther our ſaid Sovereign Lord the King, and to
introduce the Roman Religion, to be uſed within this Kingdom of England, and
to alter & change the true Reformed Religion, rightly and by the Laws of this
Kingdom of England, in this ſame Kingdom of England eſtabliſhed: And further,
that they the ſaid Thomas Pickering and John Grove, in execution of their ſaid
Traiterous Agreement, afterwards (to wit) the ſame 24th day of April, in the
ſaid thirtieth year of the Reign of our ſaid Sovereign Lord the King, and
divers other days and times afterwards at the ſaid pariſh of St. Giles in the
Fields, in the ſaid County of Middleſex, falſly, deceitfully, adviſedly,
mali­ciouſly, devilliſhly and traiterouſly they did prepare and obtain to
themſelves, and had and did keep Muſquets, Piſtols, Swords, Daggers, and other
offenſive and cruel weapons and inſtruments, to kill and murther our ſaid
Sovereign Lord the King: And that they the ſaid Thomas Pickering and John
Grove afterwards, to wit, the ſaid four and twentieth day of April, in the
ſaid thirtieth year of the Reign of our ſaid Sovereign Lord the King, and
di­vers [[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=4)
days and times afterwards with force and arms, &c. at the ſaid pariſh of St.
Giles in the Fields, in the County of Middleſex aforeſaid, and in other places
within the ſaid County of Middleſex falſly, deceitfully, adviſedly,
maliciouſly and trai­terouſly, did lie in wait, and endeavour to kill and
murder our ſaid Sovereion Lord the King; and further, that they the ſaid
Thomas White otherwiſe Whitebread, William Ireland, John Fenwick and other
falſe Traitors unknown, afterwards (to wit) the ſaid 24th day of April in the
ſaid thirtieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King, at the ſaid
pariſh of St: Giles in the Fields, in the County of Middleſex aforeſaid,
falſly, deceitfully, adviſedly, maliciouſly, devilliſhly and traiterouſly did
prepare, perſwade, excite, abet, comfort and counſel four other perſons
unknown, and ſubjects of our ſaid Soveraign Lord the King, traiterouſly to
kill and murder our ſaid Sovereign Lord the King, againſt the duty of their
allegiance, againſt the peace of our ſaid Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown
and Dignity, and againſt the form of the Statute in that behalf made and
provided.

Upon this Indictment they have been arraigned, and thereunto have ſeverally
pleaded Not guilty, and for their Tryal have put themſelves upon God and their
Country, which Country you are.

Your Charge therefore is to enquire whether they or any of them be guilty of
the High Treaſon, whereof they ſtand indicted, or not guilty. If you find them
guilty you are to enquire what Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements, thoſe
you find guilty had at the time of the High Treaſon committed, or at any time
ſince. If you find them, or any of them not guilty, you are to enquire whether
they did flee for it; if you find that they or any of them fled for it, you
are to enquire of their Goods and Chattels, as if you had found them guilty.
If you find them or any of them not guilty, nor that they, nor any of them
fled for it, ſay ſo, and no more, and hear your Evidence.

Make Proclamation for ſilence on both ſides. Which was done.

Then Sir Creſwell Levings, one of the Kings learned Council in the Law, opened
the In­dictment, thus:

Sir Creſw.

Levings▪ May it pleaſe your Lordſhip, and you Gentlemen of the Jury. Theſe
Priſoners at the Bar, Thomas White, alias Whitebread, William Ireland, John
Fenwick, Thomas Pickering and John Grove do all ſtand indicted of High
Treaſon; for that where­as they, as falſe Traytors, meaning and deſigning to
diſturb the Peace of the Kingdom, to levy War within the Kingdom, to make
miſerable ſlaughter amongſt the Kings Subjects, to ſubvert the Religion
eſtabliſhed by the Law of the Land, to introduce the Superſti­tion of the
Church of Rome and to bring to death and final deſtruction, and to murder and
aſſaſſinate our Soveraign Lord the King, they did, to effect theſe things, the
four and twentieth of April laſt aſſemble themſelves together with many other
falſe Traytors, yet unknown, in the pariſh of Saint Giles in the Fields, in
the County of Middleſex, and there, being ſo aſſembled, the better to effect
theſe deſigns did make agreements and conſpire together; firſt, that Pickering
and Grove ſhould kill the King, and that White and the reſt of the perſons
that ſtand indicted, with many other Traytors, ſhould ſay a great number of
Maſſes for the ſoul of the ſaid Pickering, I think thirty thouſand, and they
did further agree there that Grove ſhould have a great ſum of mony, and upon
this agre [...]ment Grove and Pickering did undertake and promiſe they would
do this fact, and did then and there take the Sacrament and an oath to one
another upon the Sacrament, that they would conceal theſe their Treaſons, that
they might the better effect them: and that [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=5) in purſuance of
this, Grove and Pickering did divers timesly in wait to murder the King, and
did provide Arms to do it; and the Indictment further ſets forth, that White,
and Ireland and Fenwick and many other Traytors yet unknown, did procure four
other per­ſons, yet alſo unknown, for to kill the King, againſt the pea [...]e
of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and againſt the form of
the Statute. Theſe are the heads of thoſe facts for which they ſtand indicted:
they have all pleaded not Guilty, if we prove them or any of them Guilty of
theſe or any of theſe facts according to the Evidence you ſhall have, we hope
you will find it.

Sir Samuel Baldwin, one of his Majeſties Serjeants at Law opened the Charge as
fol­loweth.

Sir Samuel Baldwin.

May it pleaſe your Lordſhip and you Gentlemen of the Jury, the perſons here
before you ſtand indicted for High Treaſon, they are five in number, three of
them are Jeſuits, one is a Prieſt, the fifth is a Layman, perſons fitly
prepared for the work in hand.

Gentlemen, it is not unknown to moſt perſons, nay to every one amongſt us,
that hath the leaſt obſerved the former times, how that ever ſince the
Reformation there hath been a deſign carried on to ſubvert the Government, and
deſtroy the Proteſtant Religion eſtabliſhed here in England, for during all
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth ſeve­rall attempts were made by ſeveral Prieſts
and Jeſuits, that came from beyond the Seas, (though the Laws were then ſevere
againſt them) to deſtroy the Queen, and alter the Religion eſtabliſhed here in
England, and to introduce Popery and the Superſtition of the Church of Rome.

But the Conſpirators from time to time, during all the Queens Reign, were
diſap­pointed, as Edmond Camtion and ſeveral other Jeſuits, who came over in
that time, and were executed & did ſuffer for their Treaſons according to Law:
at length about the lat­  [...]erend of the Queens time, a Seminary for the
Engliſh Jeſuits was founded at Valled [...]lid in Spain, and you know the
emyloyment ſuch perſons have.

And ſoon after the Queens death, in the beginning of the Reign of King James
ſeve­ral perſons came over into England from this very Seminary, who, together
with one Henry Garnet, Superior of the Jeſuits then in England, and divers
other Engliſh Papiſts, hatched that helliſh Gunpowder-plot; whereby what was
deſigned you all know, but as it fell out, theſe perſons, as well as thoſe in
Queen Elizabeths time, were likewiſe diſap­pointed for their execrable
Treaſons, in the third year of King James, were executed at Tyburn and
otherplaces.

This is evident by the very Act of Parliament in 30. Jacobi in the preamble
whereof mention is made that Creſwel and Teſmond Jeſuits, came from Validolid
in Spain to exe­cute this Gunpowder-Treaſon with the Poplſh party here in
England.

And Gentlemen, after this Treaſon, ſo miraculouſly diſcovered, was puniſhed,
one would not have thought that any future age would have been guilty of the
like Conſpiracy; but it ſo falls out, that the Myſtery of Iniquity and
Jeſuitism ſtill worketh, for there hath of late been a ſort of cruel bloody
minded perſons, who, in hopes to have better ſucceſs than they had in fo
[...]mer times, during the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, have ſet
on foot as horrid a Deſign as that of the Gunpowder-Treaſon; I can reſemble it
to no other Plot, or Deſign, or Treaſon in any other time, and truely it does
reſemble that, in many particulars: I may ſay, it doth at leaſt equal it, if
not exceed it.

I ſhall mention two or three particulars, in which this Plot doth reſemble
that.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=5)Firſt, that
horrid Deſign was to take away the Life of the then King, to ſubvert the
Government, to introduce the Popiſh Religion, and to deſtroy the eſtabliſhed
pro­teſtant Religion in England, and ſo Gentlemen, we think our prooff will
make it out, that in each of theſe particulars this deſign is the ſame that
that was.

Secondly, the great Actors in that deſign were Preiſts and Jeſuits that came
from Vale­dolid in Spain and other places beyond the Seas. And the great
Actors in this Plot are Prieſts and Jeſuits, that are come from St. Omers, and
other places beyond the Seas nearer home then Spain.

Thirdly. That plott was chiefly Guided and mannaged by Henry Garnett,
Superiour and provincial of the Jeſuits then in England; and the great Actor
in this deſign, is Mr. Whitebread, Superiour and provincial of the Jeſuits now
in England; ſo that I ſay in the ſeveral particulars it does reſemble the Gun
Powder plot.

Gentlemen, In this plot of which the Priſoners now ſtand Indicted ſeveral
Perſons have ſeveral parts, ſome of theſe perſons are imployed to keep
Correſpondence beyond the Seas, (of which more hath been ſaid in another
place, and ſo I ſhall not ſpeak of it here Others were to procure and prepare
Aid and Aſſiſtance here in England, who were to be ready when there ſhould be
Occaſion to uſe it. But the great part theſe perſons (the priſoners at the
Bar,) were to Act in this conſpiracy, was, to take away the life of our
So­veraigne Lord the King, on whoſe preſervation the ſafety and welfare of
three nations (and Millions of men) does depend. Now the facts for which the
five priſoners ſtand Indicted, I ſhall open thus;

Firſt they are here Indicted for Conſpireing the Death of his ſacred Majeſty:
They did agree to take away the Kings life, and entring into ſuch an
agreement; They hired ſome per­ſons amongſt them to doe it; and this Agreement
was made the 24th. of April, laſt, 1678.

Secondly, There is another fact they likewiſe ſtand Indicted for: That they
did Endea­vour and contrive to change and alter the Religion Eſtabliſhed in
the Nation, and introduce P [...] ­pery in tho room of it. The manner how to
Effect this, was thus, if my information be right; you ſhall hear that from
the Evidence, Mr. Whitebread being reſident here in Eng­land, and ſuperiour of
the Jeſuits, did in February laſt think fit, (being impowred by Au­thority
from Rome) to give ſummons to the Jeſuits abroade, at St. Omers, and other
places beyond the Seas, That they ſhould come over here into England, to be
ready at London, on the 24th. of April, the day laid in the Indictment and
which is the day after St. Georges day; and their deſign was (as will appear
by the proof) to contrive how they may take away the life of the King: for, if
that were once done, they thought, in all other things, their deſign would
eaſily be accompliſhed, after the ſummons were out, they were ſo Officious for
the Accompliſhing of this great end, that between 40. and 50. Je­ſuits did
appear here at London at the time, (for thither they were ſummoned) and there
the meeting was appointed to be at the White-horſe Taverne in the ſtrand they
were to meet firſt; but being ſo great a number, that they were likely to be
taken notice of, if they came all together, it was ſo Ordered, they ſhould
come but a few at a time, and go off in ſmall numbers; and others ſhould
ſucceed them, till the whole number had been there. And there were directions
given, and a Courſe taken, that there ſhould be ſome perſon, to tell them
whither they ſhould go from thence. After they had met there at ſeveral times
in the ſame day, they were appointed, and adjourned to be at ſeveral other
places, ſome of them were appointed to be at Mr. Whitebreads Lodging, and that
was in Wild­ſtreet, at one Mr. Sanders houſe: Others were appointed, to go
[...] Lodg­ing, [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=6) which was in
Ruſſelſtreet, (and this Mr. Ireland was Treaſurer of the Society): an [...]
others were to meet at Mr. Fenwicks Chamber in Drury-Lane; and he was at that
time Procurator and Agent for that Society. Others were appointed to meet at
Harcourts Lodg­ing; and others at other places.

When they came there, they all agreed to the general deſign of the firſt
meeting, which was, To kill the King. Then there was a paper; or ſome
inſtrument to be ſubſcribed. This was done, and the Sacrament was taken for
the concealment of it. After that, Whitebread, Ireland, Fenwick▪ and others,
did agree, that Mr. Grove and Mr. Pickering ſhould be im­ployed to Aſſaſſiaate
the King. One of them (Mr. Grove) being a lay Brother, was to have 15, hundred
pounds, a great ſum, the other, as a more ſuitable reward for his pains, was
to have 30. Thouſand Maſſes ſaid for his Soul: Mr. Whitebread, Mr. Ireland,
and Mr. Fenwick, (were all privy to this deſign, & this was the 24th. of
April. In Auguſt after) they being appointed to kill the King, but it not
taking effect, either their Hearts miſgave them▪ or they wanted opportunity)
there was another meeting at the Savoy, where the Witnes­ſes will tell you,
[...]our Iriſh perſons were hired for to Kill the King. And this was ordered,
in caſe the other deſign took not Effect. There was fourſcore pounds ſent down
to them to Windſor, where they were to have done the fact. After this, other
perſons were ap­pointed to do the Execution, and they were to take the King at
his Mornning Walk a [...] New-Market.

Theſe perſons are all diſappointed in their deſign: But you ſhall hear what
was the Agreement, how it was carried on, and what rewards were given to carry
it on. We ſhal acquaint you likewiſe, that for the bottom of this deſign (when
ſo many Jeſuits ſhould come over, when they ſhould have ſo many Conſultations,
and when they ſhould reſolve to Kill the King) there could be no leſs then the
altering of Religion, and introduction of Popery here in England. And that
time, at the firſt meeting, they had Ordered, that Mr. Cary a Jeſuit as their
Procurator and Agent, ſhould go to Rome, to Act their con­cern there. All
which things and more, will be made out to you by Witneſses produced. There
are likewiſe, ſome other Circumſtances that will be material to confirm thoſe
wit­neſſes. We ſhall produce to you a letter written in February laſt, about
that time that Mr. Whitebread ſent over his ſummons for the Jeſuits to appear
here. This letter was written by one Mr. Peters, a Jeſuit now in Cuſtody; and
tis Written to one Tunſtall a Jeſuit, to give him notice, that he ſhould be in
London about the 21th. of April., and be ready on th [...] 24th. of April.
That he knew what the buſineſs was; but he did adviſe him, that he ſhould
conceal himſelf, leſt the plot by obſervation) ſhould be diſcover'd. We ſhall
likewiſe produce ſeveral other evidences, to ſtrengthen and confirm the
Witneſſes: we ſhall firſt call our witneſſes, and enter upon the proof.

Mr, Finch opened the Evidence thus.

Mr. Finch,

May it pleaſe your Lord ſhip, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, before we call
our witneſſes, I would beg leave once more to remind you, of what hath already
been o­pen'd unto you, the Quality of the Offenders themſelves and the nature
of the offence they ſtand indicted of.

For the Offenders, they are moſt of them, Prieſts and Jeſuits; three of them
at the leaſt, are ſo; the other two, are the accurſed Inſtruments of this
Deſign: for the offence it ſelf, 'tis high Treaſon.

And though it be High Treaſon by the Statute of 27, Elizabeth, for men of that
profeſſi­on to come into England, yet theſe men are not Indicted upon that
Law, nor for that [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=6) Treaſon: This I
take notice of to you for the priſoners ſake, that they ſhould not fan­cy to
themſelves they ſuffered Martyrdom for their Religion, as ſome of them have
vain­ly imagin'd in their caſe; and for your ſakes too, that as at firſt, it
was Treaſon, repeated Acts of Treaſon, in theſe men; and thoſe proceeding from
a principle of Religion too, that juſtly occaſioned the making that Law: ſo
here you might obſerve a pregnant in­ſtance of it in the priſoners at the Bar,
That when ever they had an opportunity, as now they thought they had, they
have never failed to put thoſe principles into pra­ctice.

So now, Gentlemen, as they are not indicted for being Prieſts, I muſt deſire
you to lay that quite out of the Caſe, and only conſider that they ſtand here
accuſed for Treaſon; ſuch Treaſon, as, were they Lay-men only, they ought to
die for it; though I cannot but obſerve, they were the ſooner Traitors for
being Prieſts.

The Treaſon therefore they ſtand indicted of, is of the higheſt nature: it is
a Con­ſpiracy to kill the King, and that too with Circumſtances ſo aggravating
(if any thing can aggravate that Offence which is the higheſt) that nothing
leſs than the total Subverſion of the Government, and utter Deſtruction of the
Proteſtant Religion, would ſerve their turns. And really, when you conſider
the Root from whence this Treaſon ſprings, you will ceaſe wondring that all
this ſhould be attempted, and rather wonder that it was not done.

Miſchiefs have often miſcarried for want of wickedneſs enough; the Horror of
Con­ſcience, or elſe, the Malice of the Aggreſſor not being equal to the
Attempt, has ſome­times prevented the Execution of it. Here is no room for any
thing of this kind: This Treaſon proceeds from principles of Religion, from a
ſenſe that it is lawful; nay, that they ought to do theſe things; and every
neglect here, is lookt on as a piece of Irre­ligion, a want of zeal; for which
one of the Priſoners did pennance, as in the courſe of our Evidence we ſhall
prove unto you.

And when we conſider too, that this is carried on, not by the Fury of two or
three buſie men over zealous in the Cauſe, but by the deliberate, and ſteady
Councels of the whole Order, and that too under the Obligations of Secreſie as
high as Chriſtian Religi­on can lay on them; you have great reaſon to wonder
that it did not ſucceed. And yet after all this they have not been able to
prevail. Not that we can brag of any hu­man policy that did prevent it; No,
all that the Wit of man could do, theſe men had done: but 'twas the Providence
of God, 'twas his Revelation; That Providence that firſt enlightened his
Church, and has preſerv'd it againſt all oppoſition heretofore, has once more
diſappointed their Councells, and preſerved the King and this Nation in the
profeſſion of that true Religion theſe men have vainly attempted to deſtroy.

Gentlemen, I will not open to you the particulars of our Evidence, that I had
rather ſhould come from the Witneſſes themſelves; I ſhall only in general tell
you what will be the Courſe of it. We ſhall prove unto you, That there was a
Summons for a Conſul­tation to be held by theſe men the 24th of April laſt,
from the Provincial Mr. White­bread; That they had a Caution given them not to
come too ſoon, nor appear much about the Town, till the Conſultation were
over, leſt oacaſion ſhould be given to ſuſpect the Deſign: That accordingly a
Conſultation was held, as they ſay, to ſend Cary, their Procurator to Rome;
Though we ſhall prove to you, it was for other purpoſes: That they adjourned
from their general Aſſembly into leſſer Companies, where ſeveral per­ſons did
attend them to carry Intelligences of their ſeveral Reſolutions: That at theſe
[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=7) ſeveral
Conſults, they did reſolve, The King was to be killed; that Pickering and
Grove ſhould do it; for which the one was to have 30000 Maſſes ſaid for his
Soul: the other 1500 l. That in proſecution of this Deſign, they made ſeveral
attempts to execute it, That they lay in wait for the King ſeveral times in
St. James's Park and other pla­ces; And that once in particular, it had been
done by Pickering; if it had not pleaſed God to have prevented it by an
Accident unforeſeen; The Flint of his Piſtol being looſe, he durſt not then
attempt it, though he had an Opportunity; for which neglect, we ſhall prove
unto you, he underwent the pennance of 20 or 30 ſtrokes. That when theſe men
had failed, we ſhall prove to you they hired four Ruffians to murther the King
at Windſor, and after that at Newmarket. Thus they way-laid him in all his
priva­cies and retirements, wherever they could think it moſt convenient to
execute their Deſign.

And this we ſhall prove by two Witneſſes; who, though they ſhould not ſpeak to
the ſame Conſultations, nor the ſame times, yet they are ſtill two Witneſſes
in Law: for ſeveral Witneſſes of ſeveral Overt-Acts, are ſo many Witneſſes to
the Treaſon; becauſe the Treaſon conſiſts in the Intention of the man, in the
Compaſſing and Imagining the Death of the King. The ſeveral Overt-Acts which
declare that intention, are but as ſo many Evidences of the Treaſon; we will
call our Witneſſes, and make out what had been open'd to you.

Cl. of Cr.

Mr. Oates, lay your hand upon the Book. The Evidence you ſhall give for our
Sovereign Lord the King againſt Thomas White alas Whitebread, William Ireland,
John Fenwick, Thomas Pickering, and John Grove, the priſoners at the Bar,
ſhall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, So help you
God.

Mr. Serj. Baldwin.

Pray Mr. Oates, will you declare to the Court and the Jury, what Deſign there
was for the killing of His Majeſty, and by whom.

Mr. Oates.

My Lord in the month of December laſt, Mr. Thomas Whitebread did receive a
Patent from the General of the Jeſuits at Rome to be Provincial of the Order;
after he had received this Patent, he ſent Orders to one George Conyers a
Jeſuit at St. Omers to preach upon St. Thomas of Canterburys day; and by
virtue of this Order, George Conyers did preach againſt Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, and did in his Doctrine call them Anti-Chriſtian and devilliſh.
My Lord, in the month of January, this Mr. Whitebread did ſend ſeveral Letters
to St. Omers, in which Letters there was contained Intimation of his Intent to
proceed againſt the Kings Perſon to aſſaſſinate Him, which Letters were
written to Richard Asby. My Lord, in the month of February, there comes an
Order from him, as Provincial, for ſeveral of the Jeſuits to make their
appearance at London, to be there at a Conſult to be held the 24th of April,
Old ſtile.

Lord Ch. Juſt.

Where was Whitebread then.

Mr. Oates.

He was then in London, My Lord, as I ſuppoſe by the dateing of his Let­ters.
My Lord, from Mr. Whitebread after this Summons, we received a ſecond Summons,
which came the 5th of April, New ſtile, and upon the Summons there were Nine
did appear at London, the Rector of Liege, Sir Thomas Preſt [...]n, the Rector
of Ghent, whoſe name is Marſh, the Rector of Wott [...]n, whoſe name is
Williams, and to one Sir John Har­per and two or three more from St. Omers,
and there was a ſpecial Order given us, My Lord, to keep our ſelves cloſe,
leſt we ſhould be ſuſpected, and ſo our Deſign diſcloſed. My Lord, upon the
four and twentieth of April Old ſtile we did appear in the Conſult. The
Conſult was begun at the White horſe-Tavern in the Strand, and there they met
in [[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=7)
ſeveral Rooms, they came on by degrees, and as the new ones came on, the old
ones, thoſe that had been there before them, fell off. And there was one John
Cary appoint­ed to go Procurator for Rome, and he was ſo appointed by the
ſuffrages of the three Priſoners at the Bar, Whitebread, Ireland and Fenwick.
It was afterwards adjourned in­to ſeveral Colloquies or little meetings; one
meeting was at Mrs. Sanders houſe that butts upon Wild-houſe, a ſecond was at
M. Ireland's, a third was at Mr. Harcourt's, a fourth was at Mr. Grove's, and
other meeting or meetings there were, but I cannot give a good accompt of
them. My Lord, after they had thus met, and debated the ſtate of Religion, and
the life of the King, they drew up this Reſolve; it was drawn up by one Mico,
who was Secretary to the Society, and Socius or Companion to the Provincial.

L. Ch. Juſt.

When was that done?

Mr. Oates.

That day, my Lord, the Reſolve, my Lord, was this, as near as I can re­member
the words. It is reſolved, that Thomas Pickering and John Grove ſhall go on in
their Attempt to aſſaſſinate the King (whether they uſed the word Aſſaſſinate
I can't re­member, but the meaning was, they ſhould make an Attempt upon his
perſon,) and that the Reward of the one, that is Grove, ſhould be Fifteen
hundred pounds, and that Pickerings Reward ſhould be Thirty thouſand Maſſes.
My Lord, after this Reſolution was ſigned by Whitbread, it was ſigned by
Fenwick and Ireland, and by all the four Clubs; I ſaw them ſign it, for I
carried the Inſtrument from one to another.

L. Ch. Juſt.

What was it they ſigned?

Mr. Oates.

The Reſolve of the Conſult.

L. C. Juſt.

What that which was drawn up by Mico?

Mr. Oates.

Yes, my Lord, that which was drawn up by Mico?

Whitebread.

Doth he ſay that he ſaw them ſign it?

Mr. Oates,

Yes▪ I did ſee them ſign it.

Jury.

We deſire he may be asked where he ſaw them ſign it.

Mr. Oates.

Mr. Whitebread ſigned it at that part of the Conſult that was at his Cham­ber;
Ireland did ſign it at that part of the Conſult that was at his Chamber
Fenwick; ſigned it at that part of the Conſult that was at his Chamber.

Whitebread.

Were you at all theſe places.

Mr. Oates.

I went with it from place to place, but I mention no more now but only theſe.

Whitebread.

You were not at all theſe places, and ſaw them ſign it, were you?

Mr. Oates.

Yes, I did ſee them ſign it at all thoſe places. My Lord in the month of May,
Mr. Whitebread came over as Provincial from England to St. Omers, to begin his
Provincial Viſitation, and with him came Cary and his Companion Mico. Cary
left St▪ Omers to begin his Journy to Rome; Whitebread, after he had given an
Accompt of what proceedings the Catholicks of England had made in order to
diſturb the peace of the Kingdom, what moneys had been gathered, what
ſuffrages diſperſed, what means have been uſed, what Noblemen had joyned in
this execrable Plot; he did then (my Lord) order me to come for England.

L. Ch. Juſt.

Whitebread did.

Mr. Oates.

Yes, my Lord Whitebread did; And, my Lord the buſineſs I was to come into
England for, was to murder one Dr. Tongue a Dr. in Divinity, who had written a
Book called The Jeſuits Morals; that is to ſay, Tranſlated them out of French
into Eng­liſh, my Lord I came over into England on the the 23th of June New
ſtile, I came out of St. Omers, that is the 13th in the ſtile of England, on
the 24th New ſtile I took the [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=8) Packet Boat at
Calice the 25th. New ſtile I met with Mr. Fenwick at Dover. He was come down
with certain youths to ſend them to St. Omers and had ordered their paſſage.

My Lord, with Mr. Fenwick and ſome other perſons, we came to London in a
Coach, and ſix miles (as near as I remember it) on this ſide Canterbury, at a
place called Bolton, our Coach was ſtopt by the ſearchers, and there they did
examine a Box that was in the Coach, directed for the honourable Richard
Blundel Eſq this Box when they open­ed it, they found full of Beads,
Crucifixes, Images, and other ſorts of Trompery, that I cannot give a good
account of; it's he can give the beſt: Mr. Fenwick went by the name of one
Thompſon, and did perſonate one Thompſon, as Living near the Fountain▪ Tavern
at Charing-Croſs; and did order the ſearcher to write to him there, as by the
name of Thomp­ſon. When the Box was ſeized, they being prohibited Goods, Mr.
Fenwick did ſay; that if they had ſearcht his Pockets, they had found ſuch
Letters about him, as might have coſt him his life; but his Letters did eſcape
ſearching. We came that night to Sittenburgh, and lay there on Sunday the
26th. new ſtile, as near as I remember; and I think we ſtaid there till the
afternoon, We took Coach in the afternoon and came as far as Dartford. On
Mun­day morning we came into London; and (my Lord) when we came into London;
and had continued there ſome dayes. (I now return to Mr. Whitebread,) There
came one Aſhby to town, he had been ſometime Rector of St. Omers, and was come
to England ſick of the Gout, and was to go to the Ba [...]h to be Cured. And
he brought inſtructions with him from Whitebread, and the inſtructions
contained in them theſe particulars: inſtructi­ons or memorials▪ or what
[...]ſe they called them. Firſt, that Ten Thouſand pounds ſhould be propoſed
to Sir George Wakeman. for the Killing of the King. Secondly, that care ſhould
be taken for the murder of the B [...]ſhop of Hereford. Thirdly, that care
ſhould be taken for the murder  [...]f Doctor  [...] ſ [...]t. Fourthly, that
though this propoſal was made to Sir George Wakeman  [...] Pickering and Grove
ſhould go on ſtill in their Attempts (my Lord) afterward  [...] taken and
Copied out, and diſperſt to the ſeveral con­ſpirators in the King [...]
[...]mes I cannot call to mind, But Coleman made ſeveral Copies and diſpe
[...]ſt them  [...] [...]hen the 10000 l▪ was propoſed to Sir George VVakma
[...] but it was refuſed.

L. C. J.

What, it was too Li [...]

Mr. Oates,

Yes, (my Lord) it was too Little. Then Writebread he Writ from St. Omers▪ that
in caſe 10000 l. would not do, 15 ſhould be propoſed▪ and after that he had
had that propoſed, he accepted of that▪

L. C J.

Were you by when he accepted it.

Mr. Oates,

No (my Lord,) I was not: But it appeared upon their entry Books, and it
appear'd by a Letter from this Gentleman Mr. VVhitebread, wherein he did ſhew▪
great deal of Joy for Sir George VVakemans accepting of the 15 thouſand
Pounds.

(My Lord,) After this was agreed upon, that Sir George Wakeman ſhould have
15000 and 5000▪ of it was paid by Coleman or his Order. Thus the ſtate of
affairs ſtood till Au­guſt. Then one Fogarthey who is dead, came to a conſult
of the Jeſuits with the Benedictus▪ Now at this conſult the Priſoner at the
Bar Fenwick was, he was one, and Harcourt was a­nother▪ and in this conſult
there were four Ruffians recommended to them,

L. C. J.

By whom?

Mr. Oates,

By Fogarthey, they were recommended, but accepted of by theſe conſulto [...]
and conſented to by Fenwick, they were ſent away▪ and the next day after 4
ſcore pound was ſent them, the moſt part of it was Gold, and Coleman was there
and gave the meſ­ſenger [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=8) a Guiny to
expedite his Errand. (my Lord) In the month of Auguſt there came o­ther
Letters from Whitebread, wherein he did give an account of what care he had
taken of the Scotch Buſineſs, and he ordered one Moor and one Sanders alias
Browne, to go down to Scotland, and he did order the Rector of London, then
VVilliam Harcourt, to ſend them; and he did ſo ſend them the 6th. of Auguſt in
the name of the Provincial.

Whitebread,

From whence I pray?

Mr. Oates

From London, and they went to proſecute and carry on the deſign which Fenwick
and Ireland had plotted, of a Rebellion amongſt the diſaffected Scots againſt
the Governors appointed them by the King, and they ſent down Miniſters to
Preach under the notion of Presbyterian Miniſters, in order to get the
diſaffected Scots to riſe, by inſi­nuating the ſad condition they were likely
to be in, by reaſon of Epiſcopal Tyranny, (as they termed it) And that they
were reſolved to diſpoſe of the King, and they did intend to diſpoſe of the
Duke too; in caſe he did not appear Vigorous in promoting the Catholick
Religion; (I ſpeak their own words.)

L. C. J.

Have you done with your Evidence? What do you know of the Priſoners at the
Bar? name them all.

Mr. Oates,

There is Whitebread, Ireland, Fenwick, Pickering and Grove.

Lord Ch. Juſt.

Are you ſure Pickering and Grove accepted of the Terms?

Mr. Oates.

Yes, (my Lord) I was there.

L. C. Juſt.

Where was it?

Mr. Oates

At Mr. Whitebreads Lodgings, at Mrs. Sanders houſe. As for Grove, indeed he
did attend at that time upon Fenwick at his Chamber; but after the conſult was
over he came to Whitebread's Lodgings, and did take the Sacrament and the
Oaths of ſecrecy upon it, and did accept it, and agree to it.

L. C. Juſt.

Were you there when he took the Sacrament?

Mr. Oates,

Yes, (my Lord) I was.

L. C. Juſt.

Who gave you the Sacrament?

Mr. Oates,

It was a Jeſuit, that goes by the name of one Barton.

Whitebread,

(my Lord before I forget it, I deſire to ſay this. He ſays that at ſuch and
ſuch conſults in April and May, he was preſent and carryed the Reſolutions
from one to an other. There are above a hundred and a hundred, that can
teſtifie he was all that while at St. Omers. Pray tell me when I received the
Sacrament?

Mr. Oates?

At the ſame time.

Whitebread,

What day was that?

Mr. Oates.

The 24 h. of April.

Whitebread,

Was I there?

Mr. Oates,

you were there.

Whitebread,

I take God to witneſs I was not.

L. C. Juſt.

Mr. Whitebread you ſhall have time to make your Anſwer. But Mr. Oates pray Mr.
Oates, when was Mr. Cary diſpatched away to Rome, and what was his Errand?

Mr. Oates,

(my Lord) I'le tell you, he was approved of to go to Rome the 24 [...]h. of
April; in the Month of May or June, Whitebread brings Cary over to St. Omers,
and one Mico his Secretary, or companion with him.

L. C. J.

When was it?

Mr. Oates,

In the month of May or June, he was brought over by the Provincial: Then went
away on his Journy, and at Paris received 2 [...]. l. to bear his charges.

Mr. Finch,

What do you know of any attempts to Kill the King at St James Park?

Mr. Oates

I ſaw Pickering and Grove ſeveral times Walking in the Park together with
[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=9) their
Screw'd Piſtols, which were longer then Ordinary Piſtols, and ſhorter then
ſome Carbines. They had Silver Bullets to ſhoot with, and Grove would have had
the Bullets to be champ't for fear that if he ſhould ſhoot, if the Bullets
were round, the wound that might be given, might be cured,

L. C. J.

Did Grove intend to champ them?

Mr. Oates

He did ſay ſo.

L. C, J.

Did he ſhew you the Bullets?

Mr. Oates.

I did ſee them.

Grove

When was this.

Mr, Oates

I ſaw the Bullets in the month of May and in the month of June.

Whitebread,

Pray where did you ſee them.

Mr. Oates.

in Groves Poſſeſſion.

Whitebread,

At what times?

Mr: Oates.

in the month of May▪

Whitebread,

Then was he Actually himſelf at St. Omers? Was it in May or June?

Mr. Oates,

The latter end of May or June. I ſaw them then twice if not thrice, But,
Pickering's I ſaw in Auguſt.

Sir Cr. Levings,

do you know any thing of Pickerings doing Penance, and for what?

Mr. Oates,

Yes. (my Lord) In the Month of March laſt, (for theſe Perſons have fol­lowed
the King ſeveral years) but he at that time had not look't to the Flint of his
Piſtol but it was Looſe, and he durſt not venture to give fire. He had a fair
opportunity, as Whitehread ſaid; and becauſe he miſt it through his own
negligence, he under went Pen­ance and had 20 or 30 ſtroaks of diſcipline, and
Grove was chidden for his careleſsneſs.

L. C. J.

That was in March laſt?

Mr. Oates,

Yes my Lord.

L. C. J.

How do you know that.

Mr, Oates,

By Letters that I have ſeen from Mr. Whitebread, theſe I ſaw and Read, and I
know Whitebread's hand.

Mr. Serj. Baldwyn,

What do you know of the Ruffains that went down to Windſor▪ what ſucceſs had
they?

Mr. Oates,

I can give no Account of that, becauſe in the beginning of September this
Gentleman that had been in England ſome time before, was come to London, and
the buſineſs had taken Air, and one Beddingfield had written to him, that the
thing was diſ­covered, and that none but ſuch a one could do it, naming me by
a name that he knew▪ I went by▪

Whitebread.

When was that Sir

Mr. Oats.

In the month of September laſt, I came to the Provincial's chamber, the 3th.
of September, when I came I could not ſpeak with him, for he was at ſupper;
but when he had ſurp'd I was admitted in, and there he ſhewed me the letter
that he had received from Beddingfield.

Whitebread,

Where did you ſee it.

Mr. Oats.

You read it to me when you chide me, and beat me, and abuſed me.

L. C. J.

What did he chide you for?

Mr Oates.

He did charge me with very high language of being with the King, & with a
miniſter, and diſcovering the matter. I was ſo unfortunate that the Gentleman
who was with the King did wear the ſame colour'd cloathes that I did then
wear: And he having given an Account that the party wore ſuch cloathes, the
ſuſpicion was laid upon me: Now my Lord, I had not then been with the King,
but another Gentleman had been with him from me with the draught of ſome
papers concerning this Buſineſs, which I had [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=9) drawn up, and I
was ready to appear when I ſhould  [...]e called to juſtifie them, only I did
not think fit to appear immediately; And, my Lord, this Beddingfield he had
gotten into it, that it was diſcovered, and writ the Provincial word, he
thought it was by me, When he had received this letter he asked me with what
Face I could look upon him ſince I had betrayed them: ſo my Lord, I did
profeſs a great deal of innocency, becauſe  [...] had not then been with the
King; but he gave me very ill language, and abuſed me, and I was afraid of a
worſe miſchief from them; for I could not but conclude, that if they dealt ſo
cruelly with thoſe that only writ againſt them, I could ſcarce eſcape, of whom
they had that Jealouſie that I had betrayed them; And my Lord, though they
could not prove that I had diſcovered it, yet upon the bare ſuſpition I was
beaten, and affronted, and re­viled, and commanded to go beyond Sea again,
nay, my Lord, I had my lodging aſaul­ted to have murthered me, if they could.

Whitebread.

By whom?

Mr. Oats.

By Mr. Whitebread, and ſome of them.

Whitebread.

Who beat you?

Mr. Oates.

Mr. Whitebread did.

Mr. Serj. Baldwyn.

Was it Pickering or Grove that had the Flint of his Piſtol looſe?

Mr. Oates,

Pickering.

Pickering.

My Lord, I never ſhot off a piſtol in all my life.

L. C. J.

What ſay you to the fourſcore pounds?

Mr. Oates,

My Lord, I will ſpeak to that, that was given to the four Ruffians that were
to Kill the King at VVindſor; Now, my Lord that money I ſaw.

L. C. J.

Where did you ſee it?

Mr. Oates.

at Harcourts Chamber.

L. C. J.

Where is that?

Mr. Oates,

In Dukeſtreet, near the Arch▪

L. C. J.

Who was it given by?

Mr, Oates.

VVilliam Harcourt.

L. C. J.

did you ſee the four fellows?

Mr. Oates,

No (my Lord) I never did, nor never knew their names.

L. C. J

Who was the money given to?

Mr. Oates.

A meſſenger that was to carry it down to them.

L. C. J.

VVho was that meſſenger?

Mr. Oates,

One of theirs that I do not know, and I durſt not be too inquiſitive, (my
Lord) for fear of being ſuſpected.

L. C. J.

VVho was by when the money was paid?

Mr. Oates,

Coleman that is executed; and my Lord, there was this Mr. Fenwick by, that is
the Priſoner at the Bar▪

Fenwick

VVhen was this?

Mr. Oates,

In the month of Auguſt.

Fenwick,

VVhere?

Mr. Oates,

At Harcourt's chamber.

Fenwick.

I never ſaw you there in all my  [...]e: Are you ſure I was by, when the money
was there?

M. Oates,

Yes, you were.

L. C. J.

Mr. Fenwick You ſhall have your time by and by to Ask him any queſtion: Mr.
Oates let me ask you once again; when there was the appointment made for Grove
and Pickering to Kill the King, who ſ [...]gn'd it?

Mr. Oates,

At leaſt forty ſigned it.

L. C. J.

Did the other three ſign it?

Mr. Oates

Yes, my Lord all of them.

L. C. J.

Name them.

Mr. Oates,

There was VVhitebread, Fenwick, and Ireland.

L. C. J.

And you ſay you went from place to place and ſaw it ſigned.

Mr. Oates,

Yes my Lord, I did.

L. C. J.

Were you attendant upon them?

Mr Oates,

My Lord I  [...]ver was ſince the year 1666.

L. C. J.

At whoſe Lodging did you uſe to attend upon the Conſultation.

M. Oates,

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=10)

At the Provincials chamber, Mr. VVhitebread.

L. C. J.

Where was it firſt ſigned?

Mr. Oates,

at the Provincials chamber.

Sir Cr. Levings.

Who carried it from Lodging to Lodging?

Mr▪ Oates,

I did.

L. C. J.

When was it?

Mr. Oates,

The 24th of April.

Mr. J. Bertue.

You ſay you carried the reſult from place to place, pray tell us wh [...] that
reſult was.

Mr. Oates,

They knew what it was, for they read it before they ſigned it.

Mr. J. Atkins,

But tell us the contents of it.

Mr. Oates.

The contents of that Reſolve was this, (Ile tell you the ſubſtance, though
[...] cannot tell you exactly the words) that Pickering and Grove ſhould go on
in their attemp [...] to Aſſaſſinate the Perſon of the King, as near as I can
remember it was ſo, that the form [...] ſhould have 30000 Maſſes, and the
Latter 1500 pounds, and the whole conſult did con­ſent to it, and ſigned the
agreement that was made with them, and did reſolve up [...] the Kings death
all in one reſolve.

L. C. J.

Where was this agreed upon? at the White-horſe Tavern?

Mr. Oates▪

No my Lord, after they had agreed at the VVhite▪Horſe Tavern that Mr. C [...]
ſhould go procurator to Rome, and ſome other ſmall particulars, which I cannot
now  [...] member, they did adjourn from the VVhite-Horſe-Tavern, and met at
ſeveral Chamber ſome at one place, and ſome at another.

L. C. J.

But you ſay Mico did draw up the reſolution, where was that?

M. Oates,

At Mr. VVhitebreads chamber, for he was Socius and Secretary to the Provicial.

L. C. J.

Were Ireland and Fenwick preſent when Mico drew it up?

Mr. Oates,

No my Lord, but they were at their own chambers after it was drawn  [...]
there, and ſigned by Mr. VVhitebread, and thoſe of the conſult in his chamber,
it was caried to the ſeveral conſults.

L. C. J.

What all the ſame day▪

Mr. Oates,

Yes▪ my Lord.

L. C. J.

And you went along with it.

Mr Oates,

Yes my Lord I d [...]

Mr Juſt, Bertue.

I only ask you were all the five Priſoners privy to it, or do you diſ [...]
guiſh of any of them, and which?

Mr. Oates.

They were all privy to it.

Whitebread.

My Lord, we can prov [...]

L. C. J.

You ſhall have time ſufficient to make what defenee you can, you ſhall be ſ
[...] to have a fair tryal, and be ſtopt of nothing that you will think fit to
ſay for your ſel [...] Mr. Oates. were Pickering and Grove preſent?

Mr. Oates,

Yes my Lord, Grove at Fenwicks Chamber, and Pickering at the Provinc [...]
chamber.

L. C. J.

But they were not required to ſign this, were they?

Mr. Oates,

after that the whole conſult had ſigned it, and Maſs was preparing to be
[...] for it; before Maſs they did ſign and accept of it.

L. C. J.

Where did they two do it?

Mr. Oates.

At the Provincials chamber.

L. C. J.

What day was it.

Mr.

That day, for they met all together at the Provincials chamber to receive the
[...] crament, and when M [...]ſs was going to be ſaid, one ſaid it was too
late, for it was after  [...] a  [...] but Mr. Whitebread ſaid it was not
after noon  [...]i [...] we had▪ din'd; and you k [...] [...] that M [...]ſſ
[...]s have been ſaid at one or two of the clock in the af [...]ern [...]

Mr. Juſt. Atkins.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=10)

How many perſons did meet at that Conſult?

Mr. Oates.

My Lord, there were about forty or fifty, and after they had adjourned into
ſeveral leſſer Companies, they met altogether at Mr. Whitebreads Chamber.

L. C. J.

Where was that, and when?

Mr. Oates.

That day, at Wild-houſe.

L. C. J.

Where was it that they gave the Sacrament?

Mr. Oates.

At a little Chappel at Wild-houſe, Mrs. Sander's.

L. C. J.

Did they accept it before they took the Sacrament?

Mr. Oates▪

Yes, Pickering and Grove did ſign it before they took the Sacrament?

Mr. Juſt. Atkins.

You tell us of an Oath of Secreſie that was taken, what was that Oath?

Mr. Oates.

I cannot give an account of the form of the Oath, but it was an Obliga­
[...]ion of Secreſie.

Mr. Juſt. Atkins.

Did you ſee the Oath adminiſtred?

Mr. Oates.

Yes, my Lord, I did.

L. C. J.

Who adminiſtred it?

Mr. Oates.

Mr. Whitebread, he did give it unto me, and to all the reſt that were there,
and Mico held the Book, it was a Maſs-book, but they were words of his own
invention I believe they were not written down.

L. C. J.

Can't you tell what they were?

Mr. Oates.

No, my Lord, I cannot tell, becauſe I did not ſee them written down.

L. C. J.

If you will ask this Gentleman any thing more, you may.

Whitebread.

My Lord, I am in a very weak and doubtful condition as to my health, and
therefore I ſhould be very loth to ſpeak any thing but what is true: We are to
prove a Negative, and I know 'tis much harder to prove a Negative than to
aſſert an Affirmative; 'tis not a very hard thing for a man to ſwear any thing
if he will venture his Soul for it; but truly, I may boldly ſay, in the ſight
of Almighty God, before whom I am to appear, there have not been three true
words ſpoken by this Witneſs.

L. C. J.

Do you hear, if you could but ſatisfie, us, that you have no Diſpenſation to
call God to witneſs a Lye—

Whitebread,

My Lord, I do affirm it with all the Proteſtations imaginable.

L. C. J.

But if you have a Religion that can give a Diſpenſation for Oaths,
Sacra­ments, Proteſtations, and Falſhoods that are in the World, how can you
expect we ſhould believe you?

Whitebread,

I know no ſuch thing.

L. C. Juſt▪

We ſhall ſee that preſently, before we have done.

Mr. Oates,

I have one thing more to ſay, my Lord, that comes into my mind. This
Whitebread received power from the See of Rome to grant out Commiſſions to
Officers military. And, my Lord, here are the Seals of the Office in Court,
which he hath ſeal­ed ſome hundreds of Commiſſions with, which they call
Patents.

L. C. J.

What were thoſe Commiſſions for? for an Army?

Mr. Oates.

Yes, my Lord, for an Army.

Whitebread.

When were thoſe Commiſſions ſigned?

Mr. Oates.

My Lord, ſeveral of them were ſigned in the former Provincials time.

L. C. J.

What, I warrant you, you are not Provincial of the Jeſuits, are you?

Whitebread,

I cannot deny that, my Lord.

L. C. J.

Then there are more than three words he hath ſpoken are true.

Mr. Juſt. Atkins.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=11)

I believe, Mr. Oates, that that Army was intended for ſomething, pray what was
it for?

Mr. Oates.

My Lord, they were to riſe upon the death of the King, and let the French King
in upon us, and they had made it their buſineſs to prepare Ireland and
Scotland for the receiving of a foreign Invaſion.

L. C. Juſt.

Who were theſe Commiſſions ſealed by?

Mr. Oates.

My Lord, the Commiſſions of the Great Officers were ſealed with the Ge­nerals
Seal.

L. C. Juſt.

Who was that?

M Oats,

His Name is Johannes Paulus de Oliva: His Seal ſealed the Commiſſions for the
Generals, Major-Generals, and great Perſons; but thoſe Seals that ſealed the
ſeve­ral Commiſſions to ſeveral inferior Officers, were in the Cuſtody of the
Provincial.

L. Ch. Juſt.

Can you name any one perſon that he hath ſealed a Commiſſion to?

Mr. Oates.

I can name one: To Sir John Gage, which Commiſſion I delivered my ſelf.

L. Ch. Juſt.

What, of Suſſex?

Mr. Oates.

Yes, of Suſſex.

Mr. Juſtice Atkins,

Who did you receive the Commiſſion from?

Mr. Oates.

My Lord, when he went over, he left a great many blank Patents to be filled
up, and he left one ready ſealed for a Commiſſion to Sir John Gage. This was
delivered in­to my hands when he was abſent, but it was ſigned by him, and
delivered to me while he was in his Viſitation beyond the Sea [...], but I
dare ſwear it was his hand, as I ſhall anſwer it before God and the King.

Mr. Juſt. Atkins.

Who had it you from?

Mr. Oates.

From Mr. Aſhby, but by Whitebreads appointment in his inſtructions which I ſaw
and read.

L. Ch. Juſt.

What was the Commiſſion for?

Mr. Oates.

To be an Officer in the Army.

L. Ch: Juſt.

Did you ſee the Inſtructions left for Aſhby?

Mr. Oates.

I did ſee them and read them, and I did then as I always did, give it as my
judgment, that it was more ſafe to poyſon the King than to piſtol or ſtab him.

Mr. Juſt. Bertue▪

Was the Commiſſion which you delivered to Sir John Gage from Aſhby or from
Whitebread?

Mr. Oates.

I had it from Aſhby, but Whitebread who was then beyond Sea, had ſigned this
Commiſſion before he went. My Lord, I have ſomething more yet to ſay, and that
is as to Mr. Grove, That he did go about with one Smith to gather Peter pence,
which was either to carry on the Deſign, or to ſend them to Rome. I ſaw the
book wherein it was entred, and I heard him ſay that he had been gathering of
it.

Grove,

Where was this?

Mr. Oates.

In Cock-pit-Alley, where you know I lodged.

Grove,

Did I ever ſee you at your Lodging.

Mr. Oates.

You ſaw me at my own door.

L. Ch. Juſt.

Why, don't you know Mr. Oates?

Grove.

My Lord, I have ſeen him before.

Lord. Ch. Juſt.

Why this 'tis, ask a Papiſt a queſtion, and ſhall have a Jeſuitical an­wer.

Mr. Oates.

I will convince the Court that he does know me, by ſome circumſtances. My
Lord, in the month of December laſt by the Provincials order—

L. Ch. Juſt.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=11)

I would ask him firſt whether he does know you or no. Do you know Mr. Oates?

Grove,

I have ſeen him before.

L. Chief Juſt.

Have you been often in his company?

Grove,

No my Lord.

Lord Chief Juſt.

What do you call often? Have you been in his company ſeven or eight times?
(for we muſt deal ſubtilly with ſuch as you are,) have you been in his company
ten times?

Grove,

No.

Lord Chief Juſt.

What ſay you to three times?

Grove,

Yes, I believe I have ſeen him twice or thrice.

Lord Chief Juſt.

Where? Did you never ſee him at Whitebreads?

Grove,

As, I hope to be ſaved, and before the eternal God, I did never.

Mr. Oates.

I will convince him and the Court, that he does know me, and is well
acquainted with me: In the month of December laſt I went to St. Omers, I went
firſt to the then Provincials houſe to take my leave of him, and there I met
with Mr. Grove, and he appointed to come to my Lodging the next morning, near
the Red Lyon in Dru­ry-Lane, at one Grigſons houſe, and he was ſo well
acquainted with me then, that he had lent me eight ſhillings to hire the
Coach.

Lord Chief Juſt.

Did you lend him eight ſhillings?

Grove.

I did, my Lord, I do not deny it.

Lord Ch. Juſt.

How came you to do it, when it ſeems, if you ſay true, he was a ſtran­ger to
you?

Grove.

I thought I ſhould have it again.

Lord Chief Juſt.

What, of him?

Grove,

Yes.

Lord Chief Juſt.

Did he deſire you to lend him the eight ſhillings?

Grove,

Yes, he did my Lord.

Mr. Oates,

Then there is one time that he confeſſes he ſaw me.

Lord Chief Juſt.

Did you not know him before?

Grove,

I had no acquaintance with him, I had ſeen him.

Lord Ch. Juſt.

How came you then to lend money to one you had no more acquaintance with?

Grove,

I knew I ſhould go along with him to the Coach, and then I thought I ſhould
have it again.

Lord Chief Juſt.

Mr. Oates, were you going beyond Sea then?

Mr. Oates,

Yes, my Lord, I was:

Lord Chief Juſt.

Mr, Oates, did you pay him that money?

Mr. Oates,

No, my Lord I did not.

Lord Chief Juſt.

Did you ask him ſo the money, and had you it?

Grove,

He did not pay it me.

Lord Chief Juſt.

How then were you ſure you ſhould have it?

Grove,

He did order me to go to ſuch a one for it?

Lord Chief Juſt.

Who was that?

Grove,

Mr. Fenwick, I think.

Lord Ch. Juſt.

Then Mr. O [...]tes was known to you all, he was no ſuch ſtranger to you as
you would make  [...] believe.

Mr. Oates.

Thus he confeſſes three times he had ſeen me, once before he lent me the
money, another time when he lent it and the third time the next day. And I
will put him in mind of another time when he and I were in company, where o
[...]e brought in a [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=12) Note of what
was done in the Houſe of Commons turned into Burleſque, for they uſed to turn
all that was done at the Council, or at the Parliament, or at the Courts in
Weſt­minſter-Hall into Burleſque, and then tranſlated it in French, and ſent
it to the French King, for him to laugh at too. But that by the way; twice
more he drank in my com­pany at the Red P [...]ſts in Wild-ſtreet, and once
more when he owned to me that he fired Southwark.

Lord Chief Juſt.

Now by the Oath that you have taken, did he own to you that he had fired
Southwark?

Mr. Oates.

My Lord, he did tell me that he with three Iriſhmen did fire Southwark, and
that they had a Thouſand pounds given them for it, whereof he had four
thouſand pounds, and the other two hundred pounds a piece.

Lord Chief Juſt.

Now for Mr. Fenwick, do you know Mr▪ Oats.

Fenwick,

Yes, my Lord, I do.

Lord Chief Juſt.

Were you well acquainted with him? ſpeak plain.

Mr. Oates,

He was my Father Confeſſor, my Lord,

Lord Chief Juſt.

Was he ſo? were you his Gonfeſſor.

Fenwick,

I believe he never made any Confeſſion in his life.

L. Ch. Juſt.

Yes, he hath made a very good one now. Were you of his Acquaintance Mr.
Fenwick? ſpeak home, and don't mince the matter.

Fenwick,

My Lord, I have ſeen him.

Lord Ch. J.

I wonder what you are made of: Ask a Proteſtant, an Engliſh one, a plai [...]
Queſtion, and he will ſcorn to come dallying with an evaſive anſwer.

Fenw.

My Lord, I have been ſeveral times in his company.

Lord Chief Juſt.

Did you pay eight ſhillings for him?

Fenwick,

Yes, I believe I did.

L. C. J.

How came you to do it?

Fenw.

He was going to St. Omers.

L. C. J.

Why, were you Treaſurer for the Society?

Fenw.

No, my Lord, I was not.

L. C. J.

You never had your eight ſhillings again, had you?

Fenw.

It is upon my Book, my Lord, if I ever had it.

L. C. J.

Did Mr. Oates ever pay it again?

Fenw.

No, ſure he was never ſo hone [...]

L. C. J.

Who had you it of then?

Fenw.

I am certain I had it not from him; he did not pay it.

L. C. J.

How can you tell you had it then?

Fenw.

I do ſuppoſe I had it again, but not of Mr. Oates.

L. C. J.

Had you it of Ireland?

Fenw.

I do not know who I had it of, my Lord, nor certainly whether I had it.

L. C. J.

Why did you not ask Mr. Oates for it?

Fenw.

He was not able to pay [...]

L. C. J.

Why did you then lay it down for him?

Fenw.

Becauſe I was a F [...]

L. C. J.

That muſt be the concluſion always: when you can't evade being pro [...]
Knaves by anſwering directly, you will rather ſuffer your ſelves to be called
Foots.

Fenw.

My Lord, I have done more for him than that comes to; for he came once [...]
me in a miſerable poor condition, and ſaid, I muſt turn again and betake my
ſelf to  [...] Miniſt [...]r [...] to get B [...]ead, for I have eaten nothing
theſe two days: And I then gave h [...] [...]i [...]e ſhi [...]lings to
relieve his preſent neceſſity.

Mr. Oates.

My Lord, I will anſwer to that, I was never in any ſuch ſtreights, I  [...]
[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=12) ordered
by the Provincial to be taken care of by the Procurator.

Fenw.

You brought no ſuch order to me.

Mr. Oates.

Yes, Mr. Fenwick, you know there was ſuch an Order, and I never re­ceived ſo
little in my life as five ſhillings from you: I have received 20 and 30 and 40
ſhillings at a time, but never ſo little as five.

L. C. J.

You are more charitable than you thought for.

Fenw.

He told me he had not eaten a bit in two days.

Mr. Oates,

I have indeed gone a whole day without eating, when I have been hurried about
your Traſh; but I aſſure you, my Lord, I never wanted for any thing among
them.

L. C. Juſt.

Perhaps it was Faſting-day.

L. Ch. Baron.

My Lord, their Faſting-days are none of the worſt.

Mr. Oates.

No, we commonly eat beſt on thoſe days.

L. C. J.

Have you any thing to ask him any of you?

Whitebread,

My Lord, will you be pleaſed to give me leave to ſpeak for my ſelf.

Mr. Juſt. Atkins,

It is not your time yet to make your full Defence, but if you will ask him any
Queſtions you may.

Whitebread.

I crave your mercy, my Lord.

L. C. J.

Will you ask him any Queſtions?

Fenw.

Did not you ſay that you were at my Chamber the 24th of April with the
Re­ſolve of the Conſult?

Mr. Oates.

That Reſolve I did then carry to your Chamber.

Fenw.

Then was he himſelf at St. Omers.

L. C. J.

The difference of old flile and new ſtile may perhaps make ſome alteration in
the circumſtance.

Whitebread.

But, my Lord, he hath ſworn he was preſent at ſeveral Conſultations in April
and May, but from November till June he was conſtantly at St. Omers.

L C. J.

If you can make it out that he was at St, Omers all April and May, then what
he hath ſaid cannot be true.

Ireland.

He himſelf hath confeſſed that he was at St. Omers:

L. C. J.

If you mean by Confeſſion, what ſtands upon the Evidence he hath given, I'le
remember you what that was. He ſays he came to St. Omers.

Mr. Oates.

Will your Lordſhip give me leave to ſatisfie the Court: In the month of
December or November, I went to St. Omers; I remained there all January,
February, March, and ſome part of April: Then I came over with the Fathers to
the Conſult that was ap­pointed the 24th of that month.

Fenw.

Did you go back again?

Mr. Oates.

Yes.

Fenw.

When was that?

Mr. Oates.

In the month of May, preſently after the Conſult was over.

Fenw.

And we can prove by abundance of Witneſſes that he went not from St. Omers all
that month.

L. C. J.

You ſhall have what time you will to prove what you can; and if you can prove
what you ſay, you were beſt fix it upon him; for he ſaith he was here at the
Con­ſults in April and May; if you can proove otherwiſe pray do.

Fenw.

We can bring an Authentick Writing (if there be any ſuch) from St Omers un­der
the Seal of the Colledge, and teſtified by all the Colledge, that he was there
all the while.

L. C. J.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=13)

Mr. Fenwick that will not do; for the firſt, if it were in any other caſe
beſides this, it would be no evidence, but I know not what you cannot get from
St. Omers, or what you will not call Authenthick.

Fenwick

Does your Lordſhip think there is no Juſtice out of England?

L. C. J.

It is not, nor cannot be Evidence here.

Fenwick,

It ſhall be ſigned by the Magiſtrates of the Town.

L. C. J.

What there?

Fenwick.

Yes there▪

L C. J.

You muſt be tryed by the Laws of England, which ſends no piece of Fact out of
the country to be tryed.

Fenwick

But the evidence of it may be brought hither.

L. C. J.

Then you ſhould have brought it, you ſhall have a fair Tryal; but we muſt not
depart from the Law or the way of Tryal, to ſerve your purpoſes. You muſt be
tryed ac­cording to the Law of the Land.

Mr. J. Atkins,

Such evidences as you ſpeak of, we would not allow againſt you; and therefore
we muſt not allow it for you▪

Whitebread,

May this Gentleman be put to this, to produce any two Witneſſes that ſee him
in town at that time.

Mr. Oates

I will give ſome circumſtances and what Tokens I have to prove my being h
[...]re: Father Warner, Sir Tho: Preſton, Father Williams, and Sir John
Warner, they came hi­ther with me  [...]om S [...] Omers, there was one Nevil,
&c. I cannot reckon them all.

L. C. J.

You have named enough.

Mr. Oates,

But to convince them, there was a Lad in the houſe that was got to the end of
his Rhetorick; this Lad was whipt and turned out of the houſe, and had loſt
all hi [...] money Father Williams did re-imburſ [...] this Lad in order to
his bringing home, I think the Lads name was Hilſ [...]ey, o [...] ſom [...] ſ
[...]ch  [...]e. And we came up to London together.

L. C. J.

What ſay you to this circumſtance?

Whitebread,

My Lord, he knew that two ſuch came to Town, but he was not with them.

L. C. J.

You are now very good at a negative I ſee, how can you tell that?

Whitbread,

My Lord, he could not come.

L. C. J.

How can you tell he could not come,

Whitebread,

I can tell it very well, for he had no order to come nor did come.

L. C. J.

How can you undertake to ſay that he did not com [...]?

Whitebread,

Becauſe he had no order to come.

L. C. J.

Is that all your reaſon, where were you then?

Whitebread,

I was here.

L. C. J▪

How do you know he was not here.

Whitebread,

He had no orders to come.

L. C. J.

Have you any other circumſtance Mr. Oates to prove that you were here ther?

Mr. Oates,

My Lord, when I came to London, I was ordered to keep very cloſe, and I lay at
Mr. Groves Houſe, let him deny it if he can, Ile tell you who lay there then.

Groves.

Did you ever ye at my houſe.

Mr. Oates,

The [...]e l [...]y a Flax [...]n H [...]i [...]'d Gentlemen, I forgot his
name, but Ile tell you who lay there beſides; that is Strange, that was the
late Provincial.

L. C. J.

Did Strange ever lye at your houſe?

Groves

Yes, my Lord he did

L. C. J.

Did he lye th [...]re in April o [...] M [...]y?

Grove,

No, he did not in  [...]i [...]her of them▪

Lr. C. J

You will m [...]e that appear.

Grove,

Yes, that I can by all the Houſe.

L. C. J.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=13)

Have you any more queſtions to ask him? If you have, do: If you can prove this
upon him▪ that he was ab [...]e [...], and n [...]t in England in April or
May, you have made a great defence for your ſelves, and it ſhall be remembred
for your advantage, when it comes to your turn: In the mean t [...]me, if you
have no more to ſay to him, call another Witneſs▪ Let Mr. Oates ſit down
again, and have ſome refreſhment.

Mr. Serjant Baldwin,

We will now call Mr. Bedlow, my Lord.

The [...] Mr. Bedlow was ſworne.

Mr. Serj: Baldwin.

Mr. Bedlow, pray doe you tell my Lord and the Jury what you know of any deſign
of ki [...]ling the King▪ and by whom.

Mr Bedlow.

My Lord. I have been five years almoſt employed by the Society of Je­ſuits and
the Engliſh Monks in Paris, to carry and bring letters between them from
Eng­land and to England▪ for the promoting of a deſign tending to the
ſubverſion of t [...]e Go­vernment and the Extirpating of the Proteſtant
Religion, to that degree (which was al­ways concluded on, in all their
Conſults wherein I was,) that they would not leave any member of any Here
[...]ick in England, that ſhould S [...]rvive to tell in the Kingdom hereafter
that there ever was any ſuch religion in Englands as the Proteſtant Religion—

Here Whitebread would have interrupted him.

My Lord I am ſo well ſatisfied in their denyalls, that I cannot but believe
they who can give a diſpenſa [...]ion and have received the ſacrament to kill
a King, and deſtroy a whole Kingdom, doe not ſcruple to give a diſpenſation
for a little lye, to promote ſuch a deſign, for ſo much  [...]s this Expiates
any lye or greater Crime,

Sir Cr. Levines,

Pray Sir will you be pleaſed, to tell your whole knowledge concerning the
Priſoners at the B [...]rr.

Mr. Bedlow,

The firſt le [...]er  [...] [...]rr [...]e [...] wa [...] from Mr. Harcourt,
at his houſe next door to the Arch in Dukes-ſtreet. He hath been Procurator
for the Jeſuits about 6. years. H [...] em­ployed me firſt and ſent for me ov
[...]r, for I was the [...] L [...]nt in Flanders, and coming home to receive
my pay that was due to me—

L. C. J.

How long is it a goe?

Mr. Bedlow.

Michaelmus laſt was 4. years, when I came to Dunkirke▪ I went to viſit the
Engliſh N [...]nnery there, & the Lady Abbeſſe finding me very plyable &
inclineable, made very much of me, and I did adhe [...]e to her; ſh [...] k
[...]pt  [...] 6\. we [...]kes in the covent, & afterwards when I went away
recommended me to Sir John Warner as an inſtrument fit to be employ­ed in the
carrying of letters, or doing any th [...]ng that would promote the deſign
againſt England He kept me at S. Omers a forthn [...]g [...]t, and a [...] me
to Father Harcourt to be in­ſtructed in my employment, It was th [...]n win
[...], the next ſpring he ſends me into Eng­land with divers letters, whereby
Mr. Harcourt I was empl [...]yed to carry ſeveral letters to Morton and Doway,
and o [...]her places, that ſumme [...] I was ſ [...]nt into England without
an an­ſwer, but afterwards in (76) which was the  [...]xt ſummer I was to
carry another Pacquett of l [...]t [...]s to the Monks at Paris, who ſ [...]nt
it to other Engliſh Monks in France.

L. C. J.

Who ſent that pacquet of letters in 76?

M [...] ▪ Bedlow▪

I had it from mr: Harcourt, and it was written by Harcourt, Pritchard & Carry.

L. C. J.

To whom?

Mr. Bedlow,

To the Engl [...]ſh Monk [...] i [...] France, and in it there was a letter
[...]o  [...] Ch [...]ſe. Upon the receipt of theſe l [...]t [...]ers at Paris
[...] Ch [...]ſe had a co [...]ſul [...]tion with the M [...]nk [...],  [...]
a French Biſhop or two about them, I did not then ſpeak French [...]ugh to
[...]d what it was they ſaid, but it was interpreted to me by mr▪ Stapleton an
Engliſh Monk, who [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=14) told me that it
was a letter from my Lord Bellaſis and others of the Catholick Religion,
Engliſh Gentlemen who were contrivers of the Plot here, to ſatisfie them in
what ſtate things ſtood in England as to Popery. I was ſent back again with a
pacquett of letters directed to mr. Vaughan of Courtfield in Monmouthſhire.

L. C. J.

From whom was that?

Mr. Bedl [...]w,

From the Engliſh Monks at Paris. From that conſultation I went to Pon­thois. I
there received other letters to carry into England. I had a courſe to open
their letters, and read what was in them; and in thoſe letters was contained,
That the Prayers of that houſe were for the proſperity of that deſign, and
they would not fail to be at the conſultation at of Warwickshire Gentlemen. I
fell ſick at Monmouth, and Mr. Ʋaughan ſent to me a Ieſuit to confeſs me, but
I was well before he came, and ſo was▪ not confeſſed by him, I now come to the
later times.

L. C. J▪

You muſt ſpeak it over to the Jury, that they and the priſoners may hear you.

Mr. Bedlow,

The 25th. of May 77. which was laſt year, I was ſent over with an other
Pacquet of Le [...]ters. I had no letters of conſequence forward, and
therefore did not call then at Wotton, but I called upon the Lady Albeſſe at
Dunkirk, and I went thence to Bridges and to Ghent, where I had ſome letters
for the Engliſh N [...]nns, which I delivered to them, When I came to Doway, I
found there that the Monks were gone, that was Sheldon, Stapleton and Latham,
but the letters were directed to Paris, and therefore I made haſt, and at
Cam­bray I overtooke them. And the letters were to give an account of the
conſultation held in the Gallery at Sommerſet-houſe: all tending to the
deſtruction of the Proteſtant Religi­on, and killing the King, but I doe not
think fit to declare here who were the perſons that were preſent at that
conſultation. At Cambray they were very joyful that there was ſo good a
proceeding in England. At Paris when the letters were ſhewed, there was a
let­ter written in a language which I did not underſtand, but▪ as I was told
in that letter, they were charged in Paris by my Lord Bellaſis, that they did
not proceed according to their promiſe to them in England; But ſaid Mr.
Stapleton to me, my Lord Bellaſis nor the ſociety in England need not to write
thus to us, for We are not ſo backward but we can lend men, and money▪ and
Armes too, and will upon occaſion. From thence they ſent me to Spain with a
letter to an Iriſh Father: I did overtake him at Sa Mora. From thence I went
with another letter to the Rector of a Colledge of Iriſh Jeſuits in Salamanca,
by their contrivance I was ſent to St. Jago in Spain, where was another
Colledge of Iriſh Je­ſuits: There I ſtaid till I had an anſwer to Sir Willi:
Godolphin, and when I had the an­ſwer to that Letter, I went for the letter
from the Rector at Salamanca, the Jeſuits there told me, they would take care
to ſend their own anſwer another way. And when they had made me that promiſe I
came away for England, and landed at Mill-ford-haven. All this reaches to none
of theſe perſons in particular. But what I now ſhall ſay ſhall be about them,
only it was neceſſary, I ſhould ſpeak of what I have ſaid,

L. C. J.

The meaning of all this is only to ſhew the Jury and ſatisfie them, that he
was an Agent for theſe men, and hath been employed by them for five years
together, and he names you the particular places whither he hath been ſent, to
ſhew you the reaſons of his knowledge in this matter, and upon what account he
comes to be informed of this deſign.

Mr. Bedlow.

Having received the Newes of that country, I did there take water and landed
againe at P [...]nſans, and when I came to London I gave the Letter to Mr.
Harcourt: What was in that Pacquet I cannot particularly tell, for I was not
ſo inquiſitive a [...] to look into the contents of it, but I know it was
tending as all the reſt did to the carrying [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=14) on of this
Plot, Afterwards I was employed by Mr. Harcourt and Mr. Coleman to go to
[...]me parts of England, to communicate the letters to ſome of the popiſh
party.

L. C. J.

Now turn to the Jury.

Mr. Bedlow.

The Summer was paſt in the doing of that; in the beginning of Auguſt laſt,
there was a Conſultation, and a cloſe one, at Mr. Harcourts Chamber, ſo as
that they did not permit me to know any thing of it, I went out of Town for a
fortnight, and when I returned, I underſtood there had been ſuch a meeting, I
charged them with their Privacy in it, and asked what was the private deſign
of that Conſultation, they ſaid, it was ſomething I ſhould know in time: That
it did not ſignifie much at preſent, but in time I ſhould know it. But then I
underſtood by Pritchard, who was more my Confident, than any of the reſt: That
it was a deſign to kill the King: That Mr. Picke­ring and Grove had undertaken
it a great while, and that they had been endeavouring a long while to bring it
to paſs.

Fenw.

Where was this meeting, and when?

Mr. Bedlow.

Laſt Auguſt at Harcourts Chamber.

Fenwick.

Who were preſent the [...]e?

Mr. Bedl,

Be pleaſed to give me leave to go on, I'le tell you by and by. Then I
under­ſtood, as I ſaid, That it was to kill the King, but that Pickering and
Grove failing of it, they had hired four Ruffians,, that were to go to
Windſor, and to do it there, and that if I would come the next day, I ſhould
hear from Mr. Coleman the Effect. When I came there I found Mr. Coleman was
gone, but Pritchard ſaid there were ſome ſent to Windſor, and that Coleman was
going after them, and that he had given a meſſenger a Guinny that was to carry
the money to them; and he would preſently be after them, for fear they ſhould
want opportunity to effect their Deſign. Then I diſcourſed them, why they kept
their Deſign ſo long hid from me? They ſaid it was a Reſolve of the Society,
and an Order of my Lord Bellaſis that none ſhould know it but the Society, and
[...]hoſe that were actors in it. I ſeemed ſatisfied with that anſwer at
preſent. About the latter end of Auguſt or the beginning of Septem [...]er
(but I believe, it was the latter end of Auguſt) I came to Harcourts Chamber,
and there was Ireland, and Pritchard, & Pickering and Grove.

L. C. J.

What part of Auguſt was it?

Mr. Bedlow.

The latter end.

L. C. J.

Do you ſay it poſitively, that it was the latter end of Auguſt?

Mr. Bedlow.

My Lord, it was in Auguſt, I do not ſwear poſitively to a day.

L. C. J.

But you ſay, it was in Auguſt.

Ireland.

And that we were there preſent?

Mr. Bedlow.

You were there and Mr. Grove and Mr. Pickering.

Ireland.

Did you ever ſee me before?

Mr. Bedlow.

You were there preſent there, and Grove, & Pickering, and Pritchard, a [...]d
Fogarthy, and Harcourt, and I.

L. C. J.

What did you talk of the [...]e?

M [...]. Bedl.

That the Ruffians miſſing of killing the King at Windſor, Pick [...]ring and
Grove hould go on, and that Conyers ſhould be joyned with them; and that wa
[...] to aſſaſſinate he King in is morning walks at Newmarket: and they had
taken it ſo ſtrongly upon  [...]hem, that they were very eager upon it: And M.
Grove was more forward than the  [...]t; and ſaid, ſince it could not be done
clandeſtinely, it ſhould be attempted openly.  [...]d that thoſe that do fall
had the glory to die in a good cauſe. But (ſaid he) if it be  [...]ſcovered,
the Diſcovery can never come to that heighth, but their party would be  [...]g
enough to bring it to paſs.

L. C. J.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=15)

And you ſwear, Ireland was there?

Mr. Bedlow.

He was there my Lord.

L. C. J.

And heard all this?

Mr. Bedlow.

Yes, my Lord; and ſo did Grove and Pickering and the reſt.

Ireland.

My Lord I never ſaw him before in my life.

L C. J.

What was the Reward that you were to have, for your pains in this buſi­neſs?

Mr. Bedlow.

My Lord, the Reward that I was to have, (as it it was told me by Har­court)
was very conſiderable: I belonged to one particular part of the Society. There
are others, and I preſume,  [...]hey each kept their particular meſſenger.

L. C. J.

What was Mr. Grove to have?

Mr. Bedlow.

Grove was to have fifteen hundred po [...]nd if he eſcaped, and to be a co
[...] ­tinual Favourite, and reſpected as a great perſon by all the Church.

L. C. J.

What was Pickering to have?

Mr. Bedlow.

He was to have ſo many Maſſes, I can [...]ot preſume to tell the numbe [...]
but they were to be as many as at twelve pence a Maſs ſhould come to that
money: The Maſſe▪ were to be communicated to all the Jeſuits beyond the Seas,
that when he h [...] done it he might be ſent away immediately.

L. C. J.

What can you ſay of any of the reſt?

Mr. Bedlow.

My Lord, I do not charge any more, but them three?

L. C. J.

What ſay you to Whitebread?

Mr. Bedlow.

They have ſaid that he was very active in the Plot, but I know it no [...]

L. C. J.

That is not any Evidence againſt him. What can you ſay as to Fenwick?

Mr. Bedlow,

No more than I have ſaid, as to Mr. Whitebread: I only know him ſight.

L. C. J.

Then he charges only theſe three upon Oath, Ireland, Pickering and Grove.

Ireland,

Do you know Sir John Warner?

Mr. Bedlow.

I know Father Warner at St. Omers, and Sir John Warner at Wotton St. Omers.

Ireland.

He named Sir John Warner to be at Paris.

Mr. Bedlow.

It was Sheldon I ſpoke of (my Lord) at Paris.

I [...]eland.

At leaſt you are certain that I was preſent at that Conſultation.

Mr. Bedlow.

Yes, I am certain you were there.

I [...]eland.

Can you produce any witneſs that you ever ſpoke to me before in y [...] li
[...]e.

Mr. Serj. Baldwin.

Do you know any thing of Mr, Whitebreads being preſent at of the Conſults?

Mr. Bedlow.

I do know that Mr, Whitebread and Mr. Fenwick both have been  [...] ­ral times
at Conſultations; but I do not know what the particular Reſolves of  [...]
Conſultations were.

L. C. J.

Did you ever hear them ſpeak any thing in particular?

Mr. Bedlow.

No, I have never heard them ſpeak any thing in particular.

L. C. J.

Whe [...]e have you ſeen Mr. Fenwick?

Mr. Bedlow,

I have ſeen Mr. Fenwick at Mr. Harcourts Chamber, and I have  [...] heard him
talkt of, and it hath been told me, that nothing was done without Mr.  [...]
­wick.

Whitebread,

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=15)

Are you ſure you know us?

Mr. Bedlow.

I do not ſay, you are the man that employed me, you are the man I was leaſt
acquainted with, of all the Society, but I have ſeen you there.

Ireland.

Can you bring any one that can teſtifie it?

L. C. J.

He muſt then have brought one of your ſelves, and it may be, he cannot
pro­duce any ſuch one.

Ireland.

Nor no one elſe, except ſuch a Knight of the Peſt as Mr. Oates.

L. C. J.

You muſt be corrected for that Mr. Ireland: you ſhall not here come to abuſe
the Kings Evidence. Nothing appears to us that reflects upon Mr. Oates's
Teſti­mony; and we muſt not ſuffer any ſuch ſort of Language.

Mr. Juſt. Atkins.

Take of his Credit as much as you can by proof, but you muſt not abuſe him by
ill language.

Mr. Finch.

Can you tell the Court and the Jury when it was that by agreement Grove ſhould
have the fifteen hundred pound?

Mr. Bedlow.

He was to have it put into a Friends hands.

L. C. J.

Do you know that Friends name?

Mr. Bedlow.

No my Lord, I do not.

Mr. Finch▪

Do you know when that was to be delivered out to him?

Mr. Bedlow.

As to the particular time of their agreement I do not know it.

Mr▪ Finch.

But this he ſays, That when the agreement was made, he was to have fifteen
hundred pounds.

L. C. J.

And he ſays this Ireland was in Auguſt laſt with Pickering, and Grove, and
others, at a Conſult where he wa [...] alſo.

Ireland.

But what if I prove, I was not in London all Auguſt laſt, from the beginning
to the end?

L. C. J.

You heard them talk of this matter in Auguſt at Harcourts Chamber, you ſay:
What, did they talk of it, as a matter they had agreed?

Mr. Bedlow.

My Lord, they brought it in▪ as being balked in their deſign of killing the
King at Windſor; and becauſe that had not taken the effect they intended it,
they ſhould have Conyers joyned with them to do it at Newmarket.

Mr. Finch.

Did they tell you when, and where the agreement was made?

L. C. J.

No, he ſpeaks not of that; but they talkt of the failer at Windſor: And
therefore they did conclude that Conyers ſhould be joyned to them to do it at
New­market.

Mr. Bedlow.

Yes, my Lord.

L. C. J

Have you any more to ſay?

Mr. Bedlow.

My Lord, I would only ſay this; If I had any to prove what I ſay, they muſt be
parties as well as theſe perſons.

Ireland.

My Lord, I will prove, that I was not in Town in Auguſt all the month, by
twenty Witneſſes: I'le bring thoſe that ſaw me in Staffordſhire, and ſp
[...]ke with me all Auguſt.

L. C. J.

Have you any more to ask him?

Whitebread.

No.

Mr. Serj. Baldwin.

Swear Mr. James Bedlow. And he was ſworn.

Ireland▪

He does ſay, That he was familiar with me, and ſeveral other perſons here; and
therefore I deſire he may ſpecifie the Place and the Company.

Mr. William Bedlow.

I do not ſay, there was a Familiarity; for I was a Stranger to that part of
the Society.

L. C. J.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=16)

You muſt take him right Mr. Ireland; he hath not ſaid that he was of your
Fa­miliar acquaintance.

Mr. Bedlow.

I have ſeen you often Sir.

Mr. Ireland.

Where?

Mr. Bedlow.

At Monſieur Le Faires.

Ireland.

Where was that, Mr. Bedlows At Somerſet-houſe.—

Ireland,

Was there any one preſent beſides.

Mr. Bedlow.

Yes, ſeveral other Prieſts and Jeſuites of Sumerſethouſe.

Jreland.

Name one? Mr. Bedlow. Seignior Perrare.

Ireland.

You ſay, you ſaw me and Perrare together at Somerſethouſe. I ſuppoſe, if
Seig­nior Parrare may be brought hither—

Mr. Bedlow.

My Lord Perrare is a Prieſt in Orders, and without Doubt, is in this
bu­ſineſs.

L. C. J.

If he did ſee you, he muſt ſee you in ſuch company as you keep, they were
Prieſts and Ieſuits, and of your own Religion; and we know very well what
Anſwers we are like to be put off with by men of your own Perſwaſion at this
time of day

Jreland,

my Lord if no bodyes Oath can be taken that is of another Perſwaſion than the
Church of England, it is hard.

L. C. J.

Pray mind, you do not object ingeniouſly, for you ſay, this witneſs ſwears he
ſaw me in ſuch company, why does he not produce them to teſtifie it? why, he
does not come prepared to produce them; if he ſhould, we know well how you are
concern'd one for another at this time; and we can hardly expect they ſhould
make true Anſwer. But notwithſtanding if you will produce this Father Perrare,
(he cannot be ſworn becauſe t'is againſt the law, but) his Teſtimony ſhall be
heard, & let it go as far as it can.

Mr. Bedlow.

If your Lordſhip pleaſes, my Lord, I would convince him that he does know me.
Have you not been, Sir, at Somerſet-Houſe.

[...]reland,

Yes, I have.

Mr. Bedlow.

Do you know Le-Fair and Perrare?

Ireland,

Yes, but I never ſaw you in their company in Somerſet houſe in my life, above
once or twice.

Mr. Bedlow.

Yes you were twice at Le Fairs.

L. C. J.

Where is that Le Fair, you would do well to produce him?

Mr. Bedlow,

my Lord, he is gone away, and is one againſt whom the Kings proclamati­on is
out.

L. C. J.

You keep ſuch company as run away, and then you require him to pro­duce them,
whom the King's Proclamation cannot bring in.

Ireland.

I keep none but honeſt company.

Mr. Bedlow.

If your Lordſhip pleaſes, I have one thing more that is very material to
ſpeakes, at the ſame time that there was a diſcourſe about theſe three
Gentlemen's being to deſtroy the King at Newmarket, at the ſame time there was
a diſcourſe of a deſigne to kill ſeveral Noble p [...]rſons, the particular
parts aſſigned to every one. Knight was to kill the Earl of Shaftesbury,
Pritchard, the Duke of Buckingham, Oneile, the Earl Oſſery, O Bryan, the Duke
of Ormond.

L. C. Juſt.

Well, will you have any more of this?

Mr. Finch.

You ſay, you ſaw Mr. Ireland ſay Maſſe, where did you ſee him?

Mr. Bedllow.

Not Mr. Ireland, but Mr. Fenwick, I have ſeen him ſay Maſſe, and at Wild-
Houſe.

Mr. Oates.

My Lord I did omit a Conſult wherein there was a deſign laid of taking away
the Duke of Ormond's life, and of a Rebellion that was to be raiſed in
Ireland.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=16)My Lord,
in the month of January laſt, there came letters from Arch-Biſhop Talbot to
London, which letters were peruſed by Fenwick and Ireland, and Whitebread, and
when they were peruſed, they were ſent and Communicated to the Fathers at St.
Omers. The contents of thoſe letters were thus, That the Catholicks had a fair
proſpect of effecting their deſign in the Kingdom of Ireland. And this letter
was incloſed in a letter ſigned by Whitebread, Ireland, Fenwick, and others (I
name no mans name that is not here.)

L, C. Juſt.

You ſaw the Letter.

Mr. Oates.

Yes, I did ſee it, and read it; wherein they did give thanks unto God, that he
was pleaſed to proſper their deſign ſo fairly in Ireland, and withall they did
ſay, that they would not leave a ſtone unturned, to root out that abominable
Hereſie out of that Kingdom▪ Now what that abominable Hereſie was, I have
nothing bur a conjecture.

L C. Juſt.

We all know what that is well enough▪ there needs no proof of that.

M. r. Oat [...]s.

Jn the month of Auguſt, Fenwick▪ a little before he went to St. Om [...]rs, on
the one and Twentieth of Auguſt, (as I think it was) that week that Barholomew
fair begun on) as I take it, he was then going to fetch home the Provincial,
and to carry ſome Stu­dents with him, and he went unto St. Omers the monday
following; but then there was a Conſult▪ and at that Conſult, Fenwick did
conſent to the contrivance of the death of the Duke of Ormond, and for the
Rebellion that was to be raiſed in Irela [...]d after his Death. And he did
approve of the four Jeſuits that were to kill my Lord of Ormond, and did
conſent to ſend Fogarthy down to the Arch-Biſhop of Dublin, lin caſe the
[...]our good Fa­thers did not hit the buſineſs, Mr. Whitebread my Lord did
conſent when he came over as appears by their entry Books, for there came a
Letter from him Dated as from St. Omers, but I concluded it did not come from
thence becauſe it paid but two penc [...].

Whitebread,

Who was it that writ that Letter.

Mr. Oates,

My Lord this letter was Dated as the later part of Auguſt, and Dated as from
St. Omers, but the Poſt mark upon it was but two pen [...] ▪ to b [...] paid
for it, ſo that I do con­clude thence, Mr. Whitebread, was then at Eſq Leigh's
Houſe in But in that letter he did like the propoſal that was made about
killing the Duke of Ormond, in that Conſult, and the letter was Signed with
his own Hand.

L. C. Juſt.

I would gladly ſee that Letter?

Mr. Oates.

If I could ſee it, I could know it▪3

L. C. J.

You have not that letter?

Mr. Oates.

No▪ but they kept a book wherein they Regiſtred all their Reſolutions, and
there it was entred▪

L. J. C.

You upon your Oath ſay▪ That he as ſuperior of them did keep a Book wherein
they Regiſtred all their Conſults.

Mr. Oates.

Yes, my Lord.

L. C. Juſt.

You would do well to ſhew us your Book, Mr. Whitebread.

Whitebread.

We never kept any.

Mr. Oates.

The Conſult did, for though the Superior have an abſolute power over  [...]
ſubject; yet they never do any thing of conſequence without the Conſult. And
this Book was kept by the ſuperior, and never opened  [...] the Conſult and
therein all the paſſages were Regiſtred.

L. C. J.

Produce your Book, and we  [...] whether you cannot catch Mr. Oates in
[...]omething or other.

Mr. Bedlow.

My Lord, that Book I hav [...] therein all their Conſults are regiſtred▪

L. C. J.

Was there Books kept by  [...]

Mr. Bedlow.

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=17)

Yes my Lord, All the Conſults did keep Bookes, and Mr. Lang [...]orn [...] ▪
was the perſon that Regiſtred all into one.

L. C. J.

If an hundred witneſſes ſwore it, they will deny it, well, will you have any
more?

Mr. S. Baldwin.

My Lord we will now call Mr. James Bedlow, this Gentlemans Bro­ther to ſhew
you▪ that theſe ſort of Perſons did reſort to him frequently.

L. C. J.

Are you ſworn S [...]?

Mr. James Bedlow.

Y [...]s my Lord, I am.

L. C. J.

Then le [...] me ask you one ſhort Queſtion. Do you know Mr. Ireland?

M [...]. James

Bedlow. N [...].

L. C. J.

Do you know Pickering or Grove.

Mr. James Bedlow.

I have heard of them.

L. C. J.

Did your Brother know any thing of them?

Mr. J. Bedlow.

As for the Conſpiracy of killing the King, I know nothing of it; b [...] about
his knowledg of Prieſts and J [...]ſuits, and the Converſe he had beyond ſea,
that can ſpeak to. And I have very often heard theſe mens names named.

L. C. J.

In what nature did he talk of them?

Mr. J. Bedlow.

I know nothing of the Plot,  [...]nd as for any d [...]ſign▪ I know not w
[...] my Brother knew, b [...]t I have heard him talk of them.

L. C. J.

How did he talk of them?

Mr. J. Bedlow.

He mentioned them as his Acquaintance, the Jeſuits there did ask  [...]
Queſtions about them.

L. C. J.

And did it appear to you they were of his Acquaintance.

Mr. J. Bedlow.

But I underſtood nothing of the  [...]lot  [...] Deſign, by the Oath  [...]
taken.

L. C. J

But did he ſpeak as if he knew any of them?

Mr. J. Bedlow.

For  [...]n knowledg that my Brother had of them I cannot  [...] but I have
often heard him talk of them as people, I thought he kn [...]w.

Mr. Finch.

Did you know, that when he ca [...]e over from beyond ſea, that hi [...] was
frequented by any  [...]d by whom? Mr. J. Bedlow, Yes▪ there were many Prieſts
[...] Jeſuits came to him▪

Mr. Finch.

Did your Brother receive any money from the [...]?

Mr. J. Bedlow,

Yes my Lord, I have fetcht many ſcore of pounds for my Brother  [...] them.

L. C. J.

The uſe, G [...]ntlemen, that the Kings council make of this evidence, is only
ſhew, that his Brother M [...] ▪ Bedlow was converſant in their affairs, in
that he hath  [...] many a ſcore of  [...]ing of their buſineſ [...].

Sir Cr. Levings,

Pr [...]y,  [...]m whom had your Brother that money?

M [...]. J. Bedlow

I have proved that from the Goldſmiths themſ [...]lves that paid it,  [...]
the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Chanc [...]lor, and Lord Treaſurer.

Mr▪ Finch▪

Have you received any conſi [...]erable  [...] at a time?

Mr. Bedlow,

Yes  [...]

Mr. Finch,

How muc [...]?

Mr. J. Bedlow,

fifty or threeſcore pounds at a  [...]

Mr. Finch,

Of wh [...]m?

Mr. J. Bedlow,

Of Prieſts and J [...]ſuits.

M [...]. Finch,

For whom?

Mr. J. Bedlow,

For my Brother.

L. C. J.

Will you have any more Evidence?

Mr. Serj.

Baldwyn, Yes: my Lord, the next evidence we produce, is concerning a  [...]
[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=17) [...]ere
was a letter written by one Mr. Peters, that is now a priſoner, to one
Tonſtall a Je­ſuit, and this letter does mention, That there was a meeting
appointed by order of Mr. Whitebread to be at London.

L. C. J.

What is that to them, and how came you by it?

Mr. Serj. Baldwin.

Peters is now in Priſon for things of this nature; and you have he [...]rd of
one Harcourt, and out of his Study this Letter was taken.

Mr. W. Bedlow.

My Lord, may I not have liberty to withdraw, my head akes ſo ex­treamly, I
cannot endure it.

L. C. J. Mr. Bedlow,

you may ſit down, but we can't part with you yet.

Ireland.

I deſire, my Lord, that his Brother may be asked, how long he had known me.

L. C. J.

Can you recollect by the diſcourſes you have heard, how long he might have
known Ireland?

Mr. J. Bedlow.

No, my Lord, it was out of my way.

L. C. J.

But he did talk of Ireland?

Mr. J. Bedlow.

Yes, my Lord, he did.

Ireland.

As being where, in what place?

Mr. J. Bedlow.

I cannot tell.

Ireland.

He named one place three years ago, it was at Paris.

L. C. J.

But he does not ſay that you were there, but that you were familiarly talk'd
of there; ſo that the meaning is, they were acquainted with you: and this is
only brought to ſhew, that it is not a new-taken-up thing by Mr. Bedlow,
though you ſeemed never to have known any ſuch man; yet he ſwears, ſaith he, I
have heard ſuch perſons talkt of as my Brothers acquaintance.

Ireland.

If his Brother had talkt of me three years ago, why then he muſt have known me
three years ago.

L. C. J.

[...]e ask him that queſtion: How long is it ſince you knew him?

Mr. W. Bedl.

I have known him but ſince Auguſt this laſt Summer; but my Lord, I talkt five,
and four years ago, of ſeveral Engliſh Monks and Jeſuits that were then at
Rome, that I never knew in my life.

L. C. J.

His anſwer then i [...] th [...], ſaith his Brother, I have heard him talk of
them three years ago; I then asked Bedlow how long he had known them? ſaith
he, I did not know them three years ago, though I did talk of them three years
ago; for we have talkt of many that we never ſaw in our lives▪ ſo it ſeems he
had occaſion to make uſe of your names frequently, and joyn them with theſe,
of ſome he knew better: But he never knew you t [...]ll Auguſt laſt; but he
did diſcourſe of you three years ago, as known for ſuch ſort of perſons.

Ireland▪

He muſt hear ſome body ſpeak of us, as being in ſome place or another.

Mr. W. Bedlow.

I will ſatisfie you in that, we talk of ſome now in England, that are to be
ſent a year hence.

L. C. J.

If you can produce but Ha [...]court and le Faire, they will do you great
ſervice now.

Mr. W. Bedlow.

My Lord, a [...] for example, Father Pritchard is Confeſſor to ſuch a
Gen­tleman in England now thi [...] year; a year hence we m [...]t  [...]d
ſuch a one hither, and he muſt go back. And we may talk of th [...] perſon as
i [...] England two years before.

L. C. J.

You need not trouble your ſelves about that. Mr. Ireland, you ſhall have a
fair Tryal, but you will not have cunning or art enough to deceive the Jury,
nor will

Mr. Whitebread

have learning enough to baffle the Court.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=18)Then Mr.
W. Bedlow and his Brother withdrew.

Mr. Serj. Baldwyn.

My Lord, the next Evidence that we ſhall give, as I ſaid, is a Let­ter from
one Peters to one Tonſtall, and this we will bring home to Mr▪ Whitebread; for
it is an invitation to be at the Conſu [...]t held in London the 24th of
April; and it was written about that very time, to wit▪ the 3d of April. It
was written from London, and it mentions, that Mr. Whitebread did fi [...] the
meeting at that time. We'll tell you how we came by the Letter, Mr. Harcourt,
who is one of the principal perſons here, and at whoſe Houſe was the meeting
you heard o [...], he himſelf is fl [...]d away, when they came to look after
him upon the diſcovery that was made: And Mr. Bradley who was the meſ­ſenger
to ſeize upon him, did according to direction ſearch his Study, and did there
find this Letter, which we conceive, my Lord, to be very good Evidence, this
Harcourt be­ing a party, and one at whoſe hou [...]e the laſt meeting was, and
others was. We do con­ceive a  [...]etter from one of that party, bearing date
about the ſame time, concerning Mr. Whitebreads Summons, who was Maſter of the
Company, is a very good Evidence againſt them.

L. C. J.

[...]f you had found it in Mr. Whitebreads cuſtody, you ſay ſomething.

Mr. J [...]ſt. Bertue,

My Brother puts it ſo▪ we find a Letter directed to Mr. Whitebread, let the
matter of it be what it will, it is found among Harcourts papers.

Mr. Serj. Baldwin,

No, my Lord, we find a letter from one Mr. Peters, now a priſo­ner, directed
to Mr. Tonſtal concerning the Conſult ſummoned by Whitebread, and this we find
in Harcourts poſſeſſion.

L. C. J.

I can't underſtand how this may affect Mr. Whitbread.

M. Finch.

Pray, my Lord, if your Lordſhip pleaſe, this is the uſe we make of this
Letter; we do not produce it as ano [...]er Evidence of this Deſign, but to
fortifie that part of the Evidence which hath already been given; That there
was a Conſult ſum­moned at that time, and to be held with all tht privacy that
could be, to prevent diſ­covery. And this is the Paper, that we find in the
cuſtody of Harcourt, one of the Conſpirators, who is fled for it.

L. C. J.

Look you, Mr. Finch, if you uſe it not againſt any particular perſon, but as
an Evidence in general, that there was a Plot amongſt them, you ſay right
enough; but it cannot  [...]e Evidence againſt any one particular perſon of
the priſoners at the Bar.

Mr▪ Finch.

My Lord, it can affect no particular perſon; but we only uſe it in the
general, and we pray it may be rea [...].

L. C. J.

Gentlemen of the Jury, before you hear the Letter read, I would ſay this to
you. Let them have fair play, whatſoever they me [...]e unto  [...]thers, we
will ſhew them juſtice. They ſhall have as fair play upon their Tryals as any
perſons whatſoever. The thing that is offered to be given in evidence, is a
Letter written by one Peters, a priſoner for this Plot▪ and directed to one
Tonſtal a Jeſuit, and this is found in Harcourts Cham­ber, a Prieſt that is
fled, and one whom the King hath commanded to render himſelf by His
Proclamation; but he does not. Now in that Letter there is a diſcourſe of a
Deſign and Plot on foo [...]. This cannot be Evidence to charge any o [...]e
particular per­ſon of theſe; but only to ſatisfie you and all the wo [...]ld
that thoſe letters and papers that are  [...]o [...]d amongſt their own
Prieſts, do fortifie the Teſtimony of Mr. Oates, that there is a general Plot:
'tis not applied to any particular perſon.

Mr. Oates.

The day before the Conſult met, Mr. Whitebread did ask Mr. Peters whether he
had ſummoned the Conſult according to his directio [...]. Mr. Peters told him
yes, he had writ into Warwick-ſhire, and Worceſter-ſhire.

Whitebread,

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=18)

When was this?

Mr Oates,

the day before the conſult me [...] ▪

Whitebread,

Did you hear me ask Mr. Peters?

Mr. Oates,

Yes, I did hear you; and I did hear him ſay he had done it, now my Lord this
Letter that is found in Harcourts ſtudy, ſhewes that Mr. Whitebread had
directed Mr Peters in this conſult.

Mr. Serj. Baldwin,

Pray ſwear Sir Tho: Doleman to ſhew how he came by it▪ Which was done.

Mr. Serj Baldwin,

Sir Tho Doleman, what do you know of this Letter.

Sir Thomas Doleman,

this Letter in my hand was taken amongſt Harcourts papers in a great Bag of
papers; and ſearching them. I did find this Letter amongſt the reſt▪

Then the Letter was ſhewn to Mr. Oates.

L. C▪ J.

Is that Mr. Peters hand?

Mr. Oates▪

Yes my Lord▪ it is.

L C. J.

Were you acquainted with his hand?

Mr. Oates,

Yes my Lord, I have often read it in Letters.

L. C. J.

Do you know Tonſtall?

Mr. Oates,

My Lord I do not know him by that name; If I did ſee him perhaps I might; I
know men better by their faces.

Sir Cr. Levines,

pray read it.

Cl. of the Crown,

This is Dated February 23d. (77) And ſuperſcribed thus (theſe for his honourd
friend Mr. William Tonſtal at Burton.

Honoured dear ſir.

I have but time to convey theſe following particulars to you▪ firſt, I am to
give you notice, that it hath ſeemed fitting to  [...]ur Maſter conſult, Prov.
&c. to fix the 21ſt day of April next ſty­lo viteri. For the meeting at London
of our congregation, on which day all thoſe that have a ſuf­frage are to be
preſent th [...]re, that they may be ready to give a beginning to the ſame on
the 24th. which is the next day after St. Georges day; you are warned to have,
jus ſuffragij, and there­fore if your occaſions ſhould not permit you to be
preſent, you are to ſignifie as much, to the end o­thers in their Rank [...]
[...] ordered to ſupply your abſence: Every one is minded alſo, not to haſten
to London long before the time appointed, nor to appear much about the Town
till the meeting be over▪ le [...]t occaſion ſhould be given to ſuſpect the
deſign. Finally, ſecreſie, as to the  [...]ime & pl [...]ce, is much
recomended to all thoſe that receive ſummons, as it will appear o [...] its
own nature neceſſary.

L. C. J.

So it was very neceſſary indeed.

Cl. of the Crown▪

There is more of it my Lord.

Tertio pro domino ſolono diſco. B [...]n [...]fact. Prov. Luniencis.

I am ſtrai [...]ned for time, that I can only aſſure you, I ſhall be much glad
of obliging you any ways▪ Sir, your ſervant Edward Peters. Pray my ſervice
where due, &c.

L. C. J.

You know nothing of this Letter, Mr. Whitebread?

Whitebread,

No my Lord nothing at all.

L. C. J.

Nor you Mr. Ireland.

Ireland,

Tis none of my Letter my Lord.

L. C. J.

Did you never hear of it before?

Ireland,

N [...]t th [...]t I know o [...] in Particular.

L. C. J.

W [...]ll have you do [...] with the evidence for the King?

Mr. Serj. Baldwyn,

p [...]ay Sir Thomas Doleman▪ will you tell my Lord, did M [...] ▪ Oates give
in this Teſtemony of the conſul [...] ▪ to be the 24th▪ of April, before this
Le [...] wa [...] [...]ound

L. C. J.

[...][[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=19)
[...][[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=19)
[...][[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=20)

How long had you known him before that time.

S. Paine,

My Lord, I knew him; for he came often to our houſe when I lived at  [...]
Groves▪ he wa [...] the man  [...]hat broke  [...]pen the Packet of Letters,
that my Maſter carri [...] about a [...] and he  [...]ealed all the Packets
that went beyond the Seas, and he op [...] ed them  [...] when the Anſwers
returned back again.

Ire [...]d,

Now m [...]ſt  [...]l the People of  [...]y Lodging come and witneſs that I
was  [...] of my Lodging all Auguſt laſt.

L. C. J.

Call them.

Ireland,

There is one Ann Ireland.

L. C. J.

Cryer▪ call  [...]er.

Cryer, A [...] Ireland,

here ſhe is.

L. C. J.

Come Miſtris▪ what can you ſay concerning your brothers being out of T [...]
in Auguſt.

A [...]n Ireland

my Lord on Saturday the third of Auguſt he ſet out to go into Stafford [...]

L. C. J.

How long did he continue there

A Ireland

Till it was a fortnight before Michaelmas.

L C. J.

How can you remember that it was juſt the 3d. of Auguſt.

A. Ireland,

I remember it by a very good circumſtance becauſe on the Wed [...] before, my
brother and my mother and I were invited out to dinner we ſtaid the [...]
night and all Thurſday night and Friday night my brother came home, and on
Saturd [...] ſet out f [...]r Staffordſhire.

[...]. C. J.

Where was it maid that you ſaw him.

S. Paine

I ſaw him go in at the door of their own houſe

L. C. J.

When was that.

S Paine

About a week before I went with my Lord Chamberlaine to Windſor [...] was a
week after the King went thither.

L. C. J.

That muſt be about the 12 or 13 and are you ſure you ſaw him.

S. Paine

Yes my Lord I am ſure I ſaw him.

L. C. J.

Do you know this maid Mr. Ireland.

Ireland,

I do not know her my Lord.

L. C. J.

She knows you by a very good token. You uſed to break open the Lette [...] her
maſters houſe and to ſeal them.

S. Paine

He knows me very well for I have carried ſeveral Letters to him that  [...]
from the carrier as well as thoſe that came from beyond Sea▪

L. C. J.

They will deny any thing in the World.

Ireland,

I profeſs I doe not know her. Twenty people may come to me and yet  [...] know
them, and ſhe haveing been Mr. Groves ſervant may have brought me Letters
[...] yet my Lord I remember her no [...], but here is my mother Elenor
Ireland that can teſtif [...] ſame.

L. C. J.

Call her then▪

Cryer▪ Elenor Ireland▪

Elenor Ireland,

H [...]re

L. C. J.

Can you tell when your Son went out of Town.

E. Ireland.

He went out of Town the third of Auguſt towards Staffordſhire.

Ireland

My Lord, there is Mr. Charles Gif [...]ord will prove that I was a week after
th [...]gining of September, and the lat [...]r  [...]nd of Auguſt in
Staffordſhire.

L. C. J.

That will not doe for ſhe ſaid ſhe ſaw you i [...] London about the 10th, or 1
[...] Auguſt, & ſhe makes it out by a circum [...]ance which is better
evidence then if ſhe had  [...] and ſwore the preciſe day wherein ſhe ſaw him,
I ſhould not have been ſati [...]fied unl [...] [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=20) [...] given me
a good account why ſhe did know it to be ſuch a day ſhe does it by circum­
[...]ces by which we muſt calculate that ſhe ſaw you about the 12th. or 13th.
day. She  [...] to my Lord Arlington's at ſuch a day, a week after the King
went to Windſor▪ and that was about the 13th. and ſhe ſaw you a week before
ſhe went to my Lord Arlingtons, which muſt be the 12th or 13th. You ſay you
went out of Town the third of Auguſt, who can ſwear you did not come back
again.

Ireland.

All the  [...]ouſe can teſtify I did not come to my lodging.

E. Ireland.

He went out of Town the third of Auguſt, and did not return till a forth­night
before Michealmas.

L▪ C. J.

Did you lye at his houſe?

E. Ireland.

I did then my Lord

L▪ C. J.

What all that while?

E. Ireland.

Yes my Lord.

D. C. J.

So did your daughter too, did ſhe?

E. Ireland.

Yes ſhe did.

Ireland.

There are others that did ſee me the Latter end of Auguſt in Staffordſhire.

L. C. J.

And you would feign have crampt him up between the 20. and 31. and then
[...]oſſible you might be in Staffordſhire.

Ireland;

If I might have been permitted to ſend in for ſuch witneſs as I would have
[...]ad I  [...]ould have brought them.

Mr. Recorder.

Why have you not a note of what witneſſes you are to call, why don't you call
them according to that note. Ireland I had that but this morning.

L. C. J.

Why did not you ſend for them before to have them ready.

Mr. Recorder

'Tis his Siſter that brings that note of the witneſſes that he ſhould call and
[...] they are not here.

A. Ireland.

There was one Engletrap▪ and one Harriſon had promiſed to be here that went
with him into Staffordſhire.

Mr. Oates.

My Lord when ever we had a mind to come to Towne we conmmon­  [...]y writ our
Letters and let them come to town two dayes after us▪  [...]oe that we might
[...]rove by the writing of ſuch Letters if any Queſtion did ariſe that we
could not be at ſuch  [...] place at ſuch a time. And when we pretended to go
into the country we have gon [...] and  [...]ken a chamber in the City and
have had frequent cabal [...] at our chambers, there Mr.  [...]reland writ a
Letter as dated from S [...]. Omers, when I took my leave of him at his own
[...]hamb [...]r which was betwixt the 12th. and 24th. in London [...] was
there and afterwards when I  [...]r [...] Fenwicks chamber he came thither a
[...]ght or ten dayes at leaſt I am  [...]re it was  [...] Auguſt.

L▪ C▪ J.

[...] th [...]ee witneſſes upon  [...]th  [...]bout this one thing here is Mr.
Bedlow [...]ct upon which the queſt [...]ſ [...]s to b [...] Auguſt, that you
deny and ſay  [...]w [...]e out of town, then  [...] produces  [...] m [...]d
h [...]e and ſhe ſwears that about that time which by  [...]cu [...]a [...]on
muſt be about the 11th▪ o [...] 12th.  [...]e Saw you going into your  [...]wn
ho [...]ſ [...]. And here  [...] a third wit [...]ſ who ſwears he knowes
nothing of this matter of  [...]ct but he knows you were in town th [...], and
that he tooke  [...]is leave of you as going to  [...]t. Omers.

Mr. Oates,

Whereas  [...]e ſays that a [...] [...]h [...] beginning of September he was
in Staffordſhire he  [...] in town the firſt of September or ſecond for then I
had of him twenty ſhilli [...]gs,

[...]land, This is a moſt  [...]a [...]s lie  [...]or I was then in
Staffordſhire, and the witneſſes contradict  [...]elves for the one ſaith he
took his leave of me as going to St. Omers the 12th. the o­  [...]aith it was
the latter  [...]nd of Auguſt I was at Harcourts Chamber.

L. Ch. J.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=21)

He does not ſay you went, but you pretended to goe.

A. Ireland.

Here is one Harriſon, that was a Coachman that went with them▪

L. Ch. Juſt.

Well what ſay you friend, do you know mr▪ Ireland.

Harriſon.

I never ſaw the man before that time, in my life; but I met with him at  [...]
Albans.

L. Ch. Juſt.

When?

Harriſon.

The fifth of Auguſt. there I met with him, and was in a journey with him the
ſixteenth.

L. Ch. Juſt.

What day of the week was it?

Harriſon,

of a munday:

L. Ch. Juſt.

Did he come from London on that day?

Harriſon.

I cannot tell that, but there I met him.

L. Ch. Juſt.

What tim [...]

Harriſon▪

Jn the Evening.

L. Ch. Juſt.

Whereabouts in St▪ Albans.

Harriſon,

At the Bull-Inn, where We lodged.

L. Ch. Juſt.

Mr. Ireland, You ſay, you went on Saturday out of Town, did you ſtay St.
Albons till munday.

Ireland,

No I went to Standon that day, and lay there on Saturday and Sunday nig [...]
on munday I went to St. Albons.

L. Ch. Juſt.

What, from thence?

Ireland.

Yes my Lord.

L. Ch. Juſt.

Why did you goe thither? was that in your w [...]

Ireland.

I went thither for the Company of Sir John Southcot and his Lady.

L. Ch. Juſt.

How did you know that they went thither.

Ireland.

I underſtood they were to meet my Lord Aſton and Lady there.

L. Ch. Juſt.

What, on munday night.

Ireland.

Yes my Lord.

Harriſon,

From thence I went with him to Tixwell, to my Lord Aſton's houſe, [...] we
were all with him.

L. Ch▪ Juſt▪

Were you my Lord Aſton's Coachman.

Harriſon,

No my Lord, I was Servant to Sir John Southcot.

L. Ch. Juſt.

How cam [...] you to go wi [...]h them?

Harriſon▪

Becauſe my Lord Aſton is my L [...]dy Southcot's brother.

L. Ch. Juſt.

How long was you in his company?

Harriſon▪

From the fifth of Auguſt to  [...] ſixteenth, & then I was with him at W
[...]ſtch [...]

Mr. Juſt. A [...]kins.

You have no [...] yet  [...] of being at Weſtcheſter all this while.

Ireland,

my Lord, I muſt talke of  [...]ey by degrees.

L. Ch. Juſt.

Before you ſaid, you  [...] Auguſt in Stafford Shire, come you muſt  [...] out
ſome evaſion for that.

Ireland,

In Stafford Shire and t [...]e [...]eab [...]

L. Ch. Juſt.

You witneſs, who do you live with?

Harriſon,

with Sir John Sou [...]

L. Ch. Juſt.

Who brought you hither.

Harriſon,

I came only by a meſſenger laſt n [...]

L. Ch. Juſt.

Was not Sir John Southcot in that journey himſelf▪

Harriſon.

Yes my Lord he was.

L. C. J.

Then you might aſwell have ſent to Sir Iohn Southcot himſelf to come.

A. Ireland,

I did it of my ſelfe I never did ſuch a thing before and did not un [...]
ſtand the way of  [...]t.

Ireland▪

I [...] was meer chance ſhe did ſend for thoſe ſhe did.

L. C. J.

But why ſhould ſhe not ſend for Sir John himſelf.

Ireland.

ſhe did not know that Sir John was here▪

L. C. J.

You were not denied to ſend for any witneſſes, were you?

Ireland

I was expreſly denied, they would not let me have one bit of paper.

L. C. J.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=21)

Fellow, what Town was that in Staffordſhire tell me quickly.

Harriſon,

It was Tixwel, by my Lord Aſtons there we made a ſtay for three or four days
then we went to Nantwich and ſo to Weſtcheſter.

L. C. J.

Were not you at Wolverhampton with him?

Harriſon,

No my Lord I was not there, I left him at Weſtcheſter.

Ireland,

my Lord I was at Wolverhampton with Mr Charles Gifford, and here he is to
atteſt it.

L. C. J.

Well Sir what ſay you?

Gifford.

my Lord, I ſaw him there a day or two after St. Bartholomews day, there he
con­tinued till the 9th of September the 7th. of September, I ſaw him there,
and I can bring 20. and twenty more that ſaw him there. Then as he ſaid he was
to goe towards London, I came again thither on the 9th, and there, I found him
and, this is all I have to ſay.

Mr. Oates,

My Lord I do know that day in September I ſpeak of, by a particular
circum­ſtance.

Ireland.

There is one William Bowdrel that will teſtifie the ſame if I might ſend for
him.

L. C. J.

Why ha [...] you him here?

Jreland.

She hath done what ſhe can to bring as many as ſhe could.

L. C. J.

Have you any more witneſſes to call?

Ireland,

I can't tell whether there be any more here or no.

L. C. J.

Mr. Grove what ſay you for your ſelf.

Grove.

Mr. Oates ſayes he lay at my houſe, my Lord I have not been able to ſend for
a­ny witneſſes, and therefore I know not whether there be any here. They could
prove that he did not lye there, he ſayes he ſaw me receive the Sacrament at
Wildhouſe, but he never did, and if I had any witneſſes here I could prove it.

L. C. J.

He tells it you with ſuch and ſuch Circumſtances, who lay there at that times.

Grove,

He did never lye there.

L. C. J.

Why you make as if you never knew Mr. Oates.

Grove.

my Lord I have ſeen him but he never lay at my houſe.

L. C. J.

Mr. Pickering what ſay you for your ſelf, you relye upon your Maſſes?

Pickering,

I never ſaw Mr. Oates as I know of in my life.

L. C. J.

What ſay you to Bedlow, he tells you he was with you in Harcourts chamber ſuch
a day.

Pickering,

I will take my oath I was never in Mr. Bedlows company in all my life.

L. C. J.

I make no queſtion, but you will and have a diſpenſation for it when you have
done, well have you any witneſſes to call.

Pickering,

I have not had time to ſend for any.

L. C. J.

You might have moved the Court when you came at firſt, and they would have
given you an order to ſend for any.

Ireland,

Methinks there ſhould be ſome witneſſes brought that knew Mr. Oates to atteſt
his reputation, for I am told there are thoſe that can prove very ill things
againſt him, they ſay he broke Priſon at Dover.

L. C. J.

why have you not witneſſes here to prove it.

Ireland,

We could have had them if we had time.

L. C. J.

I ſee what you ask now you would have time, and the Jury are ready to goe
to­gather about their Verdict.

Ireland.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=22)

Why we deſire but a little time to make out our proof.

L. C. J.

Onely you muſt tye up the Jury, and they muſt neither eat nor drink till they
give in a verdict.

Ireland.

Then we muſt confeſs there is no Juſtice for Inoce [...]ce.

L. C. J.

Well if you have any more to ſay, ſay it.

Ireland.

my Lord I have produced witneſſes that prove what I have ſaid.

L. C. J.

Ile tell you what you have prov'd: you have produced your ſiſter and your
mother, and the ſervant of Southcott they ſay you went out the third of
Auguſt, and he gives an accompt that you came to St. Albans on the fifth, and
then there is another gen­tleman Mr. Gifford, who ſayes he ſaw you at
Wolverhampton till about a week in September, Mr. Oates hath gain ſaid him in
that, ſo you have one witneſs againſt Mr. Oates, for tha [...] Circumſtance,
it cann [...]t be true what Mr. Oates ſayes if you were there all that time,
and i [...] cannot be true what Mr Gifford ſayes, if you were in London then.
And againſt your two witneſſes and the Coachm [...]n, there are three
witneſſes that ſwear the contrary, Mr. Oates Mr. Bedlow, and the maid, ſo that
if ſhe and the other two be to be believed, here are 3 upon Oath againſt your
three, upon bare affirmation.

Ireland▪

I doe deſire time that we may bring in more witneſſes.

L. C. J.

come▪ you are better prepared then you ſeem to be call whom you have to call▪
can you prove that againſt Mr. Oates which you ſpeak of? If you can call your
witneſſe [...] on Gods name, but only to aſperſ [...], tho it be the way of
your Church it ſhall no [...] be the way of Tryal amongſt us: We know you can
call Hereticks and ill names fa [...] enough.

Ireland,

That Hi [...]ſley that he names can prove if he were here, that Mr. Oates was
all th [...] while at St. Omers.

L. C. J.

Will you have any more Witneſſes called,  [...]f you will, do it, and don't
let u [...] ſpend the time of the Court thus.

Grove,

Here is Mrs. York that is my ſiſter, will your Lordſhip pleaſe to ask her
whethe [...] ſhe ſee that Gentleman at my houſe,

L. C. J.

What ſay you Miſtriſs

York No my Lord not I▪

Mr. J.

At. Nor I neither, might not he be there for all that?

Mr▪ Oates,

To ſatisfie the Court my Lord, I was in another habit, and went by anothe
[...] name.

L. C. J

Lo [...]k you, he did as you all do▪ diſguiſe your ſelves.

Ireland,

Though we have no more witneſſes, yet we have witneſſes that there are mor
[...] witneſſes.

L. C. J.

I know your way of arguing is, that is very pretty, you have witneſſes that
can prove you have witneſſes, and th [...]ſe witneſſes can prove you have more
witneſſes and ſo in Infinitum. And thus you a [...]gue in every thing you do.

Ireland,

we can go no further than we can go, and can give no anſwer to what we did not
know would be proved againſt us.

L. C. J.

Then look you Gentlemen.

A. Ireland,

my Lord, Sir Denny Aſhburnham promiſed to be here to teſtifie what he can ſay
concerning Mr. Oates.

L. C. J.

Call him, Cryer, Sir Denny Aſhurnham. Here he is my Lord,

L. C. J.

Sir Denny, what can you ſay concerning Mr. Oates.

Sir D. Aſhburnham.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=22)

my Lord I received a letter this morning, which I transmitted to  [...]r.
Attorny, and this letter was only to ſend to me a copy of an Indictment
againſt Mr.  [...]ates, of perjury: I did ſend it accordingly with my letter
to Mr. Attorney; He hath ſeen the letter, & what the Town ſays to me in i
[...].

Mr. At. G.

I have ſeen it there is nothing in it▪

L. C. J.

Do you know any thing of your own knowledg

Sir D. Aſhburnham,

I do know Mr. Oates, and have known him a great while, I have known him from
his Cradle, and I do know that when he was a child, he was not a per­ſon of
that credit that we could depend upon what he ſaid▪

L. C. J.

What ſignifies that?

Sir D. Aſhburnham,

will you pleaſe to hear me out my Lord, I have been alſo ſolicited  [...]y
ſome of the Priſoners who ſent to me, hoping I could ſay ſomething that would
help them in this matter: Particularly, laſt night one Mrs▪ Ireland ſiſter to
the Priſoner at the Bar, a Gentlewoman I never ſaw before in my life, ſhe came
to me, & was preſſing me hard that I would appear here voluntarily to give
evidence for the Priſoner, I told her no, I would not by any means in the
world, nor could I ſay any thing as I thought that could advantage▪ them; for
I told her, though perhaps upon my knowledg of Mr. Oates in his youth had this
diſcovery come only upon Mr. Oates teſtimony, I might have had ſome little
doubt of it, but it was ſo carroborated with other circumſtances that had
convinced me, & I would not ſpeak any thing againſt the Kings witneſſes, when
I my ſelf was ſatisfied with the truth  [...] the thing; And I do think truly
that nothing can be ſaid againſt Mr. Oates to take  [...]f his credibility;
but what I tranſmitted to Mr. Attorny, I had from the town of Haſtings for
which I ſerve.

L. Ch. Juſt.

What was in that Indictment?

Sir. D. Aſhburnham.

It is ſet forth, that he did ſwear the Peace againſt a man▪ and at his taking
his Oath, did ſay there were ſome witneſſes that would evidence ſuch a point
of fact, which when they came would not teſtifie ſo much▪ and ſo was forſworn.

L. Ch. Juſt.

What was done upon that Indictment?

Sir. D. Aſhburnham.

They did not proceed upon it; but here is the letter, and the copy of the
Indictment.

Mr▪ Serj. Baldwine.

My Lord we deſire it may be read, and ſee what it is.

Mr. Attor▪ Gen.

It is onely a Certificate, pray let it be read.

L. Ch. Juſt.

I Do not think it Authentick Evidence.

Mr▪ Ator. Gen.

But if I conſent to it, it may be read.

L. Ch. Juſt.

If you will read it for the priſoners you may; you ſhan't read it againſt
them. If there be any ſtrain, it ſhall be in favour of the priſoners and not
againſt them.

Mr. Ator▪ Gen.

It is nothing againſt the Priſoners nor for them, but however if your Lordſhip
be not ſatisfied it ſhould be read, l [...]t it alone.

L. C. J.

Truly I do not think it is ſufficient Evidence▪ or fit to be read.

A▪ Ireland.

I went to another, one Colonel Shakesby, who was ſick and could not come but
could have  [...]ſt [...]d much mo [...].

L. C. J.

Have you any other Witn [...]ſſes?

Ireland.

I have none nor I have not time to bring them in.

L. C. J.

If you have none▪ what time could have brought them in. But you have called a
Gentleman that does come in▪ and truly he hath done you very great ſervice,
you would have had him te [...]fied againſt Mr. Oates, he ſaith, he hath known
him ever ſince he was a Child, and that then he had not ſo much Credit as now
he hath: And [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=23) had it been
upon his ſingle Teſtimony, that the diſcovery of the Plot had▪ depended, he
ſhould have doubted of it, but Mr. Oates his Evidence with the Teſtimony of
the Fact it ſelf, and all the concurring Evidences which he produces to back
his Teſtimony, hath convinced him, that he is true in his Narrative.

Sir D. Aſhburnham.

Your Lordſhip is right in what I have ſpoken.

L. C. J.

Have you any mo [...]e Witneſſes, or any thing more to ſay for your ſelves.

Ireland.

If I may produce on my own behalf Pledges of my own Loyalty, and that of my
Family—

L. C. J.

Produce whom you will.

Ireland.

Here is my ſiſter and my mother can tell how our Relations were plundred for
ſiding with the King.

L. C. J,

No, I will tell you why it was, it was for being Papiſts, and you went to the
King for ſhelter.

Ireland.

I had an Uncle that was killed in the Kings Service, beſides the Pendrels and
the Giffords that were inſtrumental for ſaving the King after the fight at
Worceſter, are my near Relations.

L. C. J.

Why all thoſe are Papiſts:

Pi [...]kering.

My Father, my Lord, was killed in the Kings party.

L. C. J.

Why then do you fall off from your Fathers virtue?

Pickering.

I have not time to produce Witneſſes on my own behalf.

Ireland.

I do deſire time to bring more Witneſſes.

Grove.

As I have a Soul to ſave, I know nothing of this matter charged upon me.

L. C.  [...].

Well, have you any thing more to ſay?

Ireland.

No, my Lord.

L. C. J.

You of the Kings Council, will you ſum up the Evidence?

Mr. Serj. Baldwin.

No, my Lord, we leave it to your Lordſhip.

C. of C.

Cryer, make Proclamation of ſilence.

Cryer,

O yes! All manner of perſons are commanded to keep ſilence upon pain of
impriſonment.

Then the Lord Chief Juſtice directed the Jury thus.

L. C. J.

Gentlemen, you of the Jury; As to theſe three perſons, Ireland, Pickering,
Grove; (the other two you are diſcharged of;) One of them Ireland, it ſeems is
a Prieſt, I know not whither Pickering be or no, Grove is none; but theſe are
the two men that ſhould kill the King, and Ireland is a Conſpirator in that
Plot. They are all indicted for Conſpiring the Kings Death, and endeavouring
to ſubvert the Government, and deſtroy the Proteſtant Religion, and bring in
Popery. The main of the Evidence hath gone upon that ſoul and black Offence,
Endeavouring to kill the King. The utmoſt end was without all queſtion to
bring in Popery, and ſubvert the Proteſtant Religion and they thought this a
good means to do it by killing the King, that is the thing you have had the
greateſt evidence of, I will ſum up the particulars and leave them with you.

'Tis ſworn by Mr, Oates expreſly, that on the 24th of April laſt, there was a
Conſul­tation held of Prieſts and Jeſuits. They are the men fit only for ſuch
a miſchief, for I know there are abund [...] [...] [...] Gentlemen of that
Perſwaſion, who could never be drawn t [...] do a [...]y of theſe things,
unleſs they were ſeduced by their Prieſts, that ſticke at nothing  [...] own
ends, he ſwears expreſly that the  [...]onſult was begun [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=23) at the White-
horſe-Tavern in the Strand, that they theee agreed to murther the King; That
Pickering and Grove were the men that were to do it, who went afterwards and
ſubſcribed this holy League of theirs, and ſigned it every one at his own
lodging, Whitebread at his, Ireland at his, and Fenwick at his, two of which
are out of the Caſe, but they are repeated to you only to ſhew you the Order
of the Conſpiracy. That af­terwards Pickering and Grove did agree to the ſame,
and they received the Sacrament upon it as an Oath to make all ſacred, and a
Seal to make all ſecret. Mr. Bedlow hath ſworn as to that particular time of
killing the King by Pickering and Grove, though they were not to give over the
Deſign, but there were four that were ſent to kill the King at Windſor. Mr.
Oates ſwears there was an attempt by Pickering in March laſt, but the Flint of
the Piſtol happening to be looſe, he durſt not proceed, for which he was
re­warded with Pennance. He ſwears there were Four hired to do it. That
Fourſcore pounds was provided for them: He ſaw the money; and ſwears he ſaw it
delivered to the Meſſenger to carry it down.

Ireland.

At what time was that?

Lord Chief Juſt.

In Auguſt there was an attempt firſt by Pickering and Grove: they then not
doing of it, four other perſons (Iriſhmen) were hired to do it, and ten
thou­ſand pounds profered to Sir George Wakeman, to poiſon the King. Thus
ſtill they go on in their attempts, and, that being too little, five thouſand
pounds more was added. This is to ſhew you the Groſs of the Plot in general;
and alſo the particular Tranſacti­ons of theſe two murtherers Grove and
Pickering, with the Conſpiracy of Ireland. Bed­l [...]w ſwears directly that
in Auguſt laſt, theſe Three and Harcourt, & Pritchard, and Le Faire being
altogether in a Room, did diſcourſe of the Diſappointment the Four had met
with, in not killing the King at Windſor; And there the Reſolution was, the
old ſtagers ſhould go on ſtill, but they had one Conyers joyned to them, and
they were to kill the King then at Newmarket. He ſwears, they did agree to do
it; that Ireland was at it; and that all three did conſent to that Reſolve. So
that here are Two Witneſſes that ſpeak poſitively, with all the Circumſtances
of this Attempt, of the Two to kill the King, and the Confederacy of Ireland
all along with them. N [...]w, I muſt tell you, there are no Acceſſaries, but
all Principals, in Treaſon. It may ſeem hard perhaps to convict men upon the
Teſtimony of their fellow Offenders, and if it had been poſſible to have
brought other Witneſſes, it had been well: but, in things of this nature, you
cannot expect that the Witneſſes ſhould be abſolutely ſpotleſs. You muſt take
ſuch Evidence as the nature of the Thing will afford, or you may have the King
deſtroyed and our Religion too: For Jeſuits are too ſubtle to ſubject
themſelves to too plain a proof, ſuch as they cannot evade by Equivocation or
a flat d [...]nial.

There is alſo a Letter produced, which ſpeaking of the Conſult that was to be
the 24th of April, proves that there was a Conſpiracy among them. And,
although, it is not Evidence to convict any one man of them, yet it is
Evidence upon Mr. Oate's Teſti­ny to prove the general Deſign. It is from one
Petre to one of the Confederates, and taken amongſt Harcourt, papers, after Mr
Oates had given in his Te [...]imony; and therein it is mentioned, th [...]t
the Superior had taken care, that there ſhould be a meeting the 24th of April,
the day after Saint George's day, which is the very time Oates ſpeaks of; and
that they were not to come to Town too ſoon, that the Deſign might not be
diſcovered. I would ſai [...] know what the ſignification of that Clauſe might
be. And then it goes farther, That it was to be kept ſecret, as the nature of
the thing do [...]h [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=24) require; which
ſhews plainly there was ſuch a Tranſaction on foot. But the reaſon I urge it
for, is, to ſhew you that it is a concurrent Evidence with Mr. Oates, who had
never ſeen this Paper▪ till th [...]ee or four days after his Information was
given in, where­in he ſwears the time when this Agitation was to be, and when
they came to look upon the Papers; it agrees with the time preciſely. Now they
do not write in this Letter that they intended to kill the King; but they
write to caution them to keep the De­ſign undiſcovered, and by that you may
gueſs what they mean.

What is ſaid to all this by the Priſoners, but Denya's? Ireland cannot deny
but that he knew Mr. Oates, and had been in his company ſometimes; Five times
by Circum­ſtances, Mr. Oates hath proved, ſo that they were acquaintance; and
it appears plain­ly there was a Familiarity between them. Ireland objects that
Bedlow charges him in Auguſt, when he was out of Town all that time, and that
therefore the Teſtimony of one of the Witneſſes cannot be true. And to prove
this he calls his Mother, his Si­ſter, and Sir John Southcot's man, and Mr.
Gifford. His mother and ſiſter ſay expreſly, that he went out of Town the
third of Auguſt, and the Servant ſays, that he ſaw him at St Al­bans, the
fifth of Auguſt, and continued in his company to the ſixteenth; (ſo that, as
to that there is a Teſtimony bo [...]h againſt Mr. Bedlow, and againſt Mr.
Oates;) and Gifford comes and ſays, he ſaw him at the latter end of of Auguſt
and beginning of September at Wolverhampton; whereas Mr. Oates hath ſworn, he
ſaw him the twelfth of Auguſt, and the firſt or ſecond of September, and tells
it by a particular Circumſtance, wherein I muſt tell you, it is impoſſible
that both ſides ſhould be true. But if it ſhould be a miſtake only in point of
time, it deſtroys not the Evidence, unleſs you think it nec [...]ſſa­ry to the
ſubſtance of the thing. If you charge one in the month of Auguſt, to have done
ſuch a Fact, if he deny that he was in that place at that time, and proves it
by Witneſſes, it may go to invalidate the Credibility of a mans Teſtimony, but
it does not invalidate the Truth of the Thing it ſelf, which may be true in
ſubſtance though the circumſtance of Time differ. And the Queſtion is, whether
the thing be true?

Againſt this, the Council for the King have Three, that ſwear it poſitively
and ex­preſly, That I [...]eland was here. Here is a young Maid that knew him
very well, and wa [...] acquainted with him and with his breaking up of
Letters; and ſhe is one that was Grove's Servant: ſhe comes, and tells you
directly, That about that time which, by Computation, was about the twelfth of
Auguſt, ſhe ſaw him go into his own houſe, which cannot be true, if that be
true which is ſaid on the other ſide▪ and ſhe does ſwear it upon better
Circumſtances, then if ſhe had barely pitch'd upon a day; for ſhe muſt have
ſatisfied me well, for what reaſon ſhe could remember the day ſo poſitively,
ere I ſhould have believed her: But ſhe does it remembring her going to my
Lord Ar­lingtons Service, which was a week after the King went to Windſor;
which is ſworn to be about the thirteenth of Auguſt, and a week before her
going it was that ſhe ſaw Ire­land at his own door. What Arts they have of
evading this, I know not, for a [...] they have t [...]rned their Learning
into Subtlety, ſo they have their Integrity too. The Study of Politicks is
their buſineſs and art which they make u [...]e of upon all occaſions, and I
find them learned chiefly in Cunning, and very ſubtle in their Evaſions: So
that you ſee, without great difficulty a man cannot have from them a plain
anſwer to a plain Que­ſtion. But the Fact againſt them is here expreſly ſworn
by two Witneſſes; if you have any reaſon to disbelieve them, I muſt leave that
to you. Sir Dennis Aſhburnham wh [...] [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=24) [...] produced
to diſcredit Mr. Oates, ſayes, than when he was a Child there was little or
[...]o Credit to be given to him, and if the matter had depended ſolely upon
his Teſtimo­  [...]y, thoſe Ieregularities of his, when a Boy, would have
ſtaggered his belief. But  [...]hen the matter is ſo accompanied with ſo many
other Circumſtances, which are ma­terial things, and cannot be evaded or
deny'd, it is almoſt impoſſible for any man, ei­ther to make ſuch a Story, or
not to believe it when it is told. I know not whether they can frame ſuch a
One; I am ſure never a Proteſtant ever did, and I believe never would invent
ſuch a one to take away their lives: Therefore it is left to your
Conſideration what is ſworn. The Circumſtances of ſwearing it by two
Witneſſes, and what reaſons you have to disbelieve them.

It is moſt plain the Plot is Diſcovered, and that by theſe men, and that it is
a Plot, and a Villanous one, nothing is plainer. No man of common
underſtanding, but muſt  [...]ee there was a Conſpiracie to bring in Popery,
and to deſtroy the Proteſtant Religion; and we know their Doctrines, and
practices too well; to be [...]ieve they wil ſtick at any thing, that may
effect thoſe ends. They muſt excuſe me, if I be plain with them; I would not
aſperſe a profeſſion of men as the Prieſts are▪ with hard words, if they were
not very true, and if at this time it were not very neceſſary. If they had not
Murthered Kings▪ I would not ſay they would have done ours. But when it hath
been their Practice ſo to do; When they have debauched mens underſtandings
overturned all morals, deſtroy­ed all Divinity, what ſhall I ſay of them? When
their humility is ſuch; that they tread upon the necks of Emperors, their
charity ſuch, as to kill Princes, and their vow of Po­verty ſuch as to covet
Kingdoms, what ſhall I judge of them? When they have Licences to lie, and
indulgences for fa [...]hoods, n [...]y, when they make him a Saint that dyes
in one, and then pray to him, as the Carpenter firſt make [...] an Image, &
after worſhips it, and can then think to bring in that Woodden Religion of
theirs amongſt us in this Nation, What ſhall I think of them? what ſhall I ſay
to them? what ſhall I do with them?

If there can be a diſpenſation for the taking of any Oath (& diverſe inſtances
may be giv­en of it, that their Church does Lycence them to do ſo, it is a
cheat upon mens Souls, it perverts & breaks off all converſations amongſt
mankind; For how can we deal or con­verſe in the world, when there is no ſin
but can be indulged; no offence ſo big, but they can pardon it, & ſome of the
blackeſt be accounted meritorious? what is there left for man▪ kind to lean
upon, if a Sacrament will not bind them (unleſs it be to conceal their
wick­edneſs? (If they ſhall take Teſts and Sacraments, and all this, under
colour of Religi­on be avoided, and ſignifie nothing, what is become of all
converſe? How can we think obligations and promiſes between man and man ſhould
hold, if a Covenant between God and man will not?

We have no ſuch Principles nor Doctrin [...]s in our Church, we thank God. To
uſe a­ny prevarications in declaring of the truth is abomniable to naturall
reaſon, much mo [...]e to true Religion; and 'tis a ſtrange Church that will
allow a man to be a knave. Tis poſ­ſible ſome of that Communion may be ſaved,
but they can never hope to be ſo in ſuch a courſe as this. I know they will
ſay, that theſe are not their principles, nor theſe their practices, but they
Preach otherwiſe, they Print otherwiſe, and their Councels do deter­mine
otherwiſe.

Some hold, that the Pope in Council is Infalible, & ask any Popiſh Jeſuit of
them all, and he will ſay the Pope is Infalible himſelf in Cathedra, or he is
not right Jeſuit, and if ſo, what­ever they command, is to be juſtified by
their Authority; ſo that if they give a diſpenſa­tion [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=25) to kill a King,
that King is well killed. This is a Religion that quite unhinges all P
[...]ety, all Morality, and all converſation, and to be abominated by all
mankind.

They have ſome parts of the Foundation 'tis true, but they are adulterated and
mix­ed with horrid Principles, and impious practices. They eat their God, they
kill their King, and Saint the murtherer. They indulge all ſorts of Sins, and
no humane Bonds can hold them.

They muſt Pardon me if I ſeem ſharp, for a Papiſt in England is not to be
treated as a Proteſtant ought to be in Spain, & if ye ask me why? He give you
this reaſon, we have no ſuch Principles nor practices as they have, If I were
in Spain, I ſhould think my ſelf a very ill Chriſtian, ſhould I offer to
diſturbe the Government of the place where I lived, that I may bring in my
Religion there, what have I to do to undermine the tranquility & peac [...] of
a Kingdom, becauſe all that dwell in it, are not of my particular perſwaſion?

They do not ſo here, there is nothing can quench the thirſt of a Prieſt and a
Jeſuit, nor the Blood of men, nor of any if he can but propagate his Religion,
which in truth is b [...] his intereſt.

They have not the Principles that we have, therefore they are not to have that
common Credence, which our Principles and Practices call for.

They are not to wonder if they keep no Faith, that they have none from others;
and l [...] them ſay what they will, that they do not own any ſuch things as
we charge upon them and are like to go hard with them; For we can ſhew them
out of their own Writing and Counſels, that they do juſtifie the power of the
Pope in Excommunicating Kings, i [...] Depoſeing them for Hereſie, & Abſolving
their Subjects from their Allegiance, their Clai [...] of Authority both in
Pope and Council is the ſureſt Foundation they build upon.

I have ſaid ſo much the more in this matter, becauſe their Actions are ſo very
pla [...] and open, and yet ſo pernicious; and 'tis a very great Providence,
that we, and our Religion, are delivered from Blood and Oppreſſion. I believe
our Religion would ha [...] ſtood notwithſtanding their attempts and I would
have them to know we are not afrai [...] of them; nay I think we ſhould have
maintained it by deſtroying of them. We ſhould ha [...] been all in blood 'tis
true, but the greateſt effuſion would have been on their ſide; a [...] without
it, How did they hope it ſhould have been don? There are honeſt Gentlemen▪ I
believe hundreds of that Communion, who could not be openly won upon to engag
[...] in ſuch a deſign. They will not tell them that the King ſhall be killed;
but they inſinuat [...] into them, that he is but one man, and if he ſhould
die, it were fit they were in readin [...] to promote the Catholick Religion,
and when it comes to that, they know what to d [...] When they have got them
to give money to provide Arms and be in readineſs on their ſpecious pretence,
then the Jeſuits will quickly find them work. One Blow ſhall put 'er to
exerciſe their Armes; and when they have Killed the King, the Catholick Cauſe
muſt be maintained.

But they have done themſelves the miſchief, and have brought miſery upon their
whole Party, whom they have enſnared into the Diſign upon other pretences than
what was really at the bottom. A Popiſh Prieſt is a certain ſeducer, and
nothing ſatisfies him▪ not the B [...]ood of Kings, if it ſtands in the way of
his Ambition. And I hope they have no [...] only undeceived ſome Proteſtants,
whoſe charity might encline them to think them not ſo bad as they are; but I
believe they have  [...]ſhaken their Religion in their own party here, wh
[...] will be aſhamed in time, that ſuch Actions ſhould be put upon the ſcore
of Religion.

I return now to the Facts which is proved by two Wittneſſes, and by the
concurrent [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=25) Evidence of
that Letter and the maid, and the matter is as plain and notorious as can be,
That there was an intention of bringing in Popery by a cruel and bloody way;
for I be­lieve they could never have prayed us into their Religion. I leave it
therefore to you to conſider, whether you have not as much Evidence from theſe
Two men as can be ex­pected in a caſe of this nature, and whether Mr. Oates,
be not rather juſtified by the Teſtimony offered againſt him, than
diſcredited. Let prudence and conſcience direct your Verdict, and you will be
too hard for their Art and Cunning.

Gentlemen, If you think you ſhall be long, we will Adjourn the Court till the
after­noon, and take your verdict then.

Jury.

No, my Lord, we ſhall not be long.

Then an Officer was ſworn to keep the Jury ſafe, according to Law, and they
withdrew to conſider of their verdict.

After a very ſhort receſs, the Jury returned, and the Clerk of the Crown ſpake
to them thus:

Cl. of the Crown.

Gentlemen anſwer to your Names, Sir. William Roberts.

Sir. William Roberts.

Here. And ſo the reſt.

Cl. of the Cr.

Gentlemen, Are you all agreed in your verdict?

Omnes.

Yes.

Cl. of the Cr.

Who ſhall ſay for you?

Omnes.

The Foreman.

Cl. of the Cr.

Set William Ireland to the Bar. William Ireland, Hold up thy Hand, Look upon
the priſoner, How ſay you, is he guilty of the High Treaſon whereof he ſtands
Indicted, or not Guilty?

Forman.

Guilty?

Cl. of the Cr.

What Goods and Chattels, Lands or Tenements?

Foreman.

None to our knowledg

Cl. of Cr.

Set Thomas Pickering to the Bar. Thomas Pickering hold up thy hand. Look upon
the priſoner. How ſay you, is he Guilty of the ſame High Treaſon, or not
Guilty?

Foreman.

Guilty.

Cl. of Cr.

What Goods or Chattels, Lands, or Tenements?

Foreman.

None to our knowledge.

Cl. of Cr.

Set John Grove to the Bar. John Grove hold up thy hand Look upon the priſoner.
How ſay you, is he Guilty of the ſame High Treaſon, or not Guilty.

Foreman.

Guilty.

Cl. of Cr.

What Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements?

Foreman.

None to our knowledge.

Cl. of Cr.

Hearken to your verdict, as the Court hath recorded it. You ſay that William
Ireland is Guilty of the High Treaſon whereof he ſtands indicted. You ſay that
Thomas Pickering is Guilty of the ſame High Treaſon. You ſay that John Grove
is Guilty of the ſame High Treaſon. And for them you have found Guilty, you
ſay, that they, nor any of them, had any Goods or Chattels, Lands or
Tenements, at the time of the High Treaſon committed, or at any time ſince to
your knowledg. And ſo you ſay all.

Omnes

Yes.

Lord. Ch. Juſt.

You have done, Gentlemen, like very good Subjects, and very good Chriſtians,
that is to ſay, like very good Proteſtants: And now much good may their Thirty
Thouſand Maſſes do them.

Then the Court adjourned by Proclamation till four in the Afternoon.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=26)In the
Afternoon the ſame day about 5 of the Clock Mr. Recorder, and a ſufficient
number of the Juſtices, returned into the Court, the Judges being departed
home; and Proclamation was made for attendance, as in the Morning.

Then the Clerk of the Crown called for the priſoners Convicted of High
Treaſon, and ſpoke to each of them thus.

Cl. of the Cr.

Set William Ireland to the Bar, William Ireland hold up thy hand, thou
ſtandeſt Convicted of High Treaſon; what canſt thou ſay for thy ſelf, why the
Court ſhould not give thee Judgment to dye according to Law.

Ireland.

My Lord, I repreſented all along from the beginning, that we had not time to
call in our Witneſſes to juſtifie our Innocence.

Mr. Recorder,

If you have any thing to ſay in ſtay of Judgment, you have all free li­berty
to ſay it.

Ireland.

We had no time allowed us to bring in our Witneſſes, ſo that we could have
none, but only thoſe that came in by chance, and thoſe things they have
declared, though true, were not believed.

Mr. Recorder.

Theſe things, Mr. Ireland, you did not object before the Jury gave their
verdict, now they have given their verdict, and found you guilty, if you have
any thing to ſay to the Court why they ſhould not proceed to Judgment
according to that ver­dict, you may ſpeak it, but for theſe things it is too
late.

Ireland,

My Lord, I have onely this to ſay, I Deſire more time to be heard again, and
to call in my Witneſſes.

Mr. Recorder.

Call the Executioner to do his Office.

Ireland.

There are Teſtimonies, my Lord, that I could produce of my Loyalty, and my
Relations fidelity to the King.

Mr. Recorder,

I believe, Mr. Ireland, it will be ſhame to all your Relations that have been
Loyal to the King, that you ſhould be privy to the murther of that good King,
whom your Relations ſo well ſerved; and therefore if that be all that you have
to ſay, it will ſignifie nothing.

The Executioner not appearing, the Sheriff of Middleſex was called to come
into Court, and give his attendance upon pain of 40 l. But the Executioner
coming in; was with a reproof from the Recorder for his negligence, commanded
to tye him up, which he did.

Cl. of Cr.

Set Thomas Pickering to the Bar.

Thomas Pikering,

Hold up thy hand, Thou art in the ſame caſe with the Priſoner laſt be­fore
thee, what canſt thou ſay for thy ſelf, why the Court ſhould not give thee
Judgment to dye according to Law?

Mr. Recorder,

What does he ſay for himſelf?

Capt. Richardſon,

He has nothing to ſay.

Mr. Recorder,

Then tye him up.

Cl. of Cr.

Set John Grove to the Bar.

John Grove,

hold up thy hand, thou art in the ſame caſe with the Priſoner laſt be [...] re
thee, what canſt thou ſay for thy ſelf, why the Court ſhould not give thee
Judgment to die according to Law?

Grove.

I am as innocent as the Child unborn.

Cl. of Cr.

Tye him up which was done.

C. of Cr.

Cryers on both ſides make Proclamations.

Gryere,

O Yes, All manner of perſons are commanded to keep ſilence whilſt Judgment is
[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=26) upon
pain of Impriſonment; Peace about the Court.

Mr. Recorder,

Where is the Keeper, ſhew me the Priſoners, William Ireland, Th [...]mas
Pickering and John Grove,

Cap. Richardſon,

Thoſe are the three.

Mr. Record.

You the priſoners at the Bar, you have been arraigned for a very great
offence, for the greateſt that can be commited againſt any Authority upon
Earth, for high Treaſon againſt your King, with all the aggravation that
poſſible can attend ſo great a crime as that is; for you did not only ſtrike
at the life of the beſt of Kings, but you intended the ſub­verſion of the beſt
of Religions, wharever you may apprehend; yet all men that will  [...]ay their
hopes of ſalvation upon any thing that is fit for a man to l [...]y his hopes
upon, which is upon the Merits of a crucified Saviour, and not upon your
Maſſes, Tricks or Trumperies,  [...]o abhor the thoughts of promoting their
Religion by Maſſacring Kings, and murdering their Subjects. And though we whom
you call Hereticks, abhor to own any ſuch Reli­gion; yet we are not afraid to
tell you, and all others who are enſnared into your prin­ciples▪ we will
maintain the Religion and the Government as it is Eſtabliſhed; with our lives
and fortunes. And it is fit that it ſhould be known, that we who live under
the Go­vernment of ſo mild and pious a Prince, and in a Country where ſo good,
ſo moderate a Religion is eſtabliſht by Law, will not be affrighted by all
your Murders, Conſpiracies and Deſigns, from declaring, that they who dare
Kill Kings, and Maſſacre their Subjects,  [...]e the higheſt violaters, not
only of the Laws of the Land, but of that great Law which  [...] good
Chriſtians and Proteſtants, think themſelves obliged to pay great Reverence
and obedience to, I mean the Law of God Almighty himſelf.

This I ſpeak to you, Gentlemen, not vantingly, 'tis againſt my nature to
inſult upon per­ſons in your ſad condition; God forgive you for what you have
done, and I do heartily beg it, though you don't deſire I ſhould; for, poor
men, you may belive that your intereſt in the world to come is ſecured to you
by your Maſſes, but do not well conſider that vaſt eternity you muſt e're long
enter into, and that great Tribunal you muſt appear before, where his Maſſes
(ſpeaking to Pickering) will not ſignifie ſo many Groats to him, no not one
Farthing. And I muſt ſay it for the ſake of theſe ſi [...]ly people whom you
have im­poſed upon with ſuch fallacies, That the Maſſes can no more ſave thee
from a future dam­nation, then they do from a preſent condemnation.

I do not ſpeak this to you, as intending thereby to inveigh againſt all
perſons that profeſs the Romiſh Religion; for there are many that are of that
perſwaſion, that do abhor thoſe baſe Principles of murdering Kings, and
ſubverting Governments. There are many honeſt Gentlemen in England, I dare
ſay, of that Communion, whom none  [...]f the moſt impudent Jeſuits durſt
undertake to tempt into ſuch Deſigns; theſe are on­  [...]y to be impoſed upon
ſilly men, not upon men of Conſcience and Underſtanding. And  [...] pr [...]
God, as was ſaid lately by a learned Gentleman whom we all know, that all Pro­
[...]eſtants may be as ſafe from the Force of your Daggers, as they are from
thoſe of your  [...]rguments; for I dare ſay, that you could ſooner murder any
man that underſtands  [...]e Proteſtant Religion, than perſwade him to ſuch
Villanies. And among thoſe many  [...]ings which prevailed with the honeſt
Gentlemen of the Jury, to convict you of this  [...]id Crime, they could not
but take notice▪ that you (ſpeaking to Ireland) that do  [...]end to Learning,
did ſend into Forraign parts, that your fellow Jeſuits ſho [...]ld take  [...]
publickly to preach, That the Oath of  [...]giance and Supremacy, by which the
[...]on Juſtice of the Nation is preſerved ſignified nothing; which is a
ſtrong Evi­dence [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=27) of your Deſign,
not only to murther the King, but ſubvert the Government, for ſurely the moſt
probable way to do that▪ is, to aſperſe thoſe Oaths by which all Proteſtant
Subiects, thoſe whom you call Hereticks, lie under an Obligation of Obe­dience
to their Prince. And  [...] think it not unfit to tell yon, that you had a
great favour ſhewed to you to be tried only for the Matters contained in this
Indictment; for you that are Prieſts muſt know, that there is a Law in the
Land that would have hanged you for your very reſidence here; for if any
Subject, born in England, ſhall take Orders from the See of Rome, and
afterwards come into England, and remain there Forty days, ſuch, for that
Offence alone, are made Traytors by Act of Parliament. But you are ſo far from
being under any Awe of that Law, or Submiſſion to it, that you dare not only
come to live here in deſpite thereof, but endeavour what you can, to overthrow
both it and the Government it ſelf. You dare conſpire to murther the King;
nay, not only ſo, but you da [...]e make your Conſults thereof publick. You
dare write your Names to thoſe Conſults. You dare ſollicite all your Party to
do the like, and make all the tie; of Religion and Conſcience (that to
conſidering Chriſtians are Obligations to Piety and Charity) as Engagements
either to act your Villanies, or to conceal them. We think no Power can
diſpence with us whom you call Hereticks, to falſifie our Oaths, much leſs to
break our Covenant with God in the holy Sacrament. But you▪ inſtead of ma­king
that a Tie and Obligation to engage you to the Remembrance of our Saviour,
make it a ſnare and a gin to oblige your Proſelites to the aſſaſſinating of
Kings, and murdering their Subjects. I am ſorry with all my Soul, that men who
have had their Education here, and the benefit of the good Examples of others,
ſhould not only be le [...] into ſuch miſchievous Principles themſelves, but
to be of that confidence in their Perſwaſion, as to dare to debauch others
alſo. I am ſorry alſo to hear a Lay-man ſhoul [...] with ſo much malice
declare, That a Bullet if round and ſmooth was not ſafe enou [...] for him to
execute his Villanies by: But he muſt be ſure, not only to ſet his poyſono
[...] invention on work about it, but he muſt add thereto his poyſonous Teeth;
for ſe [...] if the Bullet were ſmooth, it might light in ſome part where the
Wound might be  [...] red▪ But ſuch is the height of ſome mens Malice, that
they will put all the Veno [...] and Malice they can into their actions. I am
ſure this was ſo horrid a Deſign, th [...] nothing but a Conclave of Devils in
Hell, or a Colledge of ſuch Jeſuits as yours  [...] Earth, could have thought
upon.

This I remember to you for the ſake of them that are to live, and for the
Chari [...] I have for you, who are to die: for the ſake of them that are to
live; for I hope when they hear that men of your Perſwaſion dare commit thoſe
outragious Crime and juſtifie them by a Principle of Religion, they will not
eaſily be ſeduced into yo [...] Opinion: And out of Charity to you that are to
die, to perſwade you to hearty  [...] pentance; for otherwiſe I muſt tell
you,, thy Fifteen hundred pound (ſpeaking Grove,) nor thy Thirty thouſand
Maſſes (ſpeaking to Pickering) will avail but li [...] And I thought fit to
ſay this alſo, that it may be known, that you have had the full  [...] nefit
of the Laws eſtabliſhed in England, and thoſe the beſt of Laws; for ſuch is no
[...] Law of other Nations, for if any Proteſtant in any place where the
Romiſh Religio [...] profeſt, had been but thought guilty of ſuch Crimes, he
had never come to the Fo [...] lity and Juſtice of Arraignment, and to be
tryed by his Peers, permitted to make Defence, and hear what could be ſaid
againſt him; but he had been hang'd immediat [...] or perhaps ſuffered a worſe
Death. But you are not only beholding to the happy  [...] ſtitu [...] [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=27) of our Laws,
but to the more happy Conſtitution of our Religion. For  [...]he [...] are the
admirable Documents of that Religion we in England profeſs, That we dare not
requite Maſſacre for Maſſacre, Blood for Blood. We diſown and abhor all
Stabbing; and we are ſo far from reckoning, that he ſhall be a Saint in Heaven
for aſſaſſinating a Prince, and be prayed to in another world, that the
Proteſtant is requi­red to believe, that ſuch that begin with Murther, muſt
end with Damnation, if our bleſſed Lord and Saviour do not interpoſe; nothing
that man can do, Papiſt or Prote­ſtant, can ſave any man in ſuch a caſe. We
dare not ſay, that our Religion will per­mit us to murder Diſſenters, much
leſs to aſſaſſinate Our King.

And having thus ſaid, let me once more, as a Chriſtian, in the name of the
great God of Heaven, beg of you, for your own Souls ſake, be not ſatisfied or
overperſwaded with any Doctrine that you have preached to others, or imbibed
from others, but believe that no one can contrive the Death of the King, or
the overthrow of the Go­vernment; but the great God of Heaven and Earth will
have an account of it▪ and all Pardons, Abſolutions, and the Diſpenſations
that you who are Prieſts can give to your Lay-brother, or that any of your
Superiors may give to you, will not ſerve the turn.

I know not, but as I ſaid, you may think I ſpeak this to inſult, I take the
Great God of Heaven to witneſs that I ſpeak it with Charity to your Souls, and
with great ſorrow and grief in my own heart, to ſee men that might have made
themſelves happy, draw upon themſelves ſo great a ruin▪ But ſince you have
been ſo fairly heard, ſo fairly tryed and con­victed, there is but little more
to be ſaid; For I muſt tell you, becauſe it may not be thought that you had
not free liberty to make your full Defence, though that Gentleman (ſpeak­ing
to Ireland) ſeemed to be ſurprized, he had a kind Siſter that took care for to
bring his Witneſſes; I am ſo far from blaming her for it, that I do commend
her, it was the Ef­fect of her good Nature, and deſerves Commendation; but I
ſpeak to this purpoſe, to ſhew that there was no ſurprize upon him, nor his
Life taken away by any ſuch thing; for he had a greater favour ſhewed to him
than is uſually ſhown to ſuch Offen­ders.

And having thus ſaid to you my ſelf, We do alſo require him whoſe duty it is
to at­tend in ſuch caſes, nay, I do command him in the name of the Court, that
he attend upon you to give, you all the comfortable aſſiſtance that he can,
for the advan­tage of your future ſtate: And not only ſo, but we will cer
[...]ainly take care, that if you will have any others come to you, they
ſhall. I would not be miſtaken, I do not mean any of your Prieſts and Jeſuits;
but if you will have the aſſiſtance of any Proteſtant Di­vines, they ſhall not
be denyed you. And I hope, God Almighty will pleaſe to give you pardon in
another world, though you have offended beyond hopes of any in this. I once
more aſſure you, all I have ſaid is in perfect charity. I pray God forgive you
for what you have done. And ſo there remains now only for me to pronounce that
Sen­tence which by the Law of the Land the Court is required to do againſt
perſons con­victed of that Offence▪ which you are convicted of.

This Court doth therefore award,

That you, the Priſoners at the Bar, be conveyed from hence to the place from
whence you came, and from thence that you be drawn to the Place of Execution
upon Hurdles, that there you be ſeverally hanged by the Neck, that you be cut
down alive, that your Privy members be cut off, and your Bowels taken out, and
burnt in your view: that your Heads be ſevered from  [...] [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=28) [...] [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=28) [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=29) your Bodies,
that your Bodies be divided into Quarters, and thoſe Quarters be diſpoſed the
Kings Pleaſure: And the God of infinite mercy be merciful to your Souls.

Then the Priſoners were conveyed back to the Goal by the keeper of the Goal,
according to Cuſtome; and the Commiſſion was called over, and the priſoners
taken Orde [...] for according to Law. And then the Count adjourned by
Proclamation, thus.

Cl. of Cr.

Cryer make Proclamation.

Cryer

O yes, O yes, O yes, All manner of Perſons that have any thing more to do at
this ge [...] er [...]l Seſſions of the Peace holden for the city of London,
may depart hence for this time an [...] give their attendance at the Guild-
hall London, on Fryday the 10th. day of January next, at ſeven of the Clock in
the morning▪ And all manner of perſons at this Seſſions of Oyer a [...]
Terminer, and Goal Delivery of Newgate holden for the City of London, and
County of Mid­dleſex, may depart hence for this time, and give their
attendance here again on Wedneſday i [...] 15th, day of January at ſeven of
the clock in the Morning

And then the Court broke up.

God ſave the King. On Fryday the 24th. day of January following the Priſoners,
William Ireland, and John Grove, were drawn from Newgate on a Hurdle to the
Common place of Execution, where they were Executed, accor­ding to the
Sentence pronounced againſt them.

FINIS

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=100180&page=29)

[Home](/)

Ireland, William, 1636-1679.. Date: 1678  

