## (unknown project)

# A true narrative of the Portsmouth disputation, between some ministers of
the Presbyterian, and others of the Baptist, persuasion, concerning the
subjects and manner of baptism held in Mr. Williams's meeting-place there on
Wednesday, Feb. 22. 1698/9. The managers for the Presbyterians were, Mr.
Samuel Chandler of Fareham. Mr. Leigh of Newport in the Isle of Wight. Mr.
Robinson of Hungerford in Berks, moderator. For the Baptists were, Dr. William
Russel of London. Mr. John Williams of East Knoyle in Wiltshire. Mr. John
Sharp of Froome in Somersetshire, moderator. Transcribed from two copies taken
at the dispute; the one by Mr. Bissel Town-Clerk of Portsmouth, and the other
by Mr. Samuel Ring. Revis'd and publish'd by Dr. William Russel.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=1)

A True NARRATIVE OF THE Portſmouth DISPUTATION, Between ſome Miniſters of the
Pres­byterian, and others of the Baptiſt, Perſuaſion, concerning the Subjects
and Manner of Baptiſm: Held in Mr. Williams's Meeting-place there on
Wedneſday, Feb. 22. 1698/9.

THE MANAGERS

For the Presbyterians were,

  * M. Samuel Chandler of Fare­ham.
  * Mr. Leigh of Newport in the Iſle of Wight.
  * Mr. Robinſon of Hungerford in Berks, Moderator.

For the Baptiſts were,

  * Dr. William Ruſſel of London.
  * Mr. John Williams of Eaſt Knoyle in Wiltſhire.
  * Mr. John Sharp of Froome in Somerſetſhire, Moderator.

Tranſcribed from two Copies taken at the Diſpute; the one by Mr. Biſſel Town-
Clerk of Portſmouth, and the other by Mr. Samuel Ring.

Revis'd and Publiſh'd by Dr. William Ruſſel.

London, Printed for John Sprint, at the Bell in Little-Britain. 1699.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=2)

## To the moſt Honourable Governour, Major-General ERLE; And the Honourable
Colonel GIBSON, Deputy—Governour of His Ma­jeſty's Garriſon of Portſmouth;
THIS NARRATIVE Is humbly Dedicated,

AS a grateful Acknowledgment of that Favour you did us, in your Applicati­on
to His Auguſt Majeſty, to know his Pleaſure whether you might admit of a
Diſputation betwixt the Miniſters of the Presbyterian and thoſe of the
Baptiſt's Perſwa­ſion, (of which this is the beſt Account the Publiſher could
obtain;) whereupon His Majeſty, out of his wonted Clemency, as an Effect of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=3) that innate
Goodneſs which he hath always ma­nifeſted towards his Diſſenting Proteſtant
Sub­jects, was graciouſly pleaſed to let us have His Royal Per [...]i
[...]ion, in anſwer to your Requeſt.

For which Favour, together with the Liber­ty; we enjoy in the free Exerciſe of
our Religi­on, we deſire to lay hold on this Occaſion, to expreſſ our
Thankfulneſs to God and the King; praying for His Majeſty's Health and
Proſperity in this World, and that God would vouchſafe to en­rich him with a
Crown of Glory in the World to come.

Your Honours, to my Power, William Ruſſel.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=3)

## To my much Eſteemed and Beloved Brethren in the Lord, Mr. THOMAS BOWES,
Meſſenger and Paſtor of the Congregation of Baptized Believers at Portſmouth;
AND Mr. JOHN WEBBER, Paſtor of the Church of Chriſt at Goſport under the ſame
Profeſſion of Believers Baptiſm in Water. Together with the Congregations to
whom they belong:  
Wiſhing your Increaſe in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt;
and that God would add to your number daily ſuch as ſhall be ſaved.

Honoured and Beloved Brethren,

I Have thought meet to make this Dedication alſo to you, be­cauſe ye were not
only eye and ear Witneſſes of what paſt in the Diſputation; but were privy to
all the Circumſtances with which it was attended, and were the ſole Cauſe of
my being engaged in it. How it was managed you beſt know, and therefore are
proper Judges of the matters of fact related in this Narrative. For my own
part, I have took much Pains, and uſed great Care and Conſideration in the
Review of thoſe Papers you ſent me from thoſe that wrote down the Diſpute,
that I might do no Wrong to either Party.

And herein I have had all the Helps I could obtain both from our Brother
Williams, who was engaged with me in the Diſpu­tation; from whom I received
(by the hands of Mr. Sharp, our
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=4) Moderator) an
Account of thoſe Arguments he offered, and what elſe he could remember, taken
from his own mouth: beſides the account I have had by Letters from divers
other Perſons that were preſent. All which I have diligently compared, and
have alſo endeavoured (ſo far as thoſe Accounts and my own Memory would
furniſh me therewith) not only to give a true Narrative of what was ſpoken,
but alſo to give our Antagoniſts Words their due weight as well as our own.

And if there be any thing omitted therein, they muſt blame themſelves, or
their own Scribe, and not us. For Mr. William Leddell went to Mr. Smith their
Writer, and carried our Copy with him, and deſired him to compare it with his:
He anſwer­ed, that his was very imperfect, it being the firſt time he was in a
Diſpute, and he could not take it, but ſome things were left out; and ſaid,
that it was not as yet wholly written over. Mr. Leddell waited upon him a
ſecond time, but could not obtain a ſight of it to compare them together,
although he was ſatisfied it was then finiſhed. Now whether he did this of
himſelf, or by Advice from them, is beſt known to himſelf. However, it leaves
us without blame.

I know it is not proper for me (who was principally concerned in it) to ſay
much concerning the Diſpute it ſelf: for being made Publick, it's left to
every one that reads it to judge for himſelf. Nevertheleſs, it may not be
amiſs to make ſome few Remarks upon it; becauſe it may fall into ſome hands
who may not well underſtand the Grounds of the Controverſie.

1\. It is agreed on both ſides, That Mr. Chandler's Sermons were the occaſion
of that Offence taken by you, and of the Diſ­pute it ſelf; as appears by the
Preliminaries ſigned by Mr. Tho­mas Bowes and Mr. William Leddell on our part,
and alſo by Mr. Chandler and Mr. Williams on the part of the Presby­terians:
as you may ſee in p. 3, 4.

2\. The Objections being made againſt what Mr. Chandler preach'd, it had been
his proper Work to have vindicated the Truth of his Doctrine againſt thoſe
Objections, by the Authority of Holy Scripture. But inſtead thereof, he puts
us upon it to prove the contrary. But as the learned Dr. Smith did well
ob­ſerve, He that aſſerts muſt prove. And their own Modera­tor did declare,
that Mr. Chandler had in his Preaching aſſert­ed, that Infants are the
Subjects of Baptiſm, but told us we were not to call on him for that then.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=4) 3\. I would
make this farther Remark upon it, That the Rea­ſon why he took this method
was, becauſe he was unable to prove what he had aſſerted: for in one of his
Sermons he thus ſpeaks; But that I may proceed with the greater clearneſs, I
ſhall do theſe things; firſt, prove from Scripture the Warrantableneſs of
Infant-Baptiſm, &c. And to make his Aſſertion good, he cites the Commiſſion,
Matth. 28. 19. for the Baptizing the In­fants of believing Parents. And argues
upon it, that Diſciples were to be Baptized; and (ſaith he) we have a plain
Text that ſuch Infants are Diſciples, ſee Acts 15. 10. And when our Saviour
ſaith, Go make Diſciples, baptizing them, it muſt be underſtood of ſuch
Infants. Now as to his Pretence from Acts 15. 10. we did ſufficiently enervate
that. And as for the Commiſſion, Mr. Leigh doth confeſs (as well as Mr.
Chandler) that it is a Command, and that the Command is expreſs'd, pag. 27.
And farther ſaith, in pag. 28. We muſt all confeſs that Jeſus Chriſt gave
Commiſſion to Baptize Belie­vers when at the Age of maturity; but afterwards
the Chil­dren of thoſe Believers. Yet when Mr. Chandler begins to anſwer my
first Argument, he affirms, That Chriſt hath no where expreſly commanded
Infants to be Baptized. See p. 6. And if ſo, then Infants cannot be intended,
either in that Com­miſſion, or any other place where there is a Command in
Holy Scripture for Baptiſm. So that he needs no other Confutation than his own
Confeſſion, in the preſence, as is ſuppoſed, of about 2000 Witneſſes.

4\. As for their Conſequences which they were ſo deſirous to have a Grant from
me that I would allow them to make uſe of; it's very obſervable, that if they
can do any thing that way, it's yet to be done; for they did not offer them to
us in the Diſputa­tion, but have reſerved them in their own Breaſts, as the
Pope doth his unwritten Traditions. And how they ſhould think the People
ſhould be convinced of the truth of their Practice, when they tell them there
is no expreſs Command in Scripture for it, and pretend only they have ſome
Conſequences to prove it by, and yet refuſe to tell what theſe Conſequences
are, it is beyond my Imagination. I can aſſure them, thoſe that can take up a
Sa­tisfaction in ſuch empty Pretences, are ſufficiently prepared to be Prieſt-
ridden, with a witneſs.

5\. When they ſhould have proved (if they had known how) that Infants are
capable to be made Diſciples by the Miniſtry of Men, according to Chriſt's
Commiſſion; they tell us (inſtead
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=5) thereof) That
Children are accounted ſo when they firſt enter the School, and call a School-
maſter for their Voucher. When the very naming of it confutes themſelves,
becauſe they are ſo far from being made Scholars by Teaching, that they know
not one Letter of the Book, by their own Confeſſion.

6\. I cannot but obſerve how ſtrenuouſly they oppoſed them­ſelves againſt our
way of Baptizing by Dipping; and rejected the Authority of their own Authors,
and divers of the greateſt Pro­teſtant Writers ſince the Reformation, who have
aſſerted our Practice therein to be agreeable to the Etymology of the Word
[...], and the Practice of John the Baptiſt, Christ and his Apoſtles; and yet
themſelves can (when it is to ſerve a Turn) practiſe it the ſame way, by
plunging the Perſon over Head and Ears in Water. An Inſtance whereof, as I
received it (well atteſted) from ſeveral hands (and the Perſons own
Confeſſion) take as followeth.

To back that Inſtance of Mr. Williams's about the Virgin Mary and our Saviour
in anſwer to Mr. Leigh's Demand, namely, to give him an Inſtance of one Perſon
that was born of a Believer, and was Baptized when he came to grown years, ſee
pag. 34, 35. We can give you an Account of one whoſe Pa­rent was a Believer
when he was born, and Baptized when adult, by Mr. Earl the Presbyterian
Miniſter at Goſport, by Dipping, being about 40 years of Age. And this was
done by the Advice of ſeveral of their Miniſters, particularly Mr. Chandler
and Mr. Williams. His Name is Joſeph Fox; he is a near Neighbour of ours. And
they did it either by the Commiſſion, or, without regard to it, I know not
which; that they beſt know.

And by another hand I have this Account.

We have alſo thought fit to acquaint you with the Perſon, and his Name, who
was Baptized by the Presbyterians at Goſport; which is as followeth: It was
Mr. Joſeph Fox, living in Goſ­port; who being (by our Brother Duke) deſired to
anſwer him one thing, which was, Whether, when he was Bap­tized by Mr. Earl,
it was done by Dipping the whole Body under Water? And he ſaid, it was; and
that in the Preſence of four Presbyterian Miniſter [...] Thi [...] was
acknowledged by him to our Brother Duke on the  [...] of  [...] 16 [...]6-9.
And we do deſire you (if you think  [...] in ſome part of the Diſpute, that
the World may  [...] acquainted with that Proceed­ing of theirs.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=5) Now by this
Action of theirs, if they believe it to be according to the Commiſſion, then
they juſtify our Practice; if they do it for any by-end, without believing it
to be according to God's Word, then (as Mr. Calvin ſaith) the whole Action is
but a Sport.

Now, that Mr. Chandler can have no other Thoughts of it, doth evidently appear
from his own Words: for in his Sermon preachd at Portſmouth Nov. 10\. 1698. he
ſaith, It is not like­ly that that God that will have mercy and not ſacrifice,
would inſtitute an Ordinance ſo prejudicial to the Bodies of Men: and that
it's very unlikely that Dipping, which when­ever it is mentioned, is uſed as a
Token of God's Vengeance, ſhould in this Sacrament be uſed as a Token of his
Mercy. Where you read of Dipping, you find it mentioned in a way of Wrath and
Vengeance. Thus the old World was Dip'd and Drowned for their Sins: God's
Vengeance followed them, and they ſunk as Lead in the mighty Waters. Thus the
Egyptians were Dip'd and Drowned in the Red Sea. Thus the Lord Jeſus Chriſt
ſhall come down from Heaven, to render Vengeance on his Adverſaries; cloathed
with Gar­ments Dip'd in blood, Rev. 19. 13. [Here Mr. Chandler hath rendred
that word Dip'd to inveigh and ridicule our Practice of Dipping, although he
could object againſt it when I gave it for an Inſtance.] But he goes on,
ſaying, You find ſtill Dipping repreſents in Scripture God's Vengeance and
Diſpleaſure. And ſo I ſay it is very unlikely, that what was always uſed as a
Token of his Diſpleaſure, ſhould in the New Teſtament be uſed as a Token of
Mercy. So that it is not neceſſary that Dipping be uſed in Baptiſm.

To which I give this for Anſwer.

1\. If it be ſo as he ſaith, then it was altogether unneceſſary that Mr. Erle
(by his Conſent) ſhould dip Mr. Fox's whole Body under the Water.

2\. That it was not done in Mercy to him, thus to Baptize him; but in
Vengeance, and as a Token of God's Diſpleaſure.

3\. That the Baptiſm practiſed by John the Dipper, and that of Chriſt and his
Apoſtles, was not an Ordinance inſtituted of God in a way of Mercy, but
appointed for the People in a way of Wrath and Vengeance: for I have given him
a cloud of Witneſ­ſes, that they did adminiſter it by Dipping the whole Body
un­der the Water.

4\. By this he doth condemn and ridicule all thoſe learned Prote­ſtants I have
mentioned; with many others that might be named.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=6) And the
Divines of the Church of England (as well as we) who appoint Dipping as the
best way of Baptizing (and Sprin­kling only in caſe of Weakneſs) and was uſed
by them formerly as their frequent Practice; and is aſſerted by ſome of their
greateſt Divines, to be the old and beſt way of Baptizing: and is to this day
the conſtant Practice of the Greek Church.

I am alſo well aſſured from ſome other hands, that, upon the 25th of Febr.
laſt, a few days after the Diſpute, Mr. Leigh ſaid in the Preſence of divers
Perſons, That to ſatisfy a Scrupu­lous Conſcience he would adminiſter Baptiſm
by Dipping. Whereupon Mr. Williams askt him if he would do it to anſwer a
Scrupulous Conſcience without God's Word? And he anſwered No. And I have
reaſon to conclude that Mr. Leigh may believe that Dipping is the right way of
Baptizing, whatever he might ſay in the time of the Diſpute; becauſe he did
ſay to divers perſons, That if it had been in a private Conference, where
there had been but a few Perſons of a ſide, he ſhould have made ſeve­ral
Conceſſions, which he was not willing to make in ſo great an Aſſembly. And
therefore I will not charge thoſe extravagant Expreſſions of Mr. Chandler's
upon him; i. e. That Dipping was always uſed as a Token of Diſpleaſure. And
ſurely Mr. Chandler had mightily forgot himſelf when he ſaid ſo: for Naa­man
the Syrian was commanded to Dip himſelf, not in a way of Vengeance and Wrath,
but in a way of Mercy: and he found it to be ſo; for he was perfectly cured of
his Leproſie thereby. I would adviſe Mr. Chandler to read over Rom. 2. 1, 2,
3. and conſider how ſharply the Apoſtle reproves ſuch that condemn o­thers,
and yet do the ſame things themſelves; and ſaith, Thou art inexcuſable, O Man,
whoſoever thou art, that judgeſt; for wherein thou judgeſt another, thou
condemneſt thy ſelf; for thou that judgeſt, doeſt the ſame things.

How can he, or any of them, condemn our Practice, when themſelves can do it to
ſatisfie a Scrupulous Conſcience, or, &c. And eſpecially Mr. Leigh, who
confeſſes it to be according to the Word of God? And Mr. Erle hath done it by
their Conſent.

I ſhall now give you an Account from another hand written from Goſport, in
which (after he hath ſignified his reſpects to me, &c.) he thus ſaith;

Although they look on your Argu­ments to be of little weight, yet we think
them to be of too great weight for them to anſwer with all their Cunning. I
hope thoſe that were unprejudic'd will receive ſome Light, though they
endeavoured (as much as in them lay) to dar­ken
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=6) Counſel with
their mutinous Carriage. But Truth will be Truth ſtill in ſpight of all its
Oppoſites; and will ſhine, though they would cloud it. This was written after
that vain boaſting Advertiſement of the Presbyterians in the Poſt-man, which
was very pleaſing to their Party at London, and made ſo great a Noiſe all over
the Nation, as if they had gotten ſome great Victory; although in truth it was
nothing ſo: as will evi­dently appear by this Narrative. But my Friend
proceeds, ſay­ing, I hope this Account I have herewith ſent you, will come
ſafe to your hands; wherein you may ſee ſome of their Cu­rioſity, whereby they
ſay they have confounded your Sophi­ſtry. Four things I obſerved in their
Proceedings, which (to me) condemned their Cauſe.

I. The want of ſo much as one bare Inſtance in Scrip­ture to confirm their
Practice of Infant Baptiſm.

II. When they required an Inſtance of a Believers Child Baptized when adult;
and promiſed when produced they would give us the Cauſe: which Inſtance was
given, and yet they perſiſted in it as before.

III. Their appealing to the People to give their Aſſent that they were
ſatisfied with Mr Leighs Argument from Matth. 19. 4. Of ſuch is the Kingdom of
Heaven, by holding up their hands: and it was obſerved there were but few that
did hold up their hands in compariſon of ſo great a Multitude; ſup­poſed by
ſome not to be one in fifty, and by others, a much fewer number: ſo that they
were far from having the Opi­nion of the People on their ſide by way of
Approbation, whatever they may ſay of themſelves; which was not a little
Mortification to them.

IV. When they could not obtain it by Right, they would have it be theirs by
might. And this was evidenced by their repeated Clamours; which was not (when
duly conſidered) to their Honour.

Beſides, There have been two Conceſſions made ſince the Diſpute by themſelves,
which were theſe:

  * 1\. That there was Credit gained to our Cauſe by this Diſpute.
  * 2\. That there was Truth and Chriſtianity in it.

For my part, I am ſatisfied in what was ſaid, and ſo are our Friends, &c.

Sir, This is but ſome; and conſidering the Procedure was ſo clamorons, it may
be ſaid to be ſome of the Spoils won
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=7) in Battel,
where Innocence and Rancour encountred.

I ſhould be glad to hear of your Welfare, and deſire an Intereſt in your
Prayers as oft as you go to the Throne of Grace.

Yours, &c.

Goſport, March 11\. 1698-9.

I will give you an Abſtract of another Letter, from a worthy Perſon in thoſe
Parts, directed to me, who was an eye and ear Witneſs of what paſt. In which
(after Chriſtian Salutations) he ſaith,

I hope theſe Lines will find you in Health, after your tedi­ous and
uncomfortable Journey, which I hope may bring ſome Glory to God,
notwithſtanding the great Rage that the, &c. was in. Indeed they had no other
ſhift to ſave their Reputation, but by caſting out a Flood, acting the part of
the Serpents hiſs amongſt the worſt. I do under­ſtand, ſeveral were convinced
by their Rudeneſs; and they are ſince Baptized.

I think it may be convenient to take away the Cloud from the Common People by
expoſing what was delivered in the Diſpute (to publick view) and by adding
that which they would not then hear; I mean that which relates to the man­ner
of Adminiſtration. You may conſider of it. 'Tis pity they ſhould glory in
their ſhame, deceiving the World.

Dear Friend, I thank you for all your Labour of Love. Your Preaching and
Behaviour was to me very acceptable, and to all our Friends, &c.

> Goſport, March 6\. 1698-9.

By theſe Teſtimonies you may ſee, that the Presbyterians had no Cauſe to
publiſh what they did to the World, except it were to keep up their declining
Reputation.

After the Diſpute was ended, and I was returned to my Lodg­ing, Mr. Williams
told me he would go to his Nameſake's houſe to talk with the Presbyterian
Miniſters that were there. I de­ſired him to remember my Love to them, and let
them know, that I could diſpute with Men and yet love them notwithſtanding:
but deſired him to tell Mr. Robinſon, their Moderator, that I took it very
unkindly at his hands, that he ſhould tranſgreſs ſo much as he had done
against the Rules of Diſpute, and be ſo abuſive as he was, ſo as to give the
Lye (for he ſaid in the midst of the Diſpute, with a loud Voice, That is a
Lye, and yet could not make any thing out about it;) and for his
Miſrepre­ſentation of what I had ſaid, particularly upon that Argument about
the Beaſts of the Field not being capable, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=7) And when Mr.
Williams came to ſee me before I left Portſ­mouth, he told me that he had
delivered my Meſſage to them: and that Mr. Williams the Presbyterian Miniſter
did acknow­ledge that Mr. Robinſon had exceeded his Bounds: and that he did
abuſe me in his miſrepreſenting of me to the People upon that Argument.

I anſwer'd, It was well he had acknowledg'd it now; but it had been better if
he had done it before the People.

Mr. Williams the Baptiſt Miniſter was pleaſed to commu­nicate this Account to
me by Mr. Sharp our Moderator.

Feb. 23. 1698-9. Mr. Leigh and himſelf being together at Mr. Williams's Houſe
in Portſmouth, there came in Mr. Erle, Mr. Bowler, and Mr. Farrel, three
Presbyterian Miniſters; and there was two other Baptiſts preſent at the ſame
time. Mr. Farrel, in the Preſence of the forementioned Miniſters, ſaluted Mr.
John Williams, the Diſputant, after this manner.

Mr. Williams, I must tell you, and that not as my own Sen­timents only, but as
the Sentiments of every one of our Brethren, that what Credit was gained to
your Cauſe, was gained by you.

Mr. Leigh asked Mr. Williams, whether we did infer from thoſe words. That the
Miniſters had granted out of their own mouths that we had gained the Cauſe?

His Reply was, No, all that we infer from it was this; That it was an implicit
Conceſſion, that there was Credit gained to our Cauſe.

Mr. Leigh ſaid, How much Credit did we infer was grant­ed by them to our
Cauſe?

Mr. Williams ſaid, We do not know the quantity of it.

Mr. Leigh replied, Truly it was but a little Credit that was granted out of
our own mouths that was gained to your Cauſe.

To which Mr. Williams anſwered, That if there was a little Credit granted out
of their own mouths, then there was Credit gain'd to our Cauſe, granted by
themſelves; which was no far­ther denied by Mr. Leigh.

But what was ſpoken by Mr. John Williams in the Diſpute, was abundantly
ſhorter than what Dr. Ruſſel did then ſpeak. Thus far as to Mr. Williams's
Account.

Notwithſtanding all this, whilst they were making theſe Con­ceſſions at
Portſmouth, they let fly an Advertiſement after Dr. Ruſſel to London, which
was Printed and Publiſhed before he got home: for, as Mr. Williams ſaid, they
knew who had hurt them. Here follows a true Copy thereof.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=8)

### The Poſt-Man. Feb. 25\. 1698-9.

Portſmouth, Feb. 23\. Yeſterday the Diſpute between the Preſ­byterians and
Anabaptiſts, was held in the Presbyterian Meeting­houſe. It began at Ten of
the Clock in the Morning, and con­tinued till Six in the Afternoon, without
any Intermiſſion.

The Theme of the Diſpute was the Subjects of Baptiſm, and the Manner how
Baptiſm is to be performed. Ruſſel and Williams were the Opponents for the
Anabaptiſts, and Mr. Chandler and Mr. Leigh Defendants for the Presbyterians.
Mr. Sharp Modera­tor for the former, and Mr. Robinſon for the latter.

Mr. Ruſſel oppoſed Infant-Baptiſm, with all the Subtilty and Sophiſtry of the
Schools; and was anſwered with good Reaſon and Learning. Upon the whole, it
was the Opinion of all the Judicious Auditory, the Presbyterians ſufficiently
defended their Doctrine, and alſo worſted their Adverſaries, when they came to
aſſume the place of Opponents.

We being ſilent, and not uſing the ſame Methods as they did, to ſquirt out
fooliſh Advertiſements in common News-Papers, theſe Men grew confident; and
upon the 1ſt of April following, in the Flying-Poſt, they publiſh a long
Story, full of Ʋntruths, and filly ſquint-ey'd Reflections, not becoming their
Learning or Profeſſion: and all to ſupport a ſinking Interest. But it
appear­ed ſo manifeſtly partial, that there ſeemed to be little or no cre­dit
given to it, except by ſome few of their own Party.

For although they were ſo civil to give themſelves the Title of Maſter, they
grutched to ſpeak ſo honourably of their Opponents. And in the ſecond Paper
they ſay, one Mr. William (by ſome called Dr.) Ruſſel of London, &c.

All that I ſhall ſay to it is this; As I am a Miniſter of Chriſt and of the
Churches, I can (through the Grace of God) bear all the Indignity and Contempt
they can put upon me; if I, by ſo doing, can but do good to Souls, and bring
the leaſt Tribute of Honour to my Lord and Maſter thereby. I thank God that he
enabled me to count the Coſt before I was ordained to the Work of the
Miniſtry; and therefore, if Reproaches, yea Bonds and Af­flictions, abide me,
it is no more than I looked for.

But what Reaſon theſe Men have to refuſe to give me the civil Title of Doctor,
I know not, neither do I care. But this I know, that many years ſince, I was
not only admitted as Ma­ſter of Arts, but took my Degree of Batchelor in
Phyſick, and [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=8)
was after that Created a Doctor in Phyſick of the famous Ʋniverſity of
Cambridge, and alſo admitted by univerſal Con­ſent to be a Member of the
Senate there: and that not as ſome have ſuggeſted, as if it had been only ex
gratia. Yet theſe Men, even whilſt I was in Portſmouth (as well as ſince) have
repor­ted among the People there, that I was Ruſſel the Mountebank, a Man that
hath been dead ſeveral years. They thought (per­haps) by ſuch Artifices to
leſſen the Peoples Opinion of me. But by making me little, they make
themſelves the leſs, in that ſuch Giants (as they would have the People
believe them to be) ſhould not be able to conquer ſuch a Pigmy as they have
repreſented me in the Eyes of the Vulgar.

They have alſo reported, That I am a Hackney Diſputant, and that I refuſed to
come down to Portſmouth under thirty Guinea's; but that at last I was
prevail'd upon to take Twenty. I did not trouble my ſelf whilſt I was at
Portſmouth to confute them in it, becauſe our Friends there knew how to do it
them­ſelves; for they knew the Report to be altogether groundleſs and falſe.
But ſeeing I have this opportunity, I think ſit hereby to tell the World, That
I did not ſo much as demand one farthing of them for my Journey, neither
before nor after. For all that are throughly acquainted with me know, that I
do neither Preach for Hire, nor Divine for Money, as ſome of them do: but as I
have freely received, ſo I deſire freely to give; believing that ought to be
left to the free Benevolence of the People.

But that I may do Right to our Friends at Portſmouth and Goſport, I do
acknowledge that of their own free good Will (without asking) they did pay my
Coach hire and bear my Char­ges; which, as they thought it was the leaſt they
could do, ſo I can truly ſay, it was the moſt I ever expected

I ſhall cloſe this Epiſtle, with giving the World an Account of the Occaſion
of this Publication.

There were two things that moved our Friends thereto.

1\. Their Noiſe and Clamour they made in the Time of the Diſpute; which
bindred the People from hearing what was ſaid, eſpecially when they were
pinch'd upon an Argument.

For which Reaſon, it was thought convenient to publiſh it, that what they
could not be permitted quietly to Hear, they may have the benefit to Read
without Interruption; and ſo have leiſure to conſider it.

But 2dly, The principal Cauſe thereof, was thoſe Advertiſe­ments they ſent all
over the Nation, to miſrepreſent the Diſ­pute,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=9) and blind the
eyes of the Ʋnthinking about it.

Whereas this Publication will ſet the matter in a true Light, and let all Men
ſee that they had neither Scripture, nor any good Conſequences deduced from
thence, to prove their Practice, either with reſpect to the Subjects or
Manner. And therefore when the People ſhall ſee that they have neither Command
nor Example for their Practice, I hope it will be a means to convince them of
the Ʋnlawfulneſs thereof; and that they will not dare for time to come to
practiſe a humane Tradition in the room of an Ordinance of Jeſus Christ:
remembring what our Lord ſaid of the Jews of old, In vain they do worſhip me,
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men, Matth. 15. 9. And in Mark 7\.
8. For laying aſide the Commandment of God, ye hold the Tradition of men. And
then hear what Paul ſaith, Coloſſ. 2\. 20, 21, 22. Wherefore if ye be dead
with Chriſt from the Rudiments of the world; why; as though living in the
world, are ye ſubject to Ordinances (Touch not, taſte not, handle not, which
all are to periſh with the uſing) after the Commandments and Doctrines of men?

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jeſus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlaſting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work to do his Will, working in you that which
is well pleaſing in his ſight, through Jeſus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen. So prays,

Your Brother and Fellow-Labourer in the Work of the Goſpel, William Ruſſel.

## Table of contents

  * To the moſt Honourable Governour, Major-General ERLE; And the Honourable Colonel GIBSON, Deputy—Governour of His Majeſty's Garriſon of Portſmouth; THIS NARRATIVE Is humbly Dedicated,
  * To my much Eſteemed and Beloved Brethren in the Lord, Mr. THOMAS BOWES, Meſſenger and Paſtor of the Congregation of Baptized Believers at Portſmouth; AND Mr. JOHN WEBBER, Paſtor of the Church of Chriſt at Goſport under the ſame Profeſſion of Believers Baptiſm in Water. Together with the Congregations to whom they belong: Wiſhing your Increaſe in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt; and that God would add to your number daily ſuch as ſhall be ſaved.
  * 1\. The Occaſion of this Diſputation: And how Dr. Ruſſel came to be ingaged therein; According to the Account received from Goſport and Portſmouth. The Occaſion was this:
    * 1.1. An Account of the Diſputation held at Portſmouth, February the 22d. 1698/9.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=9)

## 1\. The Occaſion of this Diſputation: And how Dr. Ruſſel came to be ingaged
therein; According to the Account received from Goſport and Portſmouth. The
Occa­ſion was this:

THE Congregation of Baptized Believers at Goſport, were ſo bleſſed with
Succeſs in their Miniſtry, that in a ſhort time they had gathered Twenty
Members, very worthy Perſons, who were added to them by Baptiſm. Many others
were amuzed and put upon Enquiry. This ſtartled the Presbyterian Party,
becauſe divers of them were of their Number, either Members or Benefactors;
and they began to fear the Iſſue thereof.

Whereupon Mr. Sam. Chandler, of Fareham, about five or ſix Miles from
Portſmouth, a Presbyterian Miniſter, whom they much eſteemed for his Learning,
was procured to come and Preach up the contrary Doctrine, firſt at Goſport,
and af­terwards at Fortſmouth, upon Thurſdays, on purpoſe (as was ſup­poſed)
to put a Stop to this ſo hopeful a Beginning amongſt the Baptiſts, and hinder
their Progreſs therein. And this was managed by him and his Admirers in ſuch a
manner, as was to the Grief of ſuch as truly fear God in thoſe Parts. For it
was given out, that Mr. Chandler would not only prove Infant Baptiſm from
Scripture-Teſtimony, and anſwer all the Ob­jections of the Baptiſts againſt
it; but alſo ſufficiently furniſh his Hearers with Arguments to defend their
Practice.

And in the Proſecution of this his Deſign, he took occaſion to make his
Excurſions, wherein he ſpake very diminutively of thoſe in the Miniſtry;
repreſenting them as Perſons ignorant of, and unacquainted with the Holy
Scriptures. He alſo ri­diculed and miſ-repreſented the Manner of their
Performance of this Holy Ordinance as it repreſents a Burial and a
Reſur­rection, wherein upon Rom. 6\. 3, 4. he makes too bold with the manner
of our Lord's Burial, and the Apoſtles Applica­tion thereof to Holy Baptiſm.
He might have been pleaſed to [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=10) have wounded the
poor Baptiſts through the Sides of ſome other Perſon than ſo great an Apoſtle.

He alſo did greatly extol the Practice of Infant-Baptiſm, and the Uſe and
Advantage of it to them, beyond thoſe of riper Years; and did inveigh againſt
their manner of Practice with moſt ſevere Reflections. Upon this, the
Presbyterian Party began to triumph over the Baptiſts, and boaſted, that what
Mr. Chandler had ſaid upon that Point was unanſwerable.

Whereupon, when this laſt Sermon was to be Preached, wherein he was to ſhew
his great Skill in Anſwering our Ob­jections: Mr. Bowes, and divers other
Brethren of both the baptized Congregations, went and heard him. When he had
done. Mr. Bowes deſired leave to ſpeak, and in a modeſt and Chriſtian-like
Manner, did enter his Objection againſt what Mr. Chandler had ſpoken: and upon
a meeting betwixt them­ſelves, they did mutually Agree, That the Points in
Diffe­rence ſhould be publickly diſputed at Mr. Williams his Meeting­houſe in
Portſmouth; and that Mr. Chandler and Dr. Ruſſel ſhould be the Diſputants.

As touching Dr. Ruſſel, his being ingaged in it, it did not ariſe from any
deſire in himſelf to be concerned in it; but from the preſſing Importunity of
his Friends.

The Church at Goſport being newly conſtituted, and being more particularly
concerned (as the thing was circumſtanced) and ſuppoſing that all this Stir
and Noiſe was chiefly deſigned againſt them, did firſt make their Application
to him for his Aſſiſtance. And in the Name of the Church, a Letter was ſent to
him by one of their worthy Brethren, wherein they expreſs themſelves after
this manner.

# To our eſteemed Brother Ruſſel, we of the Church of Chriſt at Goſport, ſend
Greeting.

VVE being under a Preſſure of Conſcience, having of late had the great
Ordinance of our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, (viz. that of Believers Baptiſm in Water)
inveighed againſt, and ridiculed by one of the Presbyterian Miniſters (Mr.
Chandler by Name;) and being much grieved that the Ordinance of Chriſt ſhould
be thus triumphed over, and trodden under Foot: and ho­ping you have ſo far
ingaged your ſelf in Christ's Cauſe, and that God hath given you Abilities to
defend it, we don't only Beg, but Require your Perſonal Preſence, and deſire
your Aſſiſtance to defend that Sacred Ordinance, &c.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=10) He alſo
received ſeveral other Letters, Signed by the Mini­ſters, and other Private
Brethren, to preſs him to it.

He did ſend them word, that it was his Opinion, it would be the beſt way for
Mr. Chandler and himſelf to exchange ſome Letters betwixt them in the firſt
place, to try the ſtrength and length of their Weapons; and thereby prevent a
Publick Diſputation, if poſſible. But when they let him underſtand that the
Matter was too far proceeded in, and ſo circumſtan­ced, that nothing leſs than
a Publick Diſpute could decide it, he then conſented to anſwer their Requeſt
therein, becauſe (as they had ſignified to him) the Glory of God, the Ho­nour
of his Truth, and the Good of Souls, was eminently con­cerned in ſuch a
Publick Defence, eſpecially conſidering that the Presbyterian Party had given
out, that we were afraid to meet them: But I ſhall detain you no longer from
the Diſ­pute it ſelf; an Account of which follows.

For the Presbyterians.

  * Mr. Samuel Chandler, of Fareham.
  * Mr. Leigh, of Newport in the Iſle of Wight.
  * Mr. Robinſon, of Hungerford, Moderator.

For the Baptiſts

  * Dr. William Ruſſel, of London.
  * Mr. John Williams, of Eaſt-Knoyl in Wiltſhire.
  * Mr. John Sharpe, of Froome, in Somerſetſhire, Moderator.

### 1.1. An Account of the Diſputation held at Portſ­mouth, February the 22d.
1698/9.

THE Diſputants going to the Place of Meeting, between the Hours of Nine and
Ten in the Morning, having took their Places, Dr. Ruſſel ſpake to this Effect.

Gentlemen Foraſmuch as the Work we are going to en­gage in, is a Part of
Religious Exerciſe; It is my Opinion, we ought in the firſt place (as is uſual
upon ſuch Occaſions) to be ſeeking God by Prayer; that his Preſence may be
with us, and his Bleſſing upon our Endeavours.

The Motion being accepted, Mr. Chandler began the Meet­ing with a ſhort
Prayer, which being ended, the Queſtions and Preliminaries agreed upon, were
read, which are as followeth;

Whereas by Mr. Chandler's late Preaching on the Ordinance of Baptiſm, ſeveral
Perſons have taken offence; and upon deſire of Satisfaction, it's mutually
Agreed between us, whoſe Names are [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=11) under-written;
That theſe Two Points be Amicably Diſputed in the following Order, with
Relation to Manner, Time, and Place; as hereafter expreſs'd, viz.

Que. 1\. Whether according to the Commiſſion of our Lord and Saviour Jeſus
Chriſt, Adult Believers are only the pro­per Subjects of Baptiſm: and not
Infants?

Que. 2\. Whether the Ordinance of Baptiſm as appointed by Chriſt, is to be
Adminiſtred by Dipping, Plunging (or) Overwhelming only, and not otherways?

Agreed, the Diſputation be held at Portſmouth in Mr. William's Meeting Place,
on Friday the 10 of February next enſuing (if God permit) beginning at Nine in
the Morning. And if in caſe the Providence of God ſhould ſo Order, That either
Party ſhould fall ſick, or any other unavoidable Circumſtance happen; that
then the Time ſhall be deferr'd to another Day, to be agreed on by the Parties
concern'd, not exceeding a Fortnight after; provided a Week's Notice be given
thereof before the 10th of February. Alſo Agreed, The Parties Diſputants be
Mr. Samuel Chandler of Farebam, and Dr. William Ruſſel of London; or any other
Perſons in either of their Steads, ſuppoſing them Ordained Mini­ſters; and
each Diſputant to chooſe a Moderator.

The Diſputation to be Managed Regularly, with ſtrict Regard to the two above
recited Subjects: And if the Moderators ſhall ſce fit, during any interval of
the Diſputants for Refreſhment, that two other Perſons go on with the Diſpute,
until they reaſſume it.

Portſmouth, Decem­ber, 23d. 1698.

  * Samuel Chandler.
  * Francis Williams.

Here follows Mr. Chandler's Apology to the People.

My Friends, It is not out of Vanity or Pride, I appear in this Place upon this
Occaſion at this Time: Moſt of you know, and I ſuppoſe many of you have heard,
that in the Courſe of my Lecture in this Place, I have Diſcourſed of the great
Principles of Religion; and having explained the Creed, and the Lord's Prayer,
I came to give an Account of the Two Sacrament, of the New Teſtament; and
therein was una­voidably concerned to ſpeak to thoſe Truths that are
contra­dicted by theſe Gentlemen here preſent.

Thoſe that heard me, know that I was very Modeſt in ex­preſſing my ſelf in
this Controverſie: But a bold and confi­dent Challenge was given me, which I
knew not how to re­fuſe; unleſs I would betray the Truths I believe in my
Con­ſcience, or confeſs my ſelf not able to vindicate them. And accordingly
theſe Men have ſent for ſome Aſſiſtance to op­poſe us in this Matter.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=11) I deſire
theſe things may be handled with a great deal of Calm­neſs; that we may
diſcourſe of things as becomes Chriſtians. And as we have the Favour of the
Government both Civil and Military, ſo we may give them no occaſion to repent
of allowing us this Liberty.

And alſo I deſire that nothing may be done unbecoming this place, where we
uſually meet together for the more im­mediate Worſhip of God. And I would have
you join with me in this Petition; That God would grant his Truth may takē
place.

He then repeated the Queſtions to be Diſputed, and ſaid, Theſe are the Two
Articles we are to Diſpute of at this Time. We Deny, and they Affirm.

Then Dr. Ruſſel ſaid, Gentlemen, you know I was not pre­ſent at the drawing up
of the preliminaries, and therefore I think it may be neceſſary, before we
enter upon the Diſputa­tion, to know wherein we agree about the firſt
Queſtion, and wherein we differ; that we may not diſcourſe about thoſe Things
wherein we are Agreed.

I do ſuppoſe, by the ſtating of the Queſtion, That you do own that Adult
Believers are the proper Subjects of Baptiſm. And if you do, I would deſire
you to declare your ſelves herein.

Mr. Chandler ſaid, He did own that Adult Believers were the proper Subjects of
Baptiſm, but not the only proper: Infants were to be baptized alſo.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then you own our Practice to be right.

Mr. Chandler.

Yes, if they have not been Baptized in their Infancy; then they are to be
Baptized upon Profeſſion of their Faith, when they come to Years.

Dr. Ruſſel.

You ſuppoſe they are to be Baptized by Virtue of ſome Commiſſion; and that it
is by the Commiſſion of our Lord and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt.

Mr. Chandler.

Yes, I do ſo.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I ſuppoſe you expect I ſhould be Opponent firſt.

Mr. Chandler.

Yes, that was Agreed.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If therefore I prove that Infants are not the proper Subjects of Baptiſm, you
will allow that I perform what I have undertaken, we having no other Subjects
in the Queſtion but Adult Believers, and Infants.

Mr. Chandler.

Yes, we do allow it.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then I will undertake to prove, that Infants are ſo far from being the proper
Subjects of Baptiſm, that they are not the Subjects of it at all.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=12) And now I
would know how we ſhall Diſpute; whether by Reading the Commiſſion, and making
an Inference there­from, and proving that (if we are not agreed about it) from
ſome other Text; or what way we ſhall proceed in.

Mr. Chandler.

You muſt do it Syllogiſtically; and there­fore form your Argument.

Dr. Ruſſel.

My Argument is this.

Arg. 1\. If Chriſt hath no where required any of his Mini­ſters to Baptize
Infants, then the Baptiſm of Infants is not according to the Commiſſion of our
Lord and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt.

But Chriſt hath no where required any of his Miniſters to Baptize Infants;

Ergo, The Baptiſm of Infants is not according to the Com­miſſion of our Lord
and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt.

Mr. Chandler.

I diſtinguiſh here upon your Antecedent. If you mean that Chriſt hath not
expreſly commanded In­fants to be Baptized; then I deny the Conſequence of
your Major. For Chriſt hath no where expreſly commanded In­fants to be
Baptized.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If you will inſiſt upon that, I can eaſily prove it. For ſome Perſons are
expreſly commanded to be Bapti­zed in the Commiſſion: Infants (by your own
Confeſſion) are not expreſly commanded to be Baptized either in the
Commiſſion, or elſewhere: But I have neither the Word Commanded, nor expreſly
Commanded in my Argument; and you muſt Anſwer to my Argument.

For I agree with you, that Infants are no where expreſly commanded to be
Baptized.

Mr. Chandler.

There is no need of that; but thoſe of your Way will not allow us to prove it
by conſequence.

Dr. Ruſſel

I ſay, that it's no where required: If you prove it any way required, it ſhall
ſuffice.

Mr. Chandler.

If you will allow good Conſequences drawn from Scripture. I will deny your
Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then you muſt ſuppoſe that Chriſt hath requi­red ſome of his Miniſters to
Baptize Infants.

Mr. Leigh.

We diſtinguiſh between conſequential Truths, and expreſs Words.

Dr. Ruſſel.

So do we: But I hope our Lord's Commiſſion about Holy Baptiſm, is delivered in
expreſs Words, and not conſequential. The Term in my Argument is very lax, I
do not there ſay Commanded, but required; and if you prove the Baptiſm of
Infants any where required by Chriſt, it is ſufficient.

Mr. Chandler.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=12)

Will you allow genuine Conſequences drawn from Scripture?

Mr. Leigh.

Will you allow good Scripture Conſequences in this Caſe, or do you expect
plain Scripture Words?

Dr. Ruſſel.

What need is there of ſo many Words about this? Certainly Mr. Chandler is
bound to fix upon ſome Anſwer to my Argument. I ſay again, the Term I uſe
admits of any Proof; he is not thereby obliged to produce any expreſs Command,
if he can do without it; if he prove that Chriſt hath any way required it, it
will ſuffice.

Mr. Leigh.

Gentlemen, you that are Notaries, pray obſerve how ambiguouſly he expreſſes
himſelf.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I think I expreſs my ſelf plainly enough, when I tell you, that if you prove
it any ways requir'd, I will allow it.

Mr. Robinſon, their Moderator, ſaith, Will you allow this of Conſequence, or
not?

Dr. Ruſſel.

Let us not thus ſtumble at the Threſhold, how often muſt I tell you, that if
you can prove it any way re­quired by Chriſt; prove it either by Conſequence,
or which way you will, if you do but prove it, I will allow it. But you muſt
remember that you are to prove it according to Chriſt's Commiſſion, (for thoſe
are the Terms in the Queſton.) and I believe you will find a difficult Task to
do that by Conſequence.

For ſuppoſe an Embaſſador ſhould declare to the Prince to whom he is ſent,
That his Maſter hath given him Authority, by his Commiſſion, to negotiate with
him about ſuch a parti­cular matter that he ſhall name, and that he is charged
to do this in his Maſter's Name and Stead. If when his Credentials are
produced there is no ſuch thing mentioned therein, he cannot expect the Prince
ſhould give credit to him therein, when he had told him before, it was a Part
of his Maſter's Commiſſion (which is our Caſe:) And his alledging only
conſequential Proofs after that, will not ſerve his turn. But if you think you
can do it by Conſequences, you may try your Skill, with all my heart, ſo you
do but prove it requi­red according to Chriſt's Commiſſion; which is the thing
in Queſtion between us.

Mr. Chandler.

What, from the Commiſſion?

Mr. Robinſon the Moderator cries out to Mr. Chandler, Hold! Dr. Ruſſel muſt
prove it by an univerſal Negative.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then Mr. Chandler muſt deny ſome part of my Argument, which I have not yet
been able to prevail with him to do.

Mr. Chandler.

I deny the Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=13)

By denying the Minor, you ſay that Chriſt hath ſome where required ſome of his
Miniſters to baptize In­fants.

Mr. Chandler.

By good Conſequence.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then I will make good my Minor thus: If Chriſt hath any where required any of
his Miniſters to baptize In­fants, it's ſomewhere ſo recorded in the Holy
Scriptures:

But it's no where ſo recorded in the Holy Scriptures:

Ergo, Chriſt hath not any where required any of his Mini­ſters to baptize
Infants.

Mr. Chandler.

What do you mean by being recorded?

Dr. Ruſſel.

I hope you know what the word Recorded ſig­nifies. I mean any where ſo
written.

Mr. Chandler.

To this I anſwer, by diſtinguiſhing again. If you mean by being Recorded in
Scripture, being Recorded in expreſs Words, I deny your Major; but if you mean
by Conſequence, I deny the Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If you do but prove it recorded, it is ſufficient.

Mr. Chandler.

I deny your Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then you ſay it's ſomewhere ſo Recorded in Holy Scripture. I therefore argue
thus,

If it be any where ſo recorded in Holy Scripture, Mr. Chandler, or ſome other
Perſon is able to ſhew it.

But neither Mr. Chandler, not any other Perſon whatſoever, is able to ſhew it.

Ergo, It is not any where ſo recorded in Holy Scripture.

Mr. Chandler.

I deny your Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Hold Sir, it is an univerſal Negative. You muſt give your Inſtance where it is
ſo written. I appeal to your Moderator.

Mr. Robinſon.

You muſt prove it ſtill. Suppoſe Mr. Chand­ler cannot give an Inſtance, nor no
body in the Company; you cannot thence infer that none in the World can.

Dr. Ruſſel.

This is in Effect to give away your Cauſe, when there are ſo many Men of Parts
and Learning preſent; if none of them are able to give us one Inſtance from
Scripture for Infant-baptiſm, we cannot expect that any body elſe ſhould.

Beſides, I would deſire thoſe Honourable Perſons and others in this Aſſembly
that underſtand theſe things, to conſider that I am not fairly dealt with, and
that I am under a great Diſad­vantage, not having other learned Perſons to
aſſiſt me as Mr. Chandler hath, and yet am forced to anſwer two or three at a
time. But to proceed, I do affirm, that it being an univerſal Negative, he
ought to give his Inſtance, and I demand it of him; and till he doth, my
Argument ſtands good.

Mr. Chandler.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=13)

This is only a Trick to turn off the Oppo­nency.

Dr. Ruſſel.

What do you talk of a Trick? I hope you are able to give one ſingle Inſtance
of what is your daily Practice.

Mr. Leigh.

You do this to turn the Opponency upon Mr. Chandler.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If Mr. Chandler will ſay he can give no Inſtance I will urge it no further.

Here Mr. Chandler was going to ſpeak and Mr. Leigh hindered him.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Sir, why do you hinder Mr. Chandler from ſpea­king?

Mr. Chandler.

Becauſe you would turn the Opponency upon me.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I intend no ſuch thing. When you have brought your Inſtance, after I have
ſpoken to it, I will then go on with the Opponency.

Mr. Leigh.

You can bring no Argument can throw the Op­ponency upon him like this.

Mr. Robinſon.

You muſt know that according to all the Rules of Logick you are to prove your
Propoſition. For you uni­verſally affirm it, though in Form it runs
negatively. You ſay no Perſon can give an Inſtance in Scripture whereby we
bap­tize Infants: How do you prove this?

Dr. Ruſſel.

I never yet knew that an univerſal Negative was an univerſal Affirmative. This
is to ſay any thing. tho' never ſo contrary to Truth. I wonder at it that you
ſhould take the matter upon you thus by Turns; eſpecially that you ſhould take
upon you to be a Diſputant, whoſe Work is only to be a Me­derator. Is this
civil Treatment to a Stranger that comes ſo many Miles to meet you?

Mr. Robinſon.

I muſt not ſuffer the Queſtion to be alter'd. Mr. Chandler is Reſpondent; you
put the part of an Opponent upon him, I muſt not allow it: Do you prove your
Que­ſtion.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Mr. Chandler (I underſtand) hath ſignified to the People in his preaching,
that there are plain Scriptures to be brought for the proof of Infant Baptiſm,
and now is the time for him to produce them: I urge it upon him to aſſign but
one Inſtance, and you will not ſuffer him ſo to do.

Mr. Leigh.

'Tis not Mr. Chandler's Sermon; it is the Queſtion before us that you muſt
regulate.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If you ſay you have no Scripture proof for Infants Baptiſm, I have done. But
why muſt you prevent Mr. Chand­ler?

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=14)
[...][[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=14) [...]

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=15) I hope
here are ſome Honourable Perſons and others that underſtand Nature of this
Controverſie, and they may rea­ſonably expect that thoſe who have made ſuch a
Noiſe about it, can give ſome tolerable Inſtance for it; and if they will do
that, we will proceed to examine it.

Mr Robinſon

There are many here know how that Mr. Chandler hath aſſerted and proved that
Infants are the Subjects of Bap­tiſm; but you are not to call on him for that
now. You did (by your Friends) undertake to prove the contrary, and it reſts
upon you ſo to do.

Dr Ruſſel.

I have already proved the contrary, and my Ar­gument will ſtand good till you
give your Inſtance.

Mr. Robinſon.

If you will change Sides, Mr. Chandler, you may admit this Trick.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Can you (at other times) boaſt of ſo many plain Scriptures for your Practice,
and now you are brought to the Teſt about it, you are not able to produce one;
what will the People think of you?

Mr. Leigh.

I will undertake in any Diſpute Philoſophical or Divine, in this manner
immediately to turn the Opponency upon the Reſpondent. When I cannot prove the
Aſſertion, I will preſently ſay, If you can bring any ſolid Proof for your
Practice it is true, if not, falſe. And I appeal to the Modera­tor, whether it
be not his Buſineſs to keep the Diſputants to the Rules of Diſpute.

Mr. Robinſon.

The Moderator is to regulate them if they tranſgreſs Bounds; but you have
grosſly tranſgreſſed: I appeal to any that underſtand Logick, whether this be
ſufferable for him thus to turn the Opponency upon Mr. Chandler.

Then Dr. Smith ſtood up and ſaid, If I muſt ſpeak, then by your Leave,
according to what I always underſtood, He that aſſerts muſt prove.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then they having aſſerted that Infants are the Subjects of Baptiſm, they are
to prove their Practice, eſpecially when they are forc'd upon it by an
Univerſal Negative. We deſire but one ſingle Inſtance, and they will not
aſſign it.

Mr. Robinſon.

No; you are to prove your Argument.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I have done that already, and therefore if Mr. Chandler will confeſs he hath
no Inſtance to give, I will pro­ceed to a new Argument.

This Mr. Chandler refuſed to do, and yet would not give his Inſtance.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If Mr. Chandler can give no Inſtance, here are divers other Miniſters,
Gentlemen of Parts and Learning: Have [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=15) none of them an
Inſtance to produce? If you thus refuſe to produce it, the People will think
you have none to give.

Notwithſtanding this, none of them could be prevailed up­on to do it, although
they were called upon, and challenged to give any one Inſtance (where it was
ſo written) if they could.

Whereupon Dr. Ruſſel ſpake to this effect, Gentlemen, It may be you think I
have but one Argument; if you will ſay no more to this, I am not willing to
tire out the Auditory; I will therefore proceed to a New Argument.

But take notice (by the way) that my firſt Argument ſtands good, till you give
your Inſtance to the contrary.

Arg. 2\. If Infants are not capable to be made Diſciples of Chriſt by the
Miniſtry of Men, then they cannot poſſibly be the Subjects of Baptiſm intended
in Chriſt's Commiſſion.

But Infants are not capable to be made Diſciples of Chriſt by the Miniſtry of
Men.

Ergo, They cannot poſſibly be the Subjects of Baptiſm in­tended in Chriſt's
Commiſſion.

Mr. Chandler repeats the Argument and then ſaith, Here if you mean by being
made Diſciples, Actual and Compleat Diſciples, I deny your Major: But if you
mean ſuch as are entered into a School and given up to Inſtruction, then I
deny your Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel Repeats his Major, and deſires Mr. Chandler to tell him what he
denies in it. For (ſaith he) my Words are plain, to be made Diſciples by the
Miniſtry of Men.

Mr. Robinſon.

Mr. Chandler diſtinguiſhes between Compleat and Incompleat Diſciples.

Dr. Ruſſel.

But what then doth he mean by denying my Major?

Mr. Robinſon.

He denies, that they that cannot be made Compleat Diſciples, are not intended
in the Commiſſion.

I hope the Reader will obſerve how often Mr. Chandler was at a loſs, and Mr.
Leigh and Mr. Robinſon were forced to help him out with their Diſtinctions and
equivocable Expreſſions.

Here Dr Ruſſel (ſeeing they would not be brought to give any direct Anſwer)
turns his Hypothetical into a Categorical Syllogiſm.

Whoſoever are uncapable to be made Diſciples by the Mi­niſtry of Men, they
cannot be the Subjects of Baptiſm intended in Chriſt's Commiſſion:

But Infants are uncapable to be made Diſciples by the Mini­ſtry of Men:

Ergo, They cannot be the Subjects of Baptiſm intended in Chriſt's Commiſſion.

Now let Mr. Chandler tell me what he means by being made Compleat, or
Incompleat Diſciples by the Miniſtry of Men (according to my Argument) if he
can.

Mr. Chandler.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=16)

I mean by Compleat Diſciples, ſuch as are actually capable of Learning: By
Incompleat, ſuch as are en­tered in ſuch Places in order to be taught. We ſend
Children to School before they know a Letter.

Dr. Ruſſel

My Argument ſpeaks not of ſuch; but of thoſe who have underſtanding, and are
capable to be made Actual Diſciples; which Infants are not.

Mr. Chandler.

That ſuch as are ſo capable, are the only Subjects of Baptiſm; you are to
prove it.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then you deny the Major.

Mr. Chandler.

Yes, as to your Hypothetical Argument.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If you had done this before, you had ſaved your ſelf and me much trouble. Then
I prove it thus.

If our Lord in that Commiſſion given for Holy Baptiſm, hath commanded his
Apoſtles, that were Men, to make Diſciples by their Miniſtry, and after that,
to Baptize them, then the Con­ſequence of the Major is true.

But our Lord in that Commiſſion given for Holy Baptiſm hath commanded his
Apoſtles, that were Men, to make Diſci­ples by their Miniſtry, and after that
to Baptize them.

Ergo, The Conſequence of the Major is true.

Mr. Leigh.

I diſtinguiſh thus. They may be entered into the Church in Order for Learning,
and ſo they are Diſciples be­fore Baptiſm: Yet in a more viſible Senſe, they
are made Diſciples by Baptiſm.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then you ſuppoſe Infants not capable to be made Diſciples by the Miniſtry of
Men.

Mr. Chandler.

Not ſolemnly inveſted.

Dr. Ruſſel.

We are not talking of that; the Queſtion betwixt us is, Whether they are
capable to be made Diſciples by the Miniſtry of Men. Will you aſſert that?

Mr. Leigh.

We aſſert they are Diſciples, as Children of Be­lievers, before Baptiſm.

Dr. Ruſſel.

This is nothing to the purpoſe, but to ſpin out Time. Mr. Chandler or Mr.
Leigh ſhould have anſwered to my Argument, which neither of them have done.
For if Infants are Diſciples ſimply, as being Children of Believing Parents,
before Baptiſm (as Mr. Leigh ſaith) then it is done, without any Miniſtetial
Inſtruction. And therefore is ſo far from being an Anſwer to my Argument, that
it is a meer Evaſion.

I therefore Argue thus upon them.

If Infants are not the Subjects of Teaching, according to Chriſt's Commiſſion,
then they are not the Subjects of Baptiſm by that Commiſſion.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=16) But
Infants are not the Subjects of Teaching, according to Chriſt's Commiſſion.

Ergo, They are not the Subjects of Baptiſm by that Com­miſſion.

For what our Lord hath joined together, no Man ought to ſeparate.

But our Lord hath joined Teaching and Baptizing together.

Therefore no man ought to ſeparate.

And it is further manifeſt, That our Lord did not command his Father to make
Diſciples by ſome ſecret Work of his; but he commanded his Apoſtles (that were
Men) to make Diſciples by their Miniſtry; and that is the Point you are to
Anſwer to.

Mr. Robinſon.

He denies they are uncapable to be made Diſci­ples by the Miniſtry of Men.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then by the way take notice, that he grants my Major to be true; that unleſs
they are capable to be taught by the Miniſtry of Men, they cannot be the
Subjects of Baptiſm. I ſhall therefore proceed to the proof of my Minor.

If Infants have no knowledge to diſcern between Good and Evil, then they are
not capable to be made Diſciples by the Miniſtry of Men.

But Infants have no Knowledge to diſcern between Good and Evil

Ergo, They are not capable to be made Diſciples by the Mi­niſtry of Men.

Mr. Chandler.

You Trick all this while. I told you by In­fants being Diſciples, I meant
their being ſolemnly Inveſted by Baptiſm.

Dr. Ruſſel.

You ſtill miſtake, we are not ſpeaking of their Inveſtiture, but of the
Prerequiſites of Baptiſm: And it is evi­dent from what I have ſaid, that thoſe
that are truly Baptized according to Chriſt's Commiſſion (which is the thing
we are upon) muſt firſt be made Diſciples by the Miniſtry of Men. For the
Commiſſion in Mark 16\. 15, 16. is a Command to his Apoſtles to go into all
the World, and Preach the Goſpel to every Creature, and that ſuch of them that
were made Diſci­ples by their Preaching, they ſhould Baptize. And in Matth.
28\. 19. They are commanded to Diſciple all Nations, and to Baptize ſuch of
them whom they had made Diſciples by Teach­ing.

Now when I have ſhewed you, how that Infants not being capable thus to be made
Diſciples, they cannot be the Subjects of Baptiſm intended in that Commiſſion;
then you grant the Conſequence of the Major; and by denying my Minor, you ſay
they are capable.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=17) And when
I have brought another Argument to prove my Minor, you then evade it by an
indirect Anſwer.

Sir, you are bound to give a direct Anſwer to my Argument.

Mr. Chandler.

I deny the Conſequence of your Major.

Dr. Ruſſel.

By ſo doing, you ſay, though they have no Know­ledge to diſcern between Good
and Evil, yet they are capable to be made Diſciples by the Miniſtry of Men.
How can this poſſibly be true?

Mr. Leigh.

You will not allow of Compleat and Incompleat Diſciples.

Dr. Ruſſel.

What is this to my Argument? Pray let Mr. Chand­ler ſix on ſomething.

Mr. Chandler

I ſay if you mean Incompleat Diſciples, I de­ny that they are uncapable to be
ſuch.

Dr. Ruſſel.

How often muſt we have this diſtinction repeated to keep us from the Point in
hand. We are now upon this, Whether Infants have Knowledge to diſcern between
Good and Evil; which is the medium I bring to prove the other by: Why do you
not anſwer to that?

Mr. Chandler.

They have no Knowledge, yet are capable of be­ing Incompleat Diſciples.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If by Compleat, you mean perfectly ſo, I know not of any ſuch Chriſtian in the
World. But I hope this doth not hinder, but there may be Real and Actual
Diſciples of Chriſt, made ſo by the Miniſtry of Men, and fitted for Holy
Baptiſm. But I proceed to the proof of my Minor.

If the Goſpel in the Miniſtration of it, was appointed to in­form Men what is
Good, and what is evil, and Infants have no Knowledge to diſcern betwixt Good
and Evil (as Mr. Chand­ler hath been forced to confeſs) then they are not
capable to be made Diſciples by the Miniſtry of Men:

But the Goſpel in the Miniſtration of it was appointed to in­form Men what is
Good, and what is Evil, and Infant have no Knowledge to diſcern betwixt Good
and Evil, as Mr. Chandler hath been forc'd to confeſs:

Therefore they are not capable to be made Diſciples by the Miniſtry of Men.

Mr. Robinſon.

When Mr. Chandler hath diſtinguiſhed, you moſt put it into a Syllogiſm, elſe
you will ſtill confound it.

Dr. Ruſſel Anſwers, Have I not put it into an Argument, and you will not
ſuffer him to anſwer it? If you think he hath not ſufficiently done that
already, let him do it again, and tell to what he means by it, if he can.

Mr. Chandler.

I mean one deſigned and given to Learning, ſolemnly engaged to it, dedicated
to the Work, as a Child [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=17) entered into a
School before he underſtands one Letter; this is Incompleat; Compleat is to be
made ſo by Learning.

Here Dr. Ruſſel would have ſpoke, but was not permitted, but broke in upon.

Mr. Leigh.

I appeal to any, whether a Child ſent to School to a Maſter, or Miſtreſs;
given up by the Parents, and accepted by them; whether the Notion of a Scholar
be not grounded on ſuch a Relation?

Dr. Ruſſel.

I ſpeak of Actual Diſciples, made ſo by Teaching; are theſe ſuch, who (by your
own Confeſſion) know not one Letter of the Book? Theſe are Incompleat Scholars
indeed Mr. Leigh. I believe there is a School-Maſter here; let him ſpeak
whether ſuch be not immediately Scholars.

Upon this, Mr. Ridge the School Maſter ſtood up and ſaid, Upon the Parents
Dedication, and the Maſters Acceptation, and the payment of Entrance-Money, we
do look upon him as a Scholar. Whereupon there followed a general Laughter.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I appeal to this Aſſembly, whether my Argu­ment did not expreſs ſuch that were
made Diſciples by the Mi­niſtry of Men. What therefore is the Reaſon of your
making ſuch a noiſe and ſtir about ſuch being accounted Scholars ſo ſoon as
they enter the School, before they know one Letter of the Book. Are theſe made
Scholars by Teaching, when they have never learned, nor cannot learn; becauſe
they have no Knowledges to diſcern between Good and Evil: And yet this is the
Caſe of thoſe little Infants you pretend to Baptize.

Mr. Chandler.

We allow they are not capable of Knowledge to diſcern between Good and Evil,
nor of being made Com­pleat Diſciples.

Dr Ruſſel.

Then the Conſequence neceſſarily follows, that In­fants are not at all
intended in the Commiſſion of our Saviour, Matth. 28\. 19.

Mr. Robinſon.

Put it into a Syllogiſm.

Dr. Ruſſel.

There is no need of that, for Mr. Chandler hath granted every part of my
Argument.

For 1. He hath granted that Infants have no Knowledge to diſcern between Good
and Evil.

2dly. That (according to my Argument) Infants are not capable to be made
Diſciples by the Miniſtry of Men. And then it muſt unavoidably follow, they
are not intended in Chriſt's Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh.

How Sirs! Did we ſay Incompleat Diſciples are not in the Commiſſion?

Dr. Ruſſel.

That hath been ſufficiently ſpoke to already; I ſhall therefore proceed to a
new Argument.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=18) Arg. 3\.
If the Apoſtle Paul did declare all the Counſel of God, and kept back nothing
that was profitable for the Church of God, and yet did never declare the
Baptiſm of Infants to be a Goſpel Inſtitution according to Chriſt's
Commiſſion; then it is no Goſpel Inſtitution, nor any part of the Counſel of
God, nor profitable for the Church of God.

But the Apoſtle Paul did declare all the Counſel of God, and kept back nothing
that was profitable for the Church of God, and yet did never declare the
Baptiſm of Infants to be a Goſpel-inſtitution according to Chriſt's
Commiſſion.

Ergo, It is no Goſpel-inſtitution, nor any Part of the Coun­ſel of God, nor
profitable for the Church of God.

Mr. Chandler.

Your Argument is long.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Not ſo long, nor ſo hard to be underſtood.

Mr. Robinſon.

Such long Arguments are never admitted in any Diſputation.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Let Mr. Chandler ſpeak to the Argument.

Upon this, Mr. Chandler finding himſelf unable to anſwer it, notwithſtanding
he had two or three Prompters to inſtruct him, he quitted the Place of a
Diſputant, and Mr. Leigh deſir'd to take it up, which was admitted him, upon
Condition he would ſpeak to that Argument, which he promiſed to do.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny that the Apoſtle Paul did never declare Infant Baptiſm to be a Goſpel-
Inſtitution.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then you deny my Minor, which I thus prove.

If the Apoſtle Paul hath ſo declared it, it is ſomewhere to be found in the
Writings of the New Teſtament.

But it is not any where to be found in thoſe Writings.

Ergo, the Apoſtle Paul did never ſo declare it.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny the ſequel of your Major; for the Words were ſpoken to the Church at
Epheſus; and what do you talk of Paul's Epiſtles, he wrote but one that I know
of to the Church at Epheſus.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Part of the Words in my Argument were ſpoken to the Elders of the Church of
Epheſus; but I have neither E­pheſus, nor Church of Epheſus, nor Paul's
Epiſtles in my Argu­ment. Why do you not anſwer to the Argument.

Mr. Leigh.

We have not the whole of the Apoſtle Paul's Writings in the New Teſtament; and
this that he wrote to the Church of Epheſus is but a ſmall part thereof.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Pray ſpeak to the Argument: You ſee I have no ſuch Expreſſions in it as are
taken up by you.

Mr. Leigh.

I will do it by a Simile.

You know that Paul wrote divers Epiſtles, and in them of different Subjects.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=18) It is as
if a Man ſhould write a Book of ſeveral things, and when he hath finiſhed it,
one comes and cuts off ſix Leaves thereof; and after this, there is a Queſtion
ariſes, whether ſuch a Man hath writ any thing about ſuch a particular
Subject. Now it doth not follow, that becauſe it is not contain'd in the reſt
of his Book, that therefore it is not in the ſix Leaves that were cut off.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If Mr. Leigh ſpeaks ad Rem, as I ſuppoſe he thinks he doth, then I thus infer
upon him. Firſt, That he doth by this allow, that there is no Mention made of
Infant-Baptiſm in any of thoſe Writings of the Apoſtle Paul's, that we have
bound up with the reſt of the Holy Scriptures. Secondly, He ſuppoſes there may
be ſomething ſaid of it in thoſe ſix Leaves that were cut off after he had
finiſhed his Epiſtles.

Now the Aſſembly of Divines tell us, that the Scriptures of the Old and New
Teſtament are the only Rule to direct us in Matters of Worſhip. But whether
Mr. Leigh be of their Mind I cannot tell.

Mr. Leigh.

Yes, I am.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then what you mean by it I know not, but I believe they meant what we have in
the Bible, and not what is contained in thoſe ſix Leaves that were cut off, or
elſe they deſigned to put a Cheat upon the whole World, which I do not
ſuppoſe.

But as touching thoſe ſix Leaves, I conclude our Brethren have them not in
their Cuſtody, becauſe I never heard them ſpeak any thing in the leaſt
concerning it.

For my own part, I can ſpeak for my ſelf; I never ſaw them, nor heard of them
till now; neither do I know any thing of the Matter. But if Mr. Leigh or his
Brethren have them in their Cuſtody, I deſire they would produce them. And
when they have ſo done, if they will pleaſe to favour us ſo far as firſt to
prove that thoſe were the very ſix Leaves that were written by Paul, we will
take the Pains to examine them: And if it then appears that there is any ſuch
thing contained in them as Mr. Leigh ſpeaks of, we will allow it.

Mr. Leigh was angry hereupon, ſaying, What do you talk of our being the
keepers of them? and what do you talk of all the New Teſtament? is all the New
Teſtament the Apoſtle Paul's writings?

Dr. Ruſſel.

I ſay I do not confine you to Paul's Epiſtles, much leſs pretend all the new
Teſtament to be of the Apoſtle Paul's Writing, as you would inſinuate to the
People; but my Words are, It's no where ſo declared in the Writings of the New
Teſtament. And do you produce one Inſtance that it is, if you can, for that
will put an Iſſue to our Controverſie.

Mr. Leigh.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=19)

You would refer what Paul ſaith to the Church of Epheſus, to the whole New
Teſtament.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I hope you will own the Holy Scriptures to be the only Rule to direct us in
Matters of Worſhip.

Here Mr. Leigh breaks in upon the Doctor, not permitting him to ſpeak what he
had to ſay: but inſtead thereof, he ſaith, I will not own that we have all the
Sermous that Paul preached to the Church at Epheſus, and if we had, he might
preach it to ſome others though he did not to them, for this was ſpoken to
them.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I refer you to the Scripture. You ſay that Paul might declare ſome ſuch thing,
and yet it may not be recorded in the Scripture. The Words are plain. I have
not ſhunned to declare to you all the Counſel of God, Acts 20. 27. And in Ver.
20. I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you. And I do not ſuppoſe
that Paul taught one Doctrine in one Church and another Doctrine in another.
For in 1 Cor. 4\. 17. He tells that Church, Timothy ſhall bring you into
remembrance of my ways in Chriſt as I teach every where in every Church.

Beſides, he doth not only tell them that he had ſo diſcharg'd his Office among
them as to be free from the Guilt of their Blood, but that he was alſo free
from the Blood of all Men, Ver. 21. Teſtifying to the Jews and alſo to the
Greeks, Repen­tance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jeſus Chriſt.

And I further add, That if Paul never taught Infant-Bap­tiſm in the Church of
Epheſus, nor in the Church of Corinth, nor in any other Place, I hope you will
then acknowledge it to be no Goſpel inſtitution, nor any Part of the Counſel
of God, nor yet profitable for the Church of God: And there is no Record in
Holy Scripture of his ſo doing.

Mr. Leigh.

I ſay Paul's Writings are not the hundredth Part of what Paul preached. We
cannot ſuppoſe that in thoſe ſix Chapters to the Epheſians he could contrive
to put down the whole of his Preaching to them.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Sir, you might have ſpared all thisLabour; for I am ſatisfied the People will
not trouble themſelves to ſeek for it any where elſe, but only in the Writings
of the New Teſtament; and if they will take my Word I can aſſure them 'tis not
there to be found. And I perceive you think ſo too, or elſe you need not
referr them to Paul's Sermons which are not written. I have heard, indeed, of
ſome unwritten Traditions that are lock'd up in the Pope's Ereaſt, to be
delivered out as he finds Occaſion for the ſerving of a Turn; but I never knew
that the Presbyterians were ever intruſted with any ſuch Treaſure.

Mr. Leigh.

You ſay it is not to be found in the Writings of the New Teſtament; I deny it.

Dr. Ruſſel.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=19)

Then you deny my Minor, which is the thing you ſhould have done before, only
you were afraid of being brought to give an Inſtance. Now by denying my Minor,
you ſay it's ſomewhere ſo recorded in the Writings of the New Teſtament, that
Paul did declare the Baptiſm of Infants to be a Goſpel-inſtitution, &c. And,
to prove it is not, I argue thus.

If it be ſo recorded in the Writings of the New Teſtament, then Mr. Leigh or
ſome body elſe is able to ſhew it.

But neither Mr. Leigh, nor any body elſe, is able to ſhew it.

Ergo, It is not ſo recorded in the Writings of the New Te­ſtament.

Sir, I have now brought it to an Univerſal Negative, as I did with Mr.
Chandler upon the former Argument; and now it reſts upon you to produce your
Inſtance.

Mr. Leigh.

I will ſay it is in the Commiſſion, All Nations.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Are you of Mr. Chandler's Opinion?

Mr. Leigh.

I will not anſwer you.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then I ſay it is not written in the Commiſſion that Paul did ever declare any
thing concerning the Baptiſm of Infants.

But what do you bring this for now? You might have done it upon the firſt
Argument, when we were upon the Commiſſion; but it's wholly improper now; for
this that we are now upon, is, Whether the Apoſtle Paul hath any where ſo
declared it.

Reader, Obſerve theſe Mens Trifling. Do they not know as well as we, that the
Commiſſion of our Lord for Holy Baptiſm was given long before Paul's
Converſion; and yet they have the Confidence to affirm before ſo great an
Audi­tory, That it is written in the Commiſſion, that Paul did de­clare the
Baptiſm of Infants to be a Goſpel-inſtitution, &c. which is the thing
expreſſed in my Argument.

Upon this, the Reverend Mr. Chandler, (who had quitted the Work before) began
now in a great Fury to break Silence again, ſaying, You are a perfect
Sophiſter, your Arguments are full of Fallacies.

Dr. Ruſſel.

It is an eaſie Matter for a Man to ſay ſo, that underſtands not an Argument
himſelf.

Mr. Leigh.

Then, pray Sir, begin again from Acts 20. 27.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Truly, Mr. Leigh, I did not come ſo many Miles to ſpend my Time thus, to go
backwards and forwards after this manner.

Mr. Chandler.

You muſt do ſo, if you underſtand the Rules of Tergiverſation.

[This was one of Mr. Chandler's Witticiſms]

Dr. Ruſſel.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=20)

If I do not underſtand thoſe Rules when I have occaſion for them, I will come
to you and learn.

But to return to Mr. Leigh, for I have not done with him yet: Sir, you have
aſſigned the Commiſſion to prove that Paul did declare Infant-Baptiſm to be a
Goſpel-Inſtitution, part of the Counſel of God, &c. Now it's impoſſible that
ſhould be written in the Commiſſion, as I have told you before: You muſt
therefore ſhew us where it is ſo Recorded in ſome other part of the New
Teſtament; and not aſſign a place where there can be no mention of it.

Mr. Leigh.

He ſays he gives us the Latitude of the whole New Teſtament, but will not
admit of the Commiſſion, becauſe that doth not ſay that Paul hath ſo declared.

Dr. Ruſſel.

And there is very good reaſon for it, for the Apo­ſtle Paul is now under
conſideration, as mention'd in my Ar­gument; who ſolemnly proteſteth, that in
the diſcharge of his Miniſtry, he had freed himſelf from the blood of all Men,
in delivering to them all that his Maſter had given him in Com­miſſion. That
he had not ſhunned to declare all the Counſel of God, he had kept back nothing
that was profitable for the Church of God; but as faithful Steward of the
Myſteries of God, he did diſpence the Word, as himſelf declares in 1 Cor. 4\.
1, 2. And I verily believe, that Paul was as Faithful, as Emi­nent, and as
Laborous a Servant as ever Chriſt had upon Earth. And therefore the force of
my Argument depends upon this, That if Paul never ſaid one word about Infant-
Baptiſm, then it can be no part of the Counſel of God, nor a Goſpel
In­ſtitution, nor ever given him in Commiſſion by his Lord and Maſter.

You have denied my Minor; I have proved it by bringing you to an Inſtance by
an Univerſal Negative. You have aſſigned the Commiſſion; I have ſhewed you the
impoſſibility of pro­ving it from thence. I have preſſed you to aſſign ſome
other part of the New Teſtament for an Inſtance. I have not as yet been able
no obtain it. Here are divers Men of Parts and Learning among you, can none of
you produce ſo much as one Inſtance to prove it? Surely the People muſt needs
con­clude you have none to give. I therefore challenge you to produce the
place where it is written, that Paul ever ſaid one word of Infant-Baptiſm. And
till that be done, my Argu­ment will ſtand good.

Mr. Leigh.

If Paul did not declare it, if we have other places apparent and plain, at
leaſt conſequential, it is ſufficient.

Dr. Ruſſel.

This is not an Anſwer to my Argument, you might have gone here upon the other,
but cannot upon this; why did you not aſſign ſome of thoſe places then?

Mr. Chandler.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=20)

We deny the Conſequence, Paul might ſpeak of it ſome where elſe, though it is
not found in his Epiſtles.

Mr. Robinſon.

You are to prove that, becauſe Paul did not ſhun to declare to the Church of
Epheſus the whole Counſel of God, therefore Baptizing of Infants muſt be found
there, or elſe it is no part of the Counſel of God.

Mr. Leigh.

However, we will ſuppoſe the thing (but not grant it) that Paul has not ſpoken
of Infant Baptiſm.

Mr. Williams.

If you ſuppoſe it, we will take it for granted; if we may not, ſay ſo.

Thus ended their Oppoſition to this Argument.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I will now proceed to another Argument.

Arg. 4\. Chriſt's Commiſſion doth ſhew who are to be Bap­tized.

But it doth not ſhew that Infants are to be Baptized:

Ergo, Infants are not the Subjects of Baptiſm according to Chriſt's
Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny the Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

By ſo doing, you ſuppoſe it doth ſhew it.

I therefore thus Argue

If the Commiſſion doth ſhew that Infants are to be Baptized, Mr. Leigh, or
ſome other Perſon can ſhew it us in the Com­miſſion.

But neither Mr. Leigh, nor any other Perſon is able to ſhew it us in the
Commiſſion.

Ergo, The Commiſſion doth not ſhew that Infants are to be Baptized.

Mr. Leigh.

It is included in the word, All Nations.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I beg your favour; Mr. Chandler aſſerted in his Sermon, That it was the
Infants of Believing Parents that were to be Baptized: And that it was
neceſſary Men ſhould Repent and Believe, otherwiſe they had no Right to this
Or­dinance. And if we were ſent (ſaith he) into an Heathen Na­tion, we ought
to ingage Men to Repent and Believe, before we Adminiſter this Ordinance to
them. Here are Qualifica­tions required in the Perſons to be Baptized (by your
own Con­feſſion) without which you muſt not Adminiſter it. And it is contrary
both to your own Principles and Practice, to Baptize Jews, Turks and Heathens,
and all their Infants, without previous Qualifications to fit them for it.

Mr. Leigh.

I ſay it is included in the Word, All Nations: Do you prove it is not.

Dr. Ruſſel.

You have brought an Inſtance, and it is your buſineſs to make good your own
Inſtance; otherwiſe my Ar­gument ſtands firm and untouch'd.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=21) But if I
ſhew there are ſome Qualifications required in the Commiſſion, and prove that
thoſe cannot be found in Infants; then Infants cannot be included in the Word,
All Nations.

I tell you he hath commanded us to Baptize ſome Perſons, but he hath not
commanded us to Baptize any Infants; which I thus prove.

If thoſe that Chriſt in his Commiſſion hath commanded to be Baptized, muſt
firſt be made Diſciples according to that Commiſſion; then Infants are not to
be Baptized by Virtue of that Commiſſion.

But thoſe that Chriſt in his Commiſſion hath commanded to be Baptized, muſt
firſt be made Diſciples according to that Commiſſion.

Ergo, Infants are not to be Baptized by Virtue of that Com­miſſion.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny your Conſequence. Repeat it again.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then I will make it Categorical.

All thoſe required to be Baptized by Chriſt's Commiſſion, are Diſciples:
Infants are not capable to be Diſciples, as I have already proved.

Ergo, Not required to be Baptized by Chriſt's Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny your whole Argument: That all that Chriſt requires to be Baptized, are
Diſciples, and that Infants are not capable.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If no other but Diſciples are expreſs'd in the Commiſſion, then the Major is
true.

And if Infants are uncapable to be made Diſciples, then the Minor is true
alſo.

Mr. Leigh.

We ſay they are implied; you allowed good Conſequences but now.

Dr. Ruſſel.

But here are Diſciples mentioned in the Commiſ­ſion; and none but ſuch that
are made ſo by the Miniſtry of Men.

Mr. Leigh.

You talk of the Commiſſion: It is the good Con­ſequences I inſiſt upon; and
ſay, Perſons are not to be Com­pleat Diſciples before they are Baptized; nor
actually Taught before they are Diſciples.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Perhaps you mean a man is not a Compleat Chri­ſtian, if he hath not attained
to the higheſt Perfection he is ca­pable of whilſt in this Life; although he
hath been a real Chri­ſtian for many Years. I ſpeak not of ſuch a Completion,
but of ſuch that are actual Diſciples of Chriſt, made ſo by the Miniſtry of
Men.

Mr. Leigh.

I ſay there is no neceſſity of being Diſciples in your Senſe, before they are
Baptized.

Dr. Ruſſel.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=21)

Then I will prove there is a neceſſity.

If our Lord in his Commiſſion did not require his Apoſtles to Baptize any, but
only ſuch as they had before made his Di­ſciples by Teaching; then there is a
neceſſity they ſhould be Actual Diſciples before they are Baptized.

But our Lord in his Commiſſion did not require his Apoſtles to Baptize any,
but only ſuch as they had before made his Di­ſciples by Teaching.

Ergo, There is a neceſſity they ſhould be Actual Diſciples be­fore they are
Baptized.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny the Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then I will read the Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh.

You need not do that, we all know the Com­miſſion very well.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I will read my Maſter's Commiſſion, Matth 28. 19. Go ye therefore and Diſciple
all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghoſt.

This Commiſſion is very ſolemnly delivered, wherein our Lord declares, that
all Power in Heaven and Earth was given to him. And by Virtue of that
Power—Here Mr. Robinſon ſtops the Doctor, and cries out, You are not to Preach
here, Sir.

Dr. Ruſſel.

May I not have leave to draw my Inference from the Text?

Mr. Leigh.

Form your Argument. The Text doth not diſco­ver it.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Is not our Lord's Commiſſion of as good Autho­rity as my Argument? When I have
ſpoken to that, I will then form an Argument from it, if you will be ſilent,
and ſuffer me ſo to do.

I ſay, that in this great Commiſſion, our Lord declares his great Power.

Mr. Leigh.

Form your Argument.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I hope the uſe of all our Syllogiſms is to bring us to the Commiſſion: And now
we are come to it, let us ſee whether theſe things are to be found therein, or
not. Will you pretend that Infants are in the Commiſſion, and muſt not the
People be ſuffered to ſee whether there be any thing men­tion'd about them, or
not.

Mr. Robinſon.

Is this your Argument? Bring your Argument. And then he bawls very loud,
ſaying, Mr. Williams, will you ſuffer him to Preach?

Mr. Williams anſwers, No, I will not ſuffer him to Preach here.

Dr. Ruſſel.

What do you talk of Preaching? Are ye afraid of the Commiſſion? I hope it is
not ſo bad with you, as it was [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=22) with ſome in
Times paſt, whom one of the Fathers (i. e. Ter­tallian) calls by the Name of
Lucifugae Scripturarum, &c. Flyers from the Light of the Scripture (as Bats do
from the light of the Sun:) What is the reaſon, Gentlemen, you will not
en­dure to hear the Commiſſion opened? Will you fly from the Light of the
Commiſſion of our Lord and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt? Is it not the Subject
contained in the Queſtion; And will you (or dare you) deny that what I have
ſaid is in the Commiſſion?

Mr. Leigh.

We ſay not ſo.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If you ſhould, you would directly oppoſe Mr. Calvin. For he ſaith, There is no
mention made of Infants in the Commiſſion, as it is expreſs'd either in Matth.
28\. or Mark 16\. And further ſaith we may as well apply thoſe words in 2
Theſſ. 3. 10. That if any would not work, neither ſhould he eat: To little
Infants, and ſo keep them from Food till they ſtarve, as to ap­ply what is
ſaid in the Commiſſion to them, whereas it belongs only to the Adult.

Mr. Robinſon.

This is not to the purpoſe, what have we to do with what Mr. Calvin ſays?

Dr. Ruſſel.

I did not know but you might have had a Vene­ration for Mr. Calvin; but ſeeing
it's otherwiſe, I will thus Ar­gue from the Commiſſion.

If there be an expreſs Command in our Lord's Commiſſion for the Baptizing of
ſome Perſons, and there be no expreſs Command neither there nor elſewhere, for
the Baptizing of Infants; then the Baptiſm of Infants is not contained in that
Commiſſion:

Mr. Robinſon.

We ſay though—

Dr. Ruſſel.

What again Mr. Robinſon? muſt I always be thus broke in upon by you; What is
the meaning of it? When you ſee you are like to be pinched upon an Argument,
then you make it your buſineſs to hinder me from ſpeaking: Doth this become a
Moderator?

I beg I may have Liberty to ſpeak out, and not be thus taken up in the midſt
of an Argument. Pray, Sir, remember what the Wiſe man ſaith of ſuch a one,
that anſwers a matter before he hears it.

I ſay, if there be an expreſs Command in our Lord's Com­miſſion for the
Baptizing of ſome Perſons, and there be no expreſs Command neither there nor
elſewhere for the Baptizing of Infants; then the Baptiſm of Infants is not
contained in that Commiſſion:

But there is an expreſs Command in our Lord's Commiſſion for: the Baptizing of
ſome Perſons, and there is no expreſs Command either there or elſewhere for
the Baptizing of Infants:

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=22) Ergo, The
Baptiſm of Infants is not contained in that Com­miſſion.

Mr. Leigh.

Inſtead of giving his Anſwer to the Argument, he ſhams it off after this
manner; ſaying, I appeal to the Peo­ple. Though he allowed Conſequences but
now, yet now he requires an expreſs Scripture. And yet I ſay, If Nations
in­clude Infants, they are expreſly mentioned.

Upon this, Mr. Robinſon turns Dictator, and ſays to Mr. Leigh, You were better
deny his Conſequence.

Dr. Ruſſel ſaith, Pray, Mr. Leigh, be pleaſed to change places with Mr.
Robinſon, let him be Diſputant, and you Moderator; for I perceive neither you,
nor I are able to pleaſe him. This was refuſed. Upon which Dr. Ruſſel ſaid to
Mr. Robinſon, Pray Sir, do not you thus Dictate to him, I have none to Dictate
to me: Pray let him anſwer my Argument.

Here Mr. Leigh did as Mr. Robinſon had taught him, and de­nied the
Conſequence; and alſo that an expreſs Command was ne­ceſſary to Authorize the
Baptizing of Infants.

Dr. Ruſſel.

My Argument was, If there be an expreſs Com­mand for the Baptizing of ſome
Perſons, you deny the Sequel of the Major; and in ſo doing you ſay, That
notwithſtanding there is no expreſs Command for the Baptizing of Infants,
neither there nor elſewhere in all the Holy Scripture; yet ne­vertheleſs they
are intended in the Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh.

I do ſo.

Dr. Ruſſel.

And I ſay, if there be an expreſs Command for the Baptizing of ſome Perſons;
but none at all for the Bap­tizing of Infants: Then they are not at all
intended in that Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny firſt the ſequel of the Major, and then I will deny your Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

This ſeems very ſtrange, that when I have made it appear ſo evidently from the
Commiſſion it ſelf, that there is an expreſs Command for the Baptizing of ſome
Perſons; and yet it ſhould not be allowed as a neceſſary Conſequence from the
Premiſes, that Infants are not intended; when your ſelves have confeſſed there
is no expreſs Command in all the Scriptures, for the Baptizing of Infants.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny the ſequel.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then I will prove that there is an expreſs Command for the Baptizing of ſome
Perſons, from the Commiſſion it ſelf.

Mr. Leigh.

That is not the ſequel of the Major, it is that I deny.

Dr. Ruſſel.

And I bring the Commiſſion to prove it. But you ſay, that notwithſtanding our
Lord hath expreſly commanded [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=23) ſome Perſons to
be Baptized; although he hath not commanded Infants to be Baptized, yet they
may be ſome of that Number. Hath Chriſt two ſorts of Subjects that he commands
to be Bap­tized in that Commiſſion? Or, rather, are ſome commanded, and others
not commanded, and yet both to be Baptized; the one by a Command, and the
other without?

Here Mr. Leigh refuſes to Anſwer, and cries out, Put it into a Syllogiſm.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If no Perſons are to be Baptized according to that Commiſſion, but what are
there expreſly commanded; and Infants are not ſo commanded; then the
Conſequence of the Major is true:

But no Perſons are to be Baptized, according to that Com­miſſion, but what are
there expreſly commanded; and Infants, are not ſo commanded:

Ergo, The Conſequence of the Major is true.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny your Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

By ſo doing you ſay there are ſome to be Baptized that are not there expreſly
commanded.

Mr. Leigh.

Do you not know your own Argument?

Dr. Ruſſel.

I repeat it not for my own Knowledge, but for the Peoples Information. And I
prove my Minor thus:

If the words of the Commiſſion are expreſs Command to the Apoſtles, to direct
them who they ſhould Baptize, then the Minor is true:

But the words of the Commiſſion are an expreſs Command to the Apoſtles, to
direct them who they ſhould Baptize:

Ergo The Minor is true.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny your Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If there be no other Commiſſion of our Lord for Holy Baptiſm, but what is
Recorded in Matth. 28\. and Mark 16\. then the Minor is true:

But there is no other: Ergo, The Minor is true.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny tae ſequel of your Major.

Dr. Ruſſel.

But we are now upon the Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh.

We are ſo: But we ſay good Conſequences de­rived from the Commiſſion, are
ſufficient.

Dr. Ruſſel.

So you may if you pleaſe; but I had rather walk exactly according to the
Commiſſion of our Lord, than by ſuch Conſequences wherein I may be deceived.

Mr. Robinſon.

I matter not what you had rather do, or what your Opinion is. I am for
Conſequences.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny the ſequel of the Major; That they are to Baptize none, but ſuch as
they are expreſly commanded.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Thenl thus Argue:

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=23) If there
be no manner of Allowance given them to baptize any other but what they are
expreſly commanded, then the Sequel of the Major is true:

But there is no manner of Allowance given them to baptize any other but what
they are expreſly commanded:

Ergo, the Sequel of the Major is true.

Mr. Leigh was pleaſed here to give a general Denial, without Diſtinguiſhing:
Upon which Dr. Ruſſel referr'd him to his for­mer Argument, wherein he had
already ſhewed, that there is an expreſs Command for the Baptizing of all
ſuch, that they are required to baptize by Virtue of Chriſt s Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny your Minor, but diſtinguiſh between the Command being expreſſed and the
Subjects intended.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If the Words in the Commiſſion about Holy Baptiſm be a Command from Chriſt to
his Apoſtles, then the Minor is true:

But the Words in the Commiſſion about Holy Baptiſm are a Command from Chriſt
to his Apoſtles:

Ergo, The Minor is true.

Mr. Leigh.

Upon Diſtinction, we deny that all the Subjects are expreſs'd.

Dr. Ruſſel.

My Argument ſaith, They have not Allowance to baptize any other. I am now
therefore to prove that the Commiſſion is Command to them, if you deny it.

Mr. Leigh.

I allow that the Command is expreſs'd: But I ſay the Subjects are to be
brought in by Conſequence.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then I will prove that the Subjects are expreſs'd.

If Chriſt did command his Apoſtles to baptize ſuch as be­lieve and are made
Diſciples, then the Subjects are expreſs'd:

But Chriſt did Command his Apoſtles to baptize ſuch as be­lieve and are made
Diſciples:

Ergo, The Subjects are expreſs'd.

Mr. Leigh.

I find a fault with your Syllogiſm; your Major ſhould be Univerſal.

Dr Ruſſel.

I was to prove there is a Command, with Reſpect to the Subjects; and therefore
I have form'd the Syllogiſm right. For it is evident that Believers and
Diſciples are the Subjects they are commanded to baptize.

Mr. Robinſon.

You muſt ſay all the Subjects.

Dr. Ruſſel.

By yo [...]r Favour, there is no need of that. For Mr. Leigh denies there is
an expreſs Command in Chriſt's Commiſſion for any Subjects.

Mr. Leigh.

I hope the People can teſtifie that I ſaid the Command is expreſs'd: But the
Subjects to be brought in Conſequentially.

Dr. Ruſſel.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=24)

Is not that the ſame which I ſay you ſaid? I know you allowed there was a
Command for the thing it ſelf, but not for the Subjects. And therefore I have
anſwered rightly, and your Oppoſition is unreaſonable.

Mr. Leigh.

We muſt all confeſs that Jeſus Chriſt gave Com­miſſion to baptize Believers
when at the age of Maturity. Such as were before Jews and Greeks, and Newly-
believing in the Lord Jeſus, were thereupon to be baptized; but afterwards the
Children of thoſe Believers.

Dr. Ruſſel.

It's ſaid in Mark 16. 16. He that believeth and is baptized ſhall be ſaved.
Here is not one Word of Infants.

Mr. Leigh.

And it follows, He that believeth not, ſhall be damn'd. Now if believing be
previous to Baptiſm, by the ſame Way of Arguing it muſt be neceſſary to
Salvation; and ſo you muſt ſay, That all not believing are damn'd, and ſo all
Infants are damn'd.

D. Ruſſel.

This is a Non-ſequitur: For Infants are not at all intended in this
Commiſſion, as I have already ſhewed you; and as Mr. John Calvin doth alſo
affirm.

But I hope Mr. Leigh will allow our Saviour's Words to be True; That all thoſe
his Apoſtles preached to, according to his Commiſſion, if they did not
believe, they ſhould be damned. For of ſuch it is ſaid, He that believeth not,
is con­demned already, becauſe he hath not believed in the Name of the only
begotten Son of God.

But as touching Infants, I am far from believing that God hath decreed them
(as ſuch) to eternal Damnation. I will rather believe that all Infants dying
in their Infancy are ele­cted, than conclude that any of them are damned. And
I ſup­poſe you do not know the contrary. If you do, I deſire you would tell
the People ſo.

Mr. Leigh.

What do you put that upon us for?

Dr. Ruſſel.

Becauſe I think it's reaſonable you ſhould tell the People what your Opinion
is, ſeeing you have ſtarted it; for you ſee I have given my Opinion freely
about it; and if you think otherwiſe, pray tell the People ſo.

For then I conceive that your Baptizing their Infants will do them no good;
for you cannot alter the Decrees of Hea­ven: Or if you believe, as the Papiſts
do, that Grace is con­veyed to them barely by the Act done, notwithſtanding
the Children are wholly paſſive in it, pray tell us ſo.

Mr. Leigh refuſed to anſwer to the former, but gave this Anſwer to the latter:
No, we deny that.

Here Mr. John Williams, baptiz'd Miniſter, offered his Argu­ments.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=24)

If Believers are the only Subjects of Baptiſm according to Chriſt's
Commiſſion, then Infants are not:

But Believers are the only Subjects of Baptiſm according to Chriſt's
Commiſſion:

Therefore Infants are not.

Mr. Leigh denied the ſequel of the Major; which was thus proved.

If Infants are incapable of believing, then they are not the Subjects of
Baptiſm according to the Commiſſion:

But Infants are incapable of believing:

Therefore they are not the Subjects of Baptiſm according to the Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh ſaid the Greek Word ſignified to make Diſciples; and I deny that
Infants are incapable of being made Diſciples.

Mr. Williams ſaid he did not underſtand Greek; he muſt leave that to his
Brother.

Then Mr. Leigh ſaid, I deny the Minor.

Mr. Williams proved his Minor thus:

If the Eſſence of Faith conſiſts in the Act of the Underſtan­ding and of the
Will, then Infants are incapable of believing:

But the Eſſence of Faith conſiſts in the Act of the Under­ſtanding and of the
Will:

Therefore Infants are incapable of believing.

Mr. Leigh denied the Sequel of the Major, which Mr. Wil­liams thus proved.

If none can believe on Jeſus Chriſt, that never heard of Jeſus Chriſt, then
Infants are incapable of believing:

But none can believe on Jeſus Chriſt, that never heard of Jeſus Chriſt:

Therefore Infants are incapable of believing.

Mr. Leigh denied the Sequel of the Major.

But he ſhould have remembred what is written, Rom. 10, 14. How ſhall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how ſhall they hear without a
Preacher? And I do not ſuppoſe our Antagoniſts think they are obliged to
preach to New-born Infants. And yet the Adminiſtration of Baptiſm is (by the
Commiſſion) reſtrained to ſuch as are made Believers by the Preaching of the
Word.

Theſe Arguments being ſufficient to prove the Incapacity of Infants believing,
the next Argument Mr. Williams offer'd, was (from thence) to prove that
Infants could not be the Subjects of Baptiſm according to Chriſt's Commiſſion.

If the Adminiſtrator muſt have an Account of the Faith of the Subject before
he baptize him, then Infants are not the Subjects of Baptiſm according to
Chriſt's Commiſſion:

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=25) But the
Adminiſtrator muſt have an Account of the Faith of the Subject before he
baptize him:

Therefore Infants are not the Subjects of Baptiſm according to Chriſt's
Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh denied the Minor.

For the Proof of which, Mr. Williams urged two Scriptures, Acts 8\. 36, 37.
and Mat. 28\. 19. and ſaid, when the Eunuch propoſed for Baptiſm, Philip tells
him, If thou believeſt with all thy heart, thou mayſt. The contrary (that
fairly offers it ſelf) is this; That if thou doſt not believe with all thine
Heart, thou mayſt not. And upon this, the Eunuch declared his Faith before he
was Baptized.

From whence it's evident, the Eunuch was content to be taught; Philip teaches
him; and yet after this, he muſt know whether he believes before he baptized
him. Therefore it follows, they muſt have actual Learning; and the Miniſter
muſt alſo know that they have it before he baptize them.

And in Mat. 28. 19 Go diſciple to me all Nations, baptizing them. From whence
I thus argue.

If Miniſters have no Commiſſion to baptize any but ſuch as are diſcipled to
Chriſt, then they muſt have an Account of their Diſcipleſhip before they
baptize them:

But Miniſters have no Commiſſion to baptize any but ſuch as are diſcipled to
Chriſt:

Therefore they muſt have an Account of their Diſcipleſhip before they baptize
them.

To which was added, That Eraſmus in his Paraphraſe upon the New Teſtament,
reads the Commiſſion thus, Go and teach all Nations, and when they have
learned, dip them. And I fur­ther ſay, If the Adminiſtrator muſt have an
Account of the Perſon's Learning before he be baptized, then a bare going to
School is not ſufficient to conſtitute him a Diſciple.

Mr. Robinſon.

Do you ſee, Sirs! this Gentleman grounds his Opinion upon the Authority of
Eraſmus.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Why muſt Eraſmus be thus ſlighted? Here are ſome Honourable Perſons know very
well, that Eraſmus was a Man not to be deſpiſed for his Skill about the
Etymology of a Greek Word. But any thing ſerves your turn at a Pinch.

Mr. Leigh.

He quotes Eraſmus; and it's well known he was between Papiſt and Proteſtant.
Now many of theſe Men, ſpeaking againſt Infant-Baptiſm, will call it Popery;
and yet he quotes Eraſmus for their Judgment.

Now, foraſmuch as Mr. Leigh ſlipp'd the Argument, and only replied to that of
Eraſmus, that he was an Inter-Papist, &c. Mr. Williams gave him this Anſwer.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=25) Sir, You
have heard my Argument to which you have given no Anſwer. As touching Eraſmus,
I did not quote him as building my Faith on his Authority, but for his
Judgment; it being the Tranſlation of a Man that underſtood the Original: And
although he was not accounted one of the beſt of Men; yet he was accounted one
of the beſt of Scholars in his Time.

Mr. Leigh.

And now as to the Eunuch, he was a Proſelyte too, and his Infants, if he had
any, were to be taken in alſo. Philip comes to him and he requires a
Confeſſion of his Faith, becauſe he was a grown Man. Yet had he had an Infant
with him, he had had a Right to this Ordinance after he believed. When by your
Opinion it muſt be caſt out; becauſe not capa­ble of Actual Believing.

Now I deny that he that Adminiſters the Ordinance, muſt always have an account
of the Perſon, whether he hath Lear­ned, or not.

(I ſuppoſe Mr. Leigh forgot himſelf, to talk of an Eunuch's having Children.
It puts me in mind of a Story I lately heard, of a Presbyterian Miniſter that
undertook (in a Sermon) to prove Infant-Baptiſm, and to that end choſe this
Text for his purpoſe, of Philip's Baptizing the Eunuch. And when he had
inſiſted ſome time upon it, he ſpeaks after this manner to the People:
Beloved, when you are gone, perhaps you will ſay, What is all this to the
purpoſe? Here is not one word of Infants in the Text. It is true, ſays he,
there is not, but I will tell you how that comes in: Had he had his Wife and
Children with him, they had then been Baptized as Well as himſelf: But they
were at a great diſtance from him; but as ſoon as he came home, immediately he
Baptized them all. I will make no Comment upon it, but only this. If theſe
Gentlemen know what an Eunuch is, then it's vain Ba­bling: If they do not, let
them go to the Grand Senior's Se­raglio and learn.)

Mr. Williams.

We have plain direction for what I have ſaid; Philip ſaid to the Eunuch, If
thou believeſt with all thine heart, thou mayeſt. And accordingly he took an
account of his Faith.

And in the Commiſſion, Go Diſciple all Nations, Baptizing them. From whence
it's evident, it was thoſe they had made Diſciples, that they were to Baptize.
And therefore they muſt know whether they are Diſciples or no, before they
muſt ad­venture to Baptize them.

Mr. Leigh.

You Argue thus, becauſe  [...], Them, is of the Maſculine Gender, it muſt
agree with  [...], Diſciples, being of the ſame Gender: And not with  [...],
all Nations. But any School Boy that hath but learned his Greek Grammar, can
reſolve thi [...].

[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=26) Now Mr.
Williams had told him before, that he did not under­ſtand Greek; and ſo he
made bold to vapour with it, when he was Reſponding to him.

But Mr. Leigh might have been ſo civil to have told the Old Gen­tleman his
Senſe of it, and not (in ſuch a light manner) to have referr'd him to a
School-boy for his Information.

A School-boy knows (if Mr. Leigh doth not) that the Rule in the Greek Grammar
is as follows:

Relativum cum Antecedente Concordat genere, numero & perſonâ. And therefore
muſt give it for Mr. Williams.

But I will refer the Reader to a better Authority than a School-boy: The late
Reverend and Learned Miniſter of the Goſpel, Mr. John Goſnold, in his Book
Entituled,  [...], pag. 24 who thus ſaith, The word Them (Baptizing them) hath
no reference unto All Nations, as is to be ſeen in the Grammar of the Text,
[...], Them being of the Maſculine Gender, but  [...], All Nations, of the
Neuter.

This Them then muſt have reference to Diſciples, to ſuch as are firſt Taught:

But Mr. Williams paſſes by this trivial Flouriſh; and pro­ceeds to a new
Argument.

If Infants are incapable of denying themſelves for Chriſt, then they are
incapable of being made Diſciples of Chriſt:

But Infants are incapable of denying themſelves for Chriſt: Therefore they are
incapable of being made Diſciples of Chriſt.

Mr. Leigh denies the Sequel of the Major.

Mr. Williams proves it thus.

If a Perſon cannot be his Diſciple unleſs he deny both Re­lative Self and
Perſonal Self, then the Sequel is true:

But Infants are not capable ſo to do:

Therefore the Sequel is true.

Mr. Leigh.

This purely refers to grown Perſons; and by the ſame Argument you may ſay
Infants muſt not Eat; becauſe it is ſaid in another place, He that cannot
work, muſt not eat.

Mr. Williams.

Nay, Sir, It is he that will not work, not he that cannot. It is he that is
able and will not. For I hope you will provide for your Parents, when by
reaſon of Age they are not able to work for themſelves.

Mr. Leigh.

But this purely refers to grown Perſons, and I deny that Believers only are
Diſciples.

Mr. Williams.

I proved that thus: Thoſe that in Matth. 28\. are called Diſciples, are in
Mark 16\. called Believers: So that they are the ſame Perſons intended.

Hereupon Mr. Leigh not being able to give a direct Anſwer, en­deavours to
ſhift off the force of thoſe two Texts, and his Inference from them, by this
Evaſion.

Mr. Leigh.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=26)

I would know whether Infants are not as capable of Believing in Chriſt, as of
coming to Chriſt? Now they are ſaid to come when their Parents brought them.
For Chriſt ſays, Suffer little Children to come unto me: And it's moſt
pro­bable they were brought in the Arms to Chriſt. Why may they not be ſaid to
Believe, when they do not actually Be­lieve; if imputatively they are ſaid to
come when their Par­rents brought them?

So, why may not they be ſaid to Believe imputatively, when their Parents
devote them to Jeſus Chriſt, although the Chil­dren do not actually Believe,
but only the Parents?

Mr. Williams.

I deny the Parents Faith was ever imputed to the Child. Prove it if you can.

Mr. Leigh.

We talk of Believers in foro Eccleſiae and in foro Dei with Diſtinction. And
under this Notion, and no other do we account Believers are ſo.

And under this Notion, I mean in foro Eccleſiae, the Parents Faith may be
imputed to their Children.

Mr. Williams.

We ſay a Perſon is not a Diſciple of Chriſt, till he hath learned Chriſt. We
do not allow of any ſuch Im­putation: And Mr. Leigh hath not offer'd any thing
to prove it.

Dr. Ruſſel.

It is time to come to ſome Inſtance; therefore to force you upon it, I argue
thus:

If the Apoſtles of our Lord did never Baptize any Infant, then the Baptiſm of
Infants is not according to Chriſt's Com­miſſion:

But the Apoſtles of our Lord did never Baptize any Infant:

Ergo, The Baptiſm of Infants is not according to Chriſt's Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny your Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I prove my Minor thus.

If there be any account that the Apoſtles did ever Baptize any Infant, it is
ſomewhere Recorded in the Writings of the New Teſtament:

But it is no where ſo Recorded in thoſe Writings:

Ergo, There is not any account that the Apoſtles did ever Baptize any Infant.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny your Minor.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I muſt now force you upon an Inſtance by an Univerſal Negative.

If there be any ſuch account in thoſe Writings, Mr. Leigh, or ſome other
Perſon is able to ſhew it us:

But neither Mr. Leigh nor any other Perſon is able to do it:

Ergo, There is no ſuch account there to be found.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=27) Here Mr.
Leigh, being wholly deſtitute of an Inſtance; to ſhift it off, he denies the
Sequel of the Major. And ſaith, it doth not follow it muſt of neceſſity be
written in the New Teſtament.

Now although this was contrary to the Rules of Diſpute; yet Dr. Ruſſel could
not urge him to give any Inſtance; wherefore he Ar­gues upon him thus.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If nothing elſe will do with you, I will prove the ſequel of my Major,
according to your denial.

If there be no other Rule left to direct us how we are to Wor­ſhip God in this
Ordinance of Baptiſm according to the Go­ſpel but what is contained in the
Writings of the New Teſta­ment; then it muſt of neceſſity follow, that it be
therein writ­ten, if ſuch an account be any where to be found:

But there is no other Rule left to direct us how we are to Worſhip God in this
Ordinance of Baptiſm according to the Goſpel, but what is contained in the
Writings of the New Teſta­ment:

Ergo, It muſt of neceſſity follow, that it be therein written, if ſuch an
account be any where to be found.

Mr. Leigh.

I ſay it might be practiſed in thoſe Times, though not Recorded in the New
Teſtament.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Will you grant that it is not Recorded in the New Teſtament?

Mr. Leigh.

We will ſuppoſe it; but not grant it.

Dr. Ruſſel.

The reaſon why you ſuppoſe it, is becauſe you cannot prove it: For you are not
ſo free of your Conceſſions.

Mr. Leigh.

It is not Recorded in the New Teſtament what you practiſe, that grown Children
of Believers were Baptized. I challenge you to give one Inſtance of any one
born of Be­lieving Parents, Baptized at Age.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I have called for one Inſtance from Scripture ſe­veral times, of any one
Infant that was ever Baptized, and you have not been able to produce it. This
you now ſpeak of, is beſides the Matter we are upon: And is uſed on purpoſe to
divert us from our Argument, and lead us to ſome thing elſe that is foreign to
it. Pray do you firſt ſhew us where it is ſo written in the New Teſtament,
that any one Infant was Baptized, if you can; and then you ſhall hear what we
have to ſay.

Mr. Leigh.

Theſe Men talk much of Scripture, and call upon us to produce Scripture for
our Baptizing of Infants; as if they had abundance of proof for their
Practice: Now let them give but one Inſtance of what is their Practice;
namely, of one Perſon that was born of a Believer, and was Baptized when he
came to grown Years; and I will give them the Cauſe.

Dr. Ruſſel.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=27)

I will Inſtance in Conſtantine the Great, whoſe Mo­ther Helena was a
Chriſtian, and yet he was not Baptized till he was conſiderably in Years.

Beſides, I do not remember, that there is any account in Hiſtory, during the
firſt 500 Years, that any one of the Fathers, or Eminent Biſhops of the
Church, that were born of Chriſtian Parents, were Baptized until they were
about 20 or 30 Years of Age. And if any of you know the contrary, I deſire you
would ſhew it.

Mr. Leigh.

What do you tell us of the Fathers? We are not bound to abide by their
Teſtimony.

Dr. Ruſſel.

This is the firſt time I have ever met with this Anſwer from you
Paedobaptiſts, to tell us you diſown the Te­ſtimony of the Fathers in the
point of Infant Baptiſm. When you think the Fathers are on your ſide, then we
can hear enough of them; but now you ſee they are againſt you, you will not
abide by their Teſtimony. You know I do not alledge it to prove the
Inſtitution, but only Matter of Fact. But ſeeing you will not abide by their
Teſtimony, I ſhall leave it to be con­ſidered by the People; For I am well
ſatisfied there are ſome Honourable Perſons here, know what I ſay to be true.

Mr. Williams doth then proceed to a Scripture Inſtance; and asks Mr Leigh this
Queſtion. Was not the Mother of our Lord a Believer, when Chriſt was born?

Mr. Leigh Anſwers, What do you ask that Queſtion for▪ Every Body knows that.

Mr. Williams.

But do you believe it?

Mr. Leigh.

Yes, I do believe it: What then?

Mr. Williams.

Then here is an Inſtance for you from Scrip­ture, of the Child of a Believer,
that was a Believer before he was born; and yet he was not Baptized till he
came to Years. And this we can prove.

Upon this the People fell a laughing at Mr. Leigh, and his Countenance changed
pale; and he was under ſome ſeeming Conſter­nation of Mind, ſo that he could
not preſently recover himſelf; but at laſt his Spirits rallied again, and then
he ſpake to this effect.

Mr. Leigh.

Our Diſcourſe was grounded on the Commiſſion. Now was this before the
Commiſſion, or after it?

Dr. Ruſſel.

It is a miſtake, Mr. Leigh, we were not now upon the Commiſſion, but upon your
Queſtion. And I think Mr. Williams hath given you a pertinent Anſwer, every
way ſuitable to your Queſtion, and the Challenge you made us: and you are
bound to take it. Upon this he made no Reply; But Addreſſed himſelf to us
after this manner. Now if you pleaſe I will become Opponent. Our Anſwer was,
You may, if you think fit, we are contented.

Mr. Leigh.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=28)

Then I Argue thus.

If Infants are viſible Church-Members, then they are to be Baptized.

But Infants are viſible Church-Members.

Ergo, They are to be Baptized.

Dr. Ruſſel.

This Argument doth not include the Point in que­ſtion for you ought to put in
theſe words, according to Chriſt's Commiſſion.

Mr. Leigh refuſed ſo to do.

Upon which Dr. Ruſſel asked him this Queſtion.

Are you of Mr. Chandler's mind in this Matter? He ſays, That Baptiſm is an
Initiating Ordinance.

Mr. Leigh anſwered, Yes, I am.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then make Senſe of your Argument, if you can: For it will run thus.

If Infants are already viſible Members of the Church, then they are to be
Baptized that they may be made ſo.

It is as if I ſhould ſay, That becauſe ſuch a Man is in this Houſe already,
therefore there muſt ſome Act paſs upon him to bring him in, when he is
actually in the Houſe before. Make Senſe of this, if you can.

However, I will deny the Minor; and ſay they are not viſible Church-Members
before they are Baptized.

Mr. Chandler.

If there be no Precept or Example in all the Word of God, to warrant us to
make any other Initiating Or­dinance into the Church but Baptiſm, then viſible
Church-Members ought to be Baptized.

But there is no other Initiating Ordinance into the Church beſides Baptiſm:

Ergo, Viſible Church-Members ought to be Baptized.

Dr. Ruſſel.

What, doth not Mr. Chandler know the difference between the Major and Minor? I
deny the Minor, and his Argu­ment is to prove the Sequel of the Major; which I
had confute [...] before.

But if this be true that Mr. Chandler ſays, it is a full Anſwer to Mr. Leigh's
Minor: For then it runs thus; If there be no other way to bring Perſons into
the viſible Church but by Baptiſm then they were not viſible Church-Members
before they were Baptized. Which is directly oppoſite to what Mr. Leigh hath
affirmed.

Mr. Robinſon.

This Argument was brought to prove that viſible Church-Members are to be
admitted to Baptiſm.

Mr. Williams.

I deny that Infants are viſible Church-Member in their Infancy.

Mr. Leigh.

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=28)

I will prove that ſome are ſo, from Matth. 19. 14. Suffer the little Children,
and forbid them not to come unto me: for of ſuch is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Do you bring this to prove that theſe Children were Baptized?

Mr. Leigh.

No, I do not pretend to any ſuch thing.

Dr. Ruſſel.

What then do you bring it for?

Mr. Leigh.

I bring it to prove that Infants are viſible Church-Members.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If you had brought it to prove that Infants had a right to the Kingdom of
Glory, I ſhould have thought you had brought it to a better purpoſe, and more
agreeable to the ſcope of the Place.

Mr. Leigh.

I Argue thus upon it.

Thoſe that belong to the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the viſible Church of
Chriſt, are viſible Church-Members:

But the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the viſible Church of Chriſt, is in part
made up of little Children:

Ergo, Little Children are viſible Church-Members.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I might here object againſt the form of your Argument: But to paſs that by, I
do deny your Minor.

Mr. Leigh.

I ſhall prove my Minor, by an Induction of Par­ticulars.

There are divers Acceptations of the Kingdom of Heaven in Scripture. As,

1\. It ſignifies the Laws and Promiſes of the Kingdom.

2\. The Graces of the Kingdom, whereby we are ena­bled to obſerve thoſe Laws.
And thus it is ſet forth by a grain of Muſtard-ſeed, by Leaven, and the like.

3\. It ſometimes ſignifies Jeſus Chriſt his Management of his Subjects on
Earth.

4\. And ſometimes it ſignifies the happineſs of the Saints in Glory.

5\. And many times it is taken for the viſible Church Mili­tant. And in no
other Senſe but this laſt, can it be taken in this Scripture to make good
Senſe of it; which I ſhall prove by an Argument of Induction.

If it be Nonſenſe to ſay, Of ſuch is the Laws and Promiſes of the Kingdom; If
it be Nonſenſe to ſay, Of ſuch is the Graces of the Kingdom, If it be Nonſenſe
to ſay, Of ſuch is Chriſt's Management of his Subjects on Earth; If it be
Non­ſenſe to ſay, Of ſuch is the Happineſs of the Saints in Glory; and it be
good Senſe to ſay. Of ſuch is the viſible Church; then the viſible Church is
in part made up of little Children:

But it is Nonſence to apply it to all the other, and it is good Senſe to ſay,
of ſuch to the viſible Church:

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=29) Ergo, The
viſible Church is in part made up of little Chil­dren.

Dr. Ruſſel.

There is ſo much Nonſenſe in this Argument. I know not well how to make Senſe
of it: It ſeems to me little to the purpoſe. But however, I will deny your
Minor, and ſay, It is good Senſe to ſay, that little Children belong to the
Kingdom of Glory.

I pray obſerve (by the way) what ſort of Subjects Mr. Leigh's Church muſt
conſiſt of; if they have no Intereſt in the Graces of the Kingdom, nor yet in
the Glory of the Kingdom.

Mr. Leigh.

I ſay it's Nonſenſe to underſtand it otherwiſe.

And upon this he deſired, that all thoſe who were ſatisfied with what he had
ſaid ſhould hold up their hands. And of that great Multitude, there was but a
very few that did it: So that it was manifeſt they were not ſatisfied with
what he had ſaid.

Mr. Williams.

Is it Nonſenſe then to ſay, that any Infants be­long to the Kingdom of Glory?

Mr. Leigh.

Yes, while they are in their Infant State; for when arrived to Glory, they are
perfect as grown Men, what­ever they were on Earth. Otherwiſe we muſt ſay that
there are Infants of two foot long, poor, weak, ignorant things in Glory:
Therefore it muſt be thus taken, for we muſt make good Senſe of Scripture.

Mr. Williams.

I deny you Minor, and ſhall form an oppoſite Argument thus:

If Infants are neither Members of the Univerſal viſible Church, nor yet of a
particular Conſtituted Church, then they are not Members of the viſible Church
at all:

But they are neither Members of the Univerſal viſible Church, nor yet of a
particular Conſtituted Church:

Therefore they are not Members of the viſible Church at all.

Mr. Leigh took no notice of this Argument, but ſaid, It did not belong to a
Reſpondent to form an Argument.

To which Mr. Williams Reply'd, My work is to clear the Truth; I will not be
ty'd up to your Rules of Diſputation.

Mr. Robinſon required an expreſs prohibition of Infants Church Memberſhip.

Mr. Williams Reply'd, That is fine indeed; Pray give us an expreſs prohibition
of Baptizing with Cream, and Spittle, and Salt, and Oyl; and the uſe of the
Croſs in Baptiſm: (all which you reject) and of many things more that might be
brought into the Worſhip of God. And to this no Reply was made.

Mr. Leigh inſiſting again upon his Argument for excluding In­fants out of the
Kingdom of Heaven, from Matth. 19. affirming, [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=29) that from thence
it was Nonſenſe to ſay, they were the Subjects of Glory.

Mr. Williams ſaid, We muſt diſtinguiſh between a Title to Glory, and the
actual Enjoyment of Glory. Elect Infants have a Title to Glory, by Virtue of
the Righteouſneſs of Chriſt imputed unto them; although they are not actually
in it.

In the next place Mr. Williams denied the Major, and proved to him from Matth
[...]3 7. That Church-Memberſhip could not be the ground of Baptiſm; becauſe
thoſe many Phariſees and others, that came and offer'd themſelves to John for
Baptiſm, were Church-Members: And yet John denied to admit them to Baptiſm.

Here Mr. Leigh diſtinguiſhed between Church-Members de jure, and ſuch that
were only ſo de facto.

Mr. Williams asked him, whether he did own them to be Church-Members de facto.

His Anſwer was, He did.

Then Mr. Williams told him Church-Memberſhip could not be the ground of
Baptiſm.

Mr. Leigh ſaid, They were not ſo de jure, becauſe they were a Generation of
Vipers, and therefore ought by the Law to have been caſt out.

But when Mr. Williams did deſire him to tell him where that Law was written,
he could not produce it.

Upon this Dr. Ruſſel asked Mr. Leigh, what Relation this Ar­gument of his had
to the Commiſſion? For he did not know that they were obliged to follow them
any longer in anſwering ſuch Impertinencies, that were not at all included in
the Que­ſtion. And therefore deſired him to produce ſome Argu­ment that was
more conſonant to the Point in Queſtion, for this was foreign to it. For we
have granted you more than you ſeem willing to deſire, in favour of Infants;
namely, That they have a Title both to Grace here, and Glory hereafter,
through the Merits of Chriſt and his Righteouſneſs imputed to them. And yet we
cannot allow that they are the Subjects of Baptiſm, according to Chriſt's
Commiſſion; or, a Part of the viſible Church. Nevertheleſs we have very
Charitable Thoughts towards them, becauſe we believe their Salvation is
ſecured to them another way.

Mr. Leigh then proceeds to another Argument:

If Infants are Diſciples, then they have a Right to Baptiſm according to the
Commiſſion:

But Infants are Diſciples:

Ergo, They have a Right to Baptiſm according to the Com­miſſion.

Mr. Williams denied the Minor.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=30) In
defence of which, they Argued from Acts 15\. 10. after this Manner.

If thoſe upon whom the Yoke of Circumciſion was impoſed after the manner of
Moſes, were called Diſciples, and the man­ner of Moſes was to Circumciſe
Infants; then Infants are called Diſciples.

But thoſe upon whom the Yoke of Circumciſion was im­poſed after the manner of
Moſes, were called Diſciples, and the manner of Moſes was to Circumciſe
Infants:

Ergo, Infants are called Diſciples.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I both diſtinguiſh upon your Major, and deny the Conſequence thereof. For I
hope you underſtand a difference betwixt the Manner of performing an Action,
and the Subjects upon whom it is performed.

The Manner of Moſes is the thing here ſpoken of; which was to cut off the
Foreskin of the Fleſh with a Knife, a ſharp Stone, or the like Inſtrument: And
this was ſometimes practiſed upon grown Perſons, and ſometimes upon Infants.
As touching Infants, they are neither expreſſed, nor intended in the
Scrip­ture you have alledged. For they are called Brethren, Believing
Gentiles, ſuch that had an Epiſtle ſent to them, and when they heard it read,
they rejoyced at the Conſolation, were eſta­bliſh'd in the Faith, and are
called Churches: which your ſelves know (in thoſe Times) conſiſted of Adult
Perſons, Mul­titudes both of Men and Women. But not of one Infant that we read
of among them. And indeed, none of thoſe fore­mentioned Characters can agree
to little Infants.

Mr. Leigh.

I grant the Manner is there ſpoken of, and the Subjects brought in afterwards.
But would not the People conclude that Infants were intended, if I tell them
it muſt be done after the manner of Moſes?

Dr. Ruſſel.

It's no matter what thoſe People conclude, that know not how to diſtinguiſh
between the Subjects, and the Manner. But thoſe of whom this was ſpoken, knew
right well, that the falſe Teachers impoſed it upon the Gentiles that did
Believe: And they are the Subjects here ſpoken of.

Mr. Leigh.

I would form this Argument.

If thoſe are called Diſciples who are adviſed by Judaizing Chriſtians to be
Circumciſed after the Manner of Moſes, then Infants are called Diſciples:

But they are called Diſciples that are adviſed ſo to be Cir­cumciſed:

Ergo, Infants are called Diſciples.

Dr. Ruſſel denies the Conſequence of the Major, for it doth not follow that
becauſe Adult Believers who are the Subjects [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=30) there ſpoken of
(as is already proved) are call'd Diſciples; that therefore Infants, who are
neither expreſſed, nor inten­ded, muſt be ſo call'd. For Mr. Leigh hath
allowed the Di­ſtinction betwixt the Subjects, and the Manner.

Mr. Leigh.

Read the firſt Verſe, and you will find, that there came Men from Judea, that
taught the Gentile Church that believed, That unleſs they were circumciſed
after the manner of Moſes, they could not be ſaved, &c. It was the Yoke of
Circumciſion here intended.

Whereupon Mr. Williams did deny, that barely Circumci­ſion was that
intolerable Yoke, which neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear, that
is there ſpoken of by Peter. For Circumciſion, barely conſidered, Children of
Eight Days old were able to bear it, and did bear it.

But Circumciſion, as it obliged to the Law in Point of Juſti­fication, was
that intolerable Yoke, which neither they, nor their Fathers were able to
bear. For the Apoſtle tells the Ga­latians, That if they were circumciſed,
Chriſt ſhould profit them nothing; and that they were bound to keep the whole
Law.

Now, altho' Circumciſion, barely conſidered, might be im­poſed on Infants; yet
the falſe Doctrine in which that into­lerable Yoke did conſiſt, together with
Circumciſion, could not be impoſed on Children.

Beſides, that Circumciſion, after the Manner of Moſes, did not reſpect the
Subjects, but the Form. It was the Brethren that were the Subjects the falſe
Teachers would have had to have been circumciſed after the Manner of Moſes;
amongſt which, Children could not be numbred.

  * For, 1ſt. They were ſuch Brethren that had received the Holy Ghoſt.
  * 2dly. They had purified their Hearts by Faith.
  * 3dly. They were ſuch that from among the Gentiles were turned to God.

Then they went off alſo from this, and ſaid. Infants are part of a Nation, and
therefore might be Baptized.

Mr. Williams replied, Though Children are part of a Na­tion; yet not of a
Nation modify'd according to Chriſt's Commiſſion.

Whereupon their Moderator ſaid, He thought Mr. Willi­ams had but little
Academical Learning.

Mr. Williams Replied, He was warned by the Word, to have a care of vain
Philoſophy. And preſently demanded, what was the Antecedent to the Relative
them, in the Com­miſſion.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=31)

[...]

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=31)

[...]

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=32) The
Moderator making no Anſwer, Mr. Williams ſaid, It was all Nations Diſcipled.

And upon this, Dr. Ruſſel, and Mr. Williams did both de­ſire them to produce
one Inſtance for Infant Baptiſm, out of the Word of God. And this they did
very many times deſire of them, but no Inſtance was produced. At length Mr.
Williams deſired them, in theſe Words:

Brethren, I would beg you to produce one Inſtance for Infants  [...]aptiſm; it
will reflect upon you if you do not. What will all this People ſay, when they
are gone? So many times one Inſtance deſired: So many Miniſters here, and not
one Inſtance produced: They muſt needs conclude there was not one to be
produced.

Notwithſtanding this, the Miniſters were all ſilent; and not a Man did reply
to it.

Then Mr. Leigh ſaid, We might take up the Opponency again if we pleaſed.

Thus ended their ſo much boaſted of Opponency, in that vain-glorious
Advertiſement, publiſhed in the Poſt-man, the Saturday Morning after the
Diſpute, (either by one of them­ſelves, or of their unthinking Admirers)
before Dr. Ruſſel could return to London, altho' he ſet forth from Portſmouth
the next Morning after the Diſpute; his preſſing Occaſions neceſſitating him
thereto.

Dr. Ruſſel did then, at Mr. Leigh's Requeſt, reaſſume the Op­ponency, of which
Mr. Leigh ſeemed to be ſick, and was wil­ling to get rid of it. Which was a
ſign they had no mind to inform the People of the Grounds upon which they keep
up the Practice of Infants Baptiſm; when they had ſo fair an Oppor­tunity put
into their Hands to do it, and made no better Im­provement of it. But having
no Scripture Proof for it, they were not willing to let ſo great an Auditory
know the true Cauſe why they continue ſuch a Scriptureleſs Practice; to ſay no
worſe of it.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I will therefore prove, that no Infants are to be Baptized by virtue of
Chriſt's Commiſſion.

If  [...] hath no other Antecedent agreeing therewith but  [...], then none
are to be Baptized but ſuch as are firſt made Diſciples by the Miniſtry of
Men, which Infants are not capable of.

But the Antecedent is true; as is alſo the Conſequence; and therefore no
Infants are to be Baptized.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny that  [...] hath no other Antecedent but  [...].

Dr. Ruſſel.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=32)

If there be another, pray aſſign it.

Mr. Leigh.

I ſay it is  [...], all Nations.

Dr. Ruſſel.

That cannot poſſibly be; becauſe  [...], them, is of the Maſculine Gender, and
[...], all Nations, is of the Neuter Gender. But  [...], them, doth very well
agree with  [...], Diſciples, they being both of the Maſculine Gender.

To this they gave no ſolid Anſwer, worthy of noting down, according to my
Remembrance, or the Notaries Obſervation.

Dr. Ruſſel having obſerved what evaſive Anſwers they had given to his own and
Mr. Williams's Arguments, was reſolved to force them to a direct Anſwer (if
poſſible) by retorting their own Allegation upon themſelves, that they might
ſee the Abſurdity of it: And this put them into a flame, and great confuſion.

The Argument was this:

If Infants are capable to be made Diſciples of Chriſt by the Mini­ſtry of Men,
without the uſe of Reaſon, then the Beaſts of the Field are alſo capable: but
the Beaſts of the Field are not ca­pable: therefore Infants are not capable.

Upon this there was a great Diſorder among them, and a Perſon in the Company
cried out, He ſpeaks Blaſphemy. But one of the Miniſters that ſat by him was
ſo juſt, as to ſatisfie him to the contrary; for which he deſerves Thanks.

But Mr. Robinſon, their Moderator, ſtood up, and threw himſelf about, making a
noiſe like one in a delirious Paroxyſm; and bid the People take notice, that
Dr. Ruſſel had ranked their Infants among the brute Beaſts; and that if they
became of his Opinion, they muſt look upon them as Dogs, or Cats, or Hogs, &c.
with much more of the ſame ſort of Rhetorick; endeavouring all he could to
enrage the multitude of unthink­ing perſons againſt him, and put the People
into a Confuſion.

Upon this Mr. Sharp, the Baptiſt Moderator, ſtood up, and ſaid, Gentlemen
hold! what is to do now? What, doth Colo­nel Self ride Lord General in the
Town of Portſmouth to day? What is the Reaſon of this?

Dr. Ruſſel.

Hold, Mr. Robinſon. Muſt I be thus miſrepreſen­ted to the People, becauſe I
ſay (that which you all know to be true) that Infants want the Uſe of Reaſon?
I hope you will be quiet a little time, and give me leave to make my De­fence
to the People againſt your clamorous Expreſſions.

I am now put upon a neceſſity to tell this Aſſembly (of ho­nourable Perſons,
and others) what my Thoughts are con­cerning the State of Mankind in general,
and of little Infants in particular.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=33) I believe
that Man, as he came out of the hands of God, was a noble Creature, the top
Perfection of all his Creation here below and was ſubſtituted Lord of this
lower World; was endowed with the Image of his Maker, both natural and divine.

But by his Sin he loſt the divine Image, and brought him­ſelf thereby under
the Curſe, and into a ſtate of Condemnati­on, in which his Poſterity were alſo
involved.

But it pleaſed God, of his infinite Mercy, not to leave him in that miſerable
Eſtate, as he had left the fallen Angels. But Chriſt interpoſed between
Juſtice and the Sinner, the Promiſe being made before the Sentence was
pronounced, Gen. 3. 15. That the ſeed of the Woman ſhould bruiſe the Serpents
head. And this promiſed Seed hath (through the Grace of God) opened a door of
mercy for little Infants, who never ſinned in their own perſons; as well as
for others.

And you know, Gentlemen, I have already told you how great an Eſteem I have
for your little Infants; that I will ra­ther believe that all Infants dying in
their Infancy are elected, than I will conclude that any one of them are
damn'd: And this is more than I could perſuade our Oppoſites to confeſs,
al­though they were urged upon it.

So that (for ought yet appears) we have a greater Eſteem for your tender Babes
than theſe Gentlemen have, notwith­ſtanding Mr. Robinſon's unreaſonable
Clamour againſt me. And having thus Apologized for my ſelf, I do now expect an
An­ſwer to my Argument.

Mr. Robinſon

What a ſtrange thing is this, to talk of Baptizing the Beaſts of the Field!
Who ever did ſo?

Dr. Ruſſel.

I am ſo far from talking of Baptizing the Beaſts of the Field, that my
Argument is rather to prove the direct contrary. And whereas you affirm that
Infants have a Capaci­ty to be made Diſciples of Chriſt by the Miniſtry of Men
(or elſe you have been ſaying nothing to the purpoſe all this tim [...] about
it) I bring this to ſhew you the Abſurdity of ſuch a No▪ tion: And you are
bound to ſhew the Diſparity, or confeſ [...] you cannot.

Sirs, I would put this Caſe to you. Suppoſe there were twenty or thirty new
born Infants in a Room, and you ſhould chuſe out the moſt able and learned
Perſon among you to preach to them, in order to make them Diſciples according
to Chriſt's Commiſſion; I believe he would have no better Suc­ceſs than St.
Anthony had (as the Story goes) when he took upon him to inſtruct the Pigs;
or, as ſome others have don [...] (even Popiſh Saints) who have took upon them
to preach  [...] [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=33) the Fowls of the
Air, &c. of which I could furniſh you with divers Inſtances.

But why ſhould Mr. Robinſon think it ſtrange that any body ſhould have ſuch a
Conceit in their Minds? Doth he not know that the Church of Rome baptize
things of an inferiour Na­ture? for they baptize Churches and Bells.

And if I had compared your Practice to theirs of baptizing Belle, you had had
no reaſon to complain, for they are both paſſive in the Act; only if you will
give credit to one of the Fathers (viz. Auguſtine) the Bells are upon that
account the fitteſt Subjects, for they are wholly paſſive: but (ſaith he) the
little Children are not ſo; for they ſhew their Reſiſtance by their Crying.
And now I demand of any of you to take off the Retortion, and ſhew the
Diſparity if you can.

Upon this they were all ſilent, and none of them would un­dertake to ſhew the
Diſparity: and till they do it, my Retor­tion will remain upon them.

Then Mr. Leigh ſaid, It is time to proceed to the other Que­ſtion.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I will now enter upon it.

The ſecond Queſtion is this:

‘Whether the Ordinance of Baptiſm, as appointed by Chriſt is to be adminiſtred
by Dipping, Plunging, (or) Overwhelming only, and not otherwiſe?’

I take the Queſtion in the Affirmative, and my firſt Argu­ment is this.

Arg. 1\. The Holy Scripture ſhews us the right way of Bap­tizing, as appointed
by Chriſt:

But it doth not ſhew us that it ought to be done by Sprink­ling:

Ergo, Sprinkling is not the right way of Baptizing.

Mr. Leigh.

Sir, you muſt bring in that Dipping is abſolutely neceſſary (as in the
Queſtion) what do you talk of Sprinkling for?

Dr. Ruſſel.

Sir, I know not of any other way that is practi­ſed by you; nor, I ſuppoſe,
any of theſe People: I conclude they have often ſeen you ſprinkle Infants; and
Mr. Chandler hath particularly recommended it in his Preaching, as the beſt
way of Baptizing: and I hope you are not aſham'd of your Practice.

But if you will diſown Sprinkling to be the right way of Baptizing, I am
contented; I will not then inſiſt upon it.

Mr. Robinſon.

We are not diſcourſing of that now; you are to prove Dipping to be the only
way; and you muſt and ſhall prove it.

Dr. Ruſſel.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=34)

Muſt and Shall! Muſt and Shall is for the King, and not for Mr. Robinſon.

Mr. Leigh.

But we will not admit of this Argument, becauſe it hath not the word Only in
it. You are to prove that your Way is the only right Way of Baptizing.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Mr. Leigh was pleaſed to make uſe of an Argu­ment of Induction, upon the
Queſtion about the Subjects: And why may not I uſe the ſame Liberty about the
Manner, and prove it by Arguments of Inductions?

Upon this ſome of them fell a laughing, and Mr. Chandler thus expreſt himſelf;
Your Induction is an Induction like the man's Covey of Partridges.

Mr. Williams ask'd him how many there was in the Covey?

Mr. Chandler ſaid, Why there was but one.

Mr. Williams replied, But there was more a hatching.

Dr. Ruſſel.

What is the Reaſon of all this? I tell you I will make it good by Arguments of
Induction: And if you do not underſtand my meaning, I will inform you; and
ſhew that it is a good way of arguing, and will anſwer the End I bring it for.

For. I will firſt argue off your way of Sprinkling; and after that, if you
ſhall aſſign a Third way, that is neither practiſed by you nor us, I will then
argue that off alſo: and then (I hope) I ſhall fully prove what I deſign by
it; namely, that Ours is the only right way of Baptizing.

Upon this they readily diſcerned they ſhould be forced to give an inſtance
from Scripture for their Practice of Sprinkling, which they were conſcious to
themſelves they were not able to do; and therefore utterly refuſed to anſwer
the Argument.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If this Argument will not be admitted, I will proceed to another.

That Way which doth not ſignify that which ought to be repreſented in Baptiſm,
according to Chriſt's Appointment, is not the right way of Baptizing.

But this your pretended way doth not do:

Ergo, It is not the right way of Baptizing.

And this I ſhall make good by the following Syllogiſm.

If that Baptiſm which was appointed by Chriſt doth pro­perly repreſent his
Burial and Reſurrection, and ours by him, then it muſt be done not by
Sprinkling, but by Dipping, Plung­ing, or overwhelming the Perſon Baptized
into Water:

But that Baptiſm which was appointed by Chriſt doth pro­perly repreſent his
Burial and Reſurrection, and ours by him:

Ergo, It muſt be done not by Sprinkling, but by Dipping, Plunging, or
Overwhelming the Perſon Baptized into Water.

Mr. Chandler.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=34)

I deny the conſequence of the Major; that it properly ſets forth a Burial and
a Reſurrection. It is not for this Reaſon the only Way; and I deny that this
Way doth on­ly ſet forth a Burial and a Reſurrection.

Dr. Ruſſel.

Then I will prove,

  * 1\. That it doth truly repreſent a Burial and a Reſurrection. And,
  * 2\. That it is the only right way of practiſing this Ordi­nance.

1\. That it doth repreſent a Burial and a Reſurrection, I prove from Rom. 6\.
and Coloſſ. 2\. In Rom. 6. 4. Therefore we are bu­ried with him by Baptiſm
into death, that like as Chriſt was raiſed up, &c. Coloſſ. 2. 12. Buried with
him in Baptiſm, wherein alſo ye are riſen with him, &c.

This cannot be underſtood literally; for ſo they were not, could not be buried
with him in his Sepulchre, neither can we, But the Apoſtle reſolves us how
this was done, and how they were, and we may, be buried with him, and alſo
riſe with him; and that is by Baptiſm. Buried with him in Baptiſm, where­in
alſo ye are riſen with him. Therefore Baptiſm is to be per­formed in ſuch a
way that repreſents a Burial and a Reſurrecti­on: which is moſt aptly
repreſented by Dipping, Plunging, or Overwhelming the Perſon baptized, into
the Water, and raiſing him up again out of it.

2\. That this is the only right way of performing this Or­dinance, I prove
thus:

If there were no other way practiſed by John the Baptiſt, Chriſt, nor his
Apoſtles, but what did repreſent a Burial and a Reſurrection, then ours is the
only right way of Baptizing.

But there was no other way practiſed by John the Baptiſt, Chriſt, nor his
Apoſtles, but what did repreſent a Burial and a Reſurrection:

Ergo, Ours is the only right way of Baptizing.

Mr. Chandler.

You are to prove, that becauſe Baptiſm is ſig­nificant of a Burial and
Reſurrection, therefore it muſt be done only by Dipping.

Dr. Ruſſel.

By this Mr. Chandler grants that Baptiſm doth ſignifie a Burial and
Reſurrection; and I have already proved that therefore it is the only right
way of Baptizing that we practiſe, becauſe there was no other practiſed in
thoſe firſt Times of the Goſpel. And till he give an Inſtance to the contrary,
my Proof ſtands good.

But I ſhall farther prove it by this Argument.

If there can no Inſtance be given that ever the Apoſtles did Baptize other
ways than by Dipping, then ours is the right Way of Baptizing.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=35) But there
[...] be no Inſtance given, that ever the Apoſtles did Baptize other ways than
by Dipping:

Ergo, Ours is the right way of Baptizing.

Mr. Leigh.

I deny the Enumeration in your Argument: for it doth not follow, that becauſe
the Apoſtles did not practiſe it any other way, that there were no others that
did. For there were divers other Miniſters in thoſe Times, beſides the
Apoſtles, that did alſo Baptize.

Dr. Ruſſel.

By this you grant that the Apoſtles of our Lord did not practiſe Baptiſm any
other way than by Dipping. And to prove that no others did uſe a different
Practice, I thus argue.

If we have no Account in Holy Scripture, that either the Apoſtles, or any
other Miniſters in thoſe Times, did Baptize any one Perſon other ways than by
Dipping, then Dipping is the only right way of Baptizing.

But we have no Account in Holy Scripture, that either the Apoſtles, or any
other Miniſters in thoſe Times, did Baptize any one Perſon other ways than by
Dipping:

Ergo, Dipping is the only right way of Baptizing.

Mr. Chandler.

I can ſhew there is another way that it might be done, and not by Dipping; and
that from the Etymology of the word Baptizo, for it ſignifies alſo to waſh.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I remember what Alſtedius ſaith in his Lexicon The­ologicum. Having before
been ſpeaking about the Etymology of that word;  [...] tantum ſignificat
immergere, non lava­re, niſi ex conſequenti: and therefore it ſignifies to
waſh only in a ſecondary and remote ſenſe, becauſe things that are dip'd, may
be ſaid to be waſh'd. But the proper and primary Sig­nification of Baptizo is,
to dip; for it comes from  [...], mer­go, immergo, to dip, to plunge, to
overwhelm, to dip into, &c.

Mr. Chandler.

I own that  [...] ſignifies mergo, immergo. But I can ſhew great probability,
that many, in Scripture times, were Baptized by pouring a little Water on the
Face: and there is no Certainty that Dipping was ever uſed.

Dr. Ruſſel.

How doth that appear?

Mr. Leigh

We will argue on a Probability. It might be done other ways than by Dipping;
and a Probability is the moſt you can pretend to for Dipping. I require you to
prove that Dip­ping was certainly intended in thoſe places you bring for it;
and then I will prove, that Dipping was not intended, but on­ly an Application
of Water to the Perſon.

Dr. Ruſſel.

The firſt Inſtance I ſhall give is the Baptiſm of our Saviour, as it is
expreſt in Mark 1. 9. Jeſus came from Naza­reth of Galilce, and was baptized
of John in Jordan. The words [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=35) are,  [...]
Which words do certainly ſignifie, that he was Dipped into [...]rdan.

Mr. Leigh.

The Word  [...] ſignifies in, as well as into, and is often ſo Tranſlated in
the New Teſtament.

Dr. Ruſſel.

That it may ſometimes ſo ſignify where the Scope of the place may ſhew it, I
will not contend. But you know very well, that where it is joined with an
Accuſative (as it is here) it ſignifies into. And I can ſhew that our
Tranſlators have ſo rendred it in many places in the New Teſtament. And it
would many times be Nonſence to underſtand it otherwiſe. I will give you ſome
Inſtances of it, in the room of many that might be given.

As in John 3. 17. God ſent not his ſon into the World to condemn the World;
but that the World through him might be ſaved. Here  [...] is rendred into:
for the Words in the Greek are  [...]; and I hope you will not deny that God
ſent Chriſt into the World.

And in 1 Tim. 1. 15. Chriſt Jeſus came into the World to ſave ſinners, &c.
There  [...] is alſo Tranſlated into. And I hope you will not deny, that
Chriſt came into the World to ſave Sinners. It's joined with the ſame Words as
in John 3\. 17. before re­cited.

And in Luke 4\. 16. it's ſaid, He went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath-day,
and ſtood up for to read. Here again it is ſo ren­dred; for the Words are,
[...], into the Syna­gogue, And the eyes of all them that were in the
Synagogue were faſtned on him, ver. 20. which could not have been, had he not
gone into the Synagogue; as it's manifeſt he did. And I hope you will not deny
that Chriſt went into the Synagogue: but you may do it with as much colour of
Reaſon, as to ſay he was not Dip'd, or Plunged of John into the River of
Jordan. when the ſame Word is uſed in the ſame Senſe. And beſides if we do but
conſider thoſe multitudes that John Baptized in the River of Jordan, and other
places where there was much Water; we have no reaſon to doubt of the Truth
thereof.

Mr. Leigh.

We allow, that what cannot be now uſed without being burdenſome. might be more
commodious in that day, and obſerved in that hot Country of Judaea, when there
was ſo many came to John to be Baptized: and therefore it may be that they
went out to Rivers. But I will argue upon a Pro­bability. It is well known, in
thoſe hot Countries the People wore Sandals: and they might go into the Water
a little way to waſh their Feet. Now I offer this fair Interpretation: They
might ſtep a little way into Jordan for Eaſe and Refreſhment, and then John
might pour a little Water on them.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=36) Now allow
[...]ut the Word  [...] to ſignifie to waſh, as we can eaſily pr [...]e it is
often ſo taken in Scripture; and I offer to all the Company, whether this be
not a fair Interpretation of the place, That John waſhed him with Water, he
going a little way into Jordan

Dr. Ruſſel.

Notwithſtanding this Flouriſh of a pretended Probability, you know that the
Word  [...] doth proper­ly ſignifie to Dip, as all the great Lexicographers
and Criticks do tell us; and that its proper and native Signification is to
Dip into Water, or to Plunge under Water: and that I could give you many
Inſtances of, out of Scapula, Stephanus, Schre­velius, and many others. And
they alſo tell us, That if it be uſed for Waſhing, it is in a remote Senſe:
and if it be taken in its primary Senſe, it's ſuch a Waſhing as is by Dipping,
or Plunging into the Water, and being covered therewith.

But that you may ſee I am not ſingular in my Opinion, I will ſhew you that
your own Expoſitors do thus render it, and ſome of the greateſt Men among the
Proteſtants that ever wrote ſince the Reformation: of which I have made a
Col­lection out of their own Works, becauſe I would not wrong them.

I ſhall begin with the Teſtimony of thoſe learned and judi­cious Divines of
your own Perſwaſion, who were thoſe that continued Mr. Peol's Annotations upon
Matth. 3\. 6. Theſe are their own words, Were Baptized, that is, Dipped in
Jordan.

Upon John 3\. 22, 23. There John was Baptizing, becauſe this Aenon was a Brook
or River that had much Water. It is from this apparent, that both Chriſt and
John Baptized by Dipping the Body in the Water; elſe they need not have ſought
Places where had been a great plenty of Water.

Before Dr. Ruſſel had read this laſt Sentence wholly out, the Presbyterian
Miniſters, even Mr. Leigh himſelf, as well as the reſt of them, fell a hiſſing
ſo loud, and ſet others of their Par­ty to make a noiſe alſo by their ill
Example, that altho Dr. Ruſſel went on with his Work, yet the Noiſe was ſo
great, that it wholly drowned his Voice, that he could not be heard.

Whereupon Mr. Sharp, the Moderator, call'd out aloud to ſtill this great
Noiſe, and ſpoke to this effect: What is the rea­ſon of this Hiſſing?
Gentlemen, are you not aſham'd? You preach to others the Doctrine of
Sanctification and Self-denial, and to act thus your ſelves, I am aſham'd to
ſee it. I pray, good People, take no notice of it now.

When Dr. Ruſſel perceived they would not forbear this Hiſ­ſing and uncivil
Carriage, he forbore to read any farther. And when Silence was obtained, he
addreſſed himſelf to the Mini­ſters after this manner:

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=36) Sirs,
What is the matter with you? Muſt I n [...] be permitted to recite your own
Authors, and ſome of the gre [...]teſt Men that have written ſince the
Reformation? Although their Teſtimo­ny againſt us is of little value, becauſe
they are Parties in the Controverſie; yet when the clear evidence of Truth
ſhall enforce a Confeſſion from their Pens that we are in the right, it is
then a great Teſtimony for us.

Here is firſt of all Pool's Annotators, certain learned and judi­cious
Divines, that ſay in that matter as we do: and they are Men of your own Party.
There is alſo Dr. Hammond ſaith the ſame.

Here the Doctor was interrupted again, and they cried out, What do you tell us
of Dr. Hammond? What have we to do with Dr. Hammond?

Dr. Ruſſel.

Why certainly, Gentlemen, Dr. Hammond is not thus to be deſpiſed upon his
Judgment about a Greek word. I have alſo Mr. Baxter, Wollebius, Tilenus, the
Learned Perkins, and Luther alſo, who was againſt Sprinkling, and practiſed
Dip­ping; and ſo did the reſt of the Divines at Wistenburgh. Mr. Calvin alſo,
although he did allow a Liberty of Sprinkling in cold Climates, yet he ſaith
as I do as to the Signification of the word Baptiz [...], that it ſignifies to
Dip, and was ſo uſed in the Primitive Church.

There is alſo the Dutch Tranſlators, they do every where render the words that
are uſed to expreſs this Ordinance by, as we do; and they call John the
Baptiſt, Joannes de Dooper, John the Dipper. And I know not of any place but
it's ſo ex­preſt. And theſe are Presbyterians, Men of your own Reli­gion.

Upon this, one of the Miniſters ſaid, What! do you under­ſtand Dutch?

Dr. Ruſſel ſaid, Yes, he underſtood it, but he could not ſpeak it readily.

They replied, We will try that; for we have a Gentleman here that underſtands
Dutch very well.

Dr. Ruſſel.

You may ask that Gentleman if you think fit: he can ſatisfie you, that what I
ſay is true.

But they had  [...] Diſcretion than to call the Gentleman out to confute
them­ſelves.

Dr. Ruſſel

I have alſo the Teſtimony of the Dutch Annota­tors, who ſay the ſame thing.
And theſe alſo are Men of your own Perſuaſion.

And, to add no more, I have alſo the Teſtimony of the Aſ­ſembly of Divines,
ſitting at Weſtminſter: And I hope they may be of ſome credit with you.

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=37) But they
would not ſuffer him to proceed in the Reading thereof to the People; but
cried out, We are Proteſtants, and will not pin our Faith on other Mens
ſleeves.

Dr. Ruſſel.

What! not the Aſſembly of Divines? I thought, though you had no regard to my
words, you might have had ſome regard to the Aſſembly of Divines. You know I
do not wrong theſe Authors: and therefore what muſt the People think of you,
to oppoſe your ſelves thus againſt theſe great Men, and ſuch multitudes of
them, that are of your own Per­ſuaſion (as many of them are) and the reſt,
ſome of the great­eſt Men ſince the Reformation. Surely the People cannot take
it kindly at your hands, to reject the Authority of theſe Men in a matter of
this Nature.

Their Anſwer was, We do reverence theſe Divines, but adhere to what they ſay
no farther than it agrees with the Word of God.

Dr. Ruſſel.

We ſay, that in this Particular, what they have written doth agree with the
Word of God.

Mr. Leigh.

You have recourſe to the prime Signification of the Word, whereas we muſt take
it according to its Accepta­tion in Scripture. And I offer it to the
Conſideration of the Learned, whether the prime Signification of the Word be a
ſufficient Argument in this caſe? And here he makes his Rhe­torical Excurſions
about a Mathematician, an Angel, a Foot­boy that carries a Letter, a
Phyſician, &c. and concludes thus, but we muſt go to the Scripture Acceptation
of the Word. And I challenge you to bring one place of Scripture where it muſt
be underſtood that it was done by Dipping.

Dr. Ruſſel.

It is very well, Mr. Leigh will allow that I have given the People the proper
Meaning of the word  [...], and that its prime Signification is to Dip. Now he
might have ſpared all the reſt that he hath ſaid; for we do not lay the ſtreſs
only upon the Etymology of the Word, but alſo upon the concurrent Teſtimonies
of Holy Scripture, that it was ſo underſtood and ſo practiſed by John the
Baptiſt, Chriſt, and his Apoſtles, and ſo repreſented by the Metaphors made
uſe of (as a Burial and a Reſurrection) to ſet it forth by: as alſo their
chooſing places where there was much Water to Baptize in, as I have already
ſhewed, ſo far as they would permit me; and ſhould have made it manifeſt
beyond exception, if I might have been heard.

But to anſwer your Demand, I alledge Acts 8. 38, 39. And they went both down
into the Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and by Baptized him. And when they
were come up out of the Wa­ter, &c. Here we have an account, that both the
Adminiſtra­tor, [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=37) and the Perſon
to be Baptized, went both down into the Water: and when they came there, he
Baptized him. And if Philip had not been to put the Eunuch into the Water, and
co­ver him with it, why ſhould they go down both into the Wa­ter? A little of
it might have been brought up to them into the Chariot, if Sprinkling would
have ſerved the turn. But it appears manifeſtly, that nothing leſs would ſerve
for to anſwer the Commiſſion, but to Dip the Perſon Baptized into the Wa­ter,
otherwiſe they did that which was wholly needleſs, and beſides the Rule that
was given them to practiſe by. And their coming up again out of the Water,
doth evidently ſhew that he was Plunged into it, and overwhelm'd with it.

Mr. Leigh replied, That the Greek word ſignified to go down to, and come up
from the Water.

Mr. Williams replied, That there was two differing Words (as he had been
informed) in the Greek Text; as there are two different Words in the
Tranſlation. For it is ſaid, As they went on their way, they came unto a
certain Water: This was before he propoſed for Baptiſm. But when a Grant was
given him that he might be Baptized, it is then ſaid, They went down both of
them into the Water, and Philip Baptized him there. Now as they are different
Words in the Tranſlation, coming unto, and going down into, even ſo they are
differing Words in the Greek.

Dr. Ruſſel ſaid, They were two different Words; to which Mr. Leigh conceſſed.

But after the Meeting was over, Mr. Williams the Presbyte­rian Miniſter, in
whoſe Meeting place the Diſpute was, told Mr. Williams the Baptiſt Diſputant,
he was in the right, and that they were two differing Words in the Greek; one
for coming unto, the other for going down into.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I then farther argue:

If the Spirit of God doth never uſe the Word  [...] where the Ordinance of
Baptiſm is mentioned, but al [...]ays ex­preſſes it by  [...]; then it was
performed by Dipping, Plunging, or Overwhelming only: But the Spirit of God
doth never uſe the word  [...] where the Ordinance of Baptiſm is mentioned,
but always expreſſes it by  [...];

Ergo. It was performed by Dipping, Plunging, or Over­whelming only.

Mr. Chandler.

I deny the Sequel of the Major; becauſe the Word doth ſometimes ſignify a
Waſhing that is ſhort of Dip­ping.

Dr. Ruſſel.

You muſt then aſſign your Inſtance.

Mr. Chandler

[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=38)

You muſt know that  [...] comes from  [...] Tabal. And I will ſhew that it
denotes ſuch a Waſhing as is ſhort of Dipping. And in Dan. 4\. 33. where it is
ſaid of Nebuchadnezzar, His body was wet with the dew of Heaven; the
Septuagint render it  [...]: ſo that it cannot be underſtood in your ſenſe.

Dr. Ruſſel.

That  [...] is uſed in the ſtead of Tabal, is true. But how do you know that
the Word was ſo Rendred by the Septuagint?

Mr. Chandler.

It is ſo in that Tranſlation that goes in their Name.

Dr. Ruſſel.

That I deny; for the Word there is Ebaphe, and not Baptizo. But do you not
know what Weemes ſaith in his Chriſtian Synagogue, That the Septuagint
Tranſlation was burnt, and only ſome Fragments of it remaining, which was made
up by others: ſo that neither you nor I know when we read the Septuagint, and
when we read other men. But what doth all this ſignify? That is but a
Tranſlation, and I think ours to be much better than that, if it were as you
ſay; and more agreeable to the ſcope of the place, to ſay his body was wet
with the dew of Heaven, than to ſay it was dipt with the dew of Heaven.

But I pray let Mr. Chandler tell us how it is in the Hebrew, which is the
Language in which it was written.

Mr. Chandler.

The Word in the Hebrew is Tabal.

Dr. Ruſſel.

That I deny.

Whereupon an Hebrew Bible was produced, and handed up to Dr. Ruſſel. And the
Book of Daniel not being placed in its right order, as in other Hebrew Bibles,
he did not readily find it; whereupon they cried out, They believ'd he could
not read it. The Dr. anſwered, He could read Hebrew before Mr. Chandler was
born: and as a demonſtration of it, he read a Verſe or two in the Beginning
thereof. Upon this Mr. Robin­ſon took the Book, and with ſome difficulty found
out the Book of Daniel and then gave it to Dr. Ruſſel again, who read the
Place by them directed to, and told Mr. Chandler that the Word Tabal was not
there. And then, after all this needleſs trouble, Mr. Chandler did confeſs
that it was not: and ſo all his Pretention from thence vaniſhed into Smoak.

Mr. Chandler alſo urged for another inſtance, to prove that Tabal ſignified a
Waſhing leſs than that by Dipping, 2 Kings 5. 10, 14. Go and waſh in Jordan,
and be clean. And in Verſe 14. H [...] dipped himſelf in Jordan. Now this muſt
ſignifie a Waſhing ſhort of Dipping; becauſe though Tabal doth expreſs the Act
done in Ver. 14. yet the Command is given by Rachatz, which ſignifies to waſh.

Dr. Ruſſel.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=38)

I do allow that the Command is  [...]xpreſt by Ra­chatz, and alſo that it
ſometimes is uſed, as we [...] as Cabas, to ſignifie leſs than Dipping when it
is applied to ſome particular things, or parts of things, which are to be
cleanſed from Filth; as you know  [...] in the Greek is to waſh the hands.

But where Rachatz in the Hebrew is uſed in the Sence as it's here expreſt,
namely, to waſh himſelf; it's always to be under­ſtood of ſuch a Waſhing as is
by Dipping. The Jews under­ſtood it ſo, and Naaman the Syrian underſtood the
Prophet in that ſence; for it's ſaid he dipped himſelf in Jordan ſeven times.
And that he was not miſtaken about it, is evident; for that the Spirit of God
hath left it upon Record, that what he did was according to the Saying of the
Man of God: ſo that the Prophet did not intend by Rachatz any other Waſhing
than what is performed by Dipping of the Perſon ſo waſhed into the Water. And
had this been a Derivative, there might have been ſome doubt raiſed about it;
but ſeeing Tabal is the Root it ſelf, it can ſignify nothing leſs than what is
the known ſence thereof, viz. he Dipped. He dipped himſelf in Jordan ſeven
times, according to the Saying of the Man of God. Thus I have cleared this
Text from your Objection, as not intending any ſuch thing as you have brought
it for, but the direct con­trary.

Then Mr. Chandler ſaid, We challenge you to prove, by Scripture, that the Word
Baptizo ſignifies to Dip, and that that is intended by Baptiſm.

Dr. Ruſſel.

I will prove it from all the Places where the Or­dinance of Baptiſm is ſpoken
of, if you will let me prove it from the Greek.

Mr. Chandler.

No, you ſhall prove it from our Tranſlation, that it's there any where ſo
rendred; but you ſhall not do it from any of thoſe places where the Ordinance
of Baptiſm is ſpoken of.

Dr. Ruſſel.

That is unreaſonable, that when the Uſe of a Word is enquired into, and what
was the Practice of the firſt Miniſters, purſuant to that Word by which they
are command­ed to Baptize; for all thoſe Scriptures where it is ſo mentioned
to be excluded out of our Enquiry.

Mr. Chandler.

I will not allow you to prove it from any of thoſe places where the Ordinance
of Baptiſm is either expreſt or intended.

Dr. Ruſſel.

If nothing elſe will do with you, I will then un­dertake to prove from divers
places in Scripture, that either Bapto, or its Derivatives, is ſo rendred in
our Engliſh Tranſla­tion.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=39) The firſt
Scripture I ſhall inſtance in, is, Revel. 19. 1 [...]. He was cloathed with a
Veſture dipt in Blood.

Mr. Chandler.

This is not Bapto.

Dr. Ruſſel.

No more is Baptizo, Baptiſmos, Baptiſma, &c. but they are all Derivatives from
it; and ſo is the Word that is here uſed. And this Mr. Chandler did not deny.

Dr. Ruſſel did then urge the ſeveral places in the Evangeliſts about Judas
dipping with Chriſt in the diſh; as, Matt. 26. 23. He that dippeth. Mark 14.
20. John 13. 26. When I have dip­ped it. And when he had dipped, &c. Now in
all theſe places you ſee it's thus rendred, and the Ordinance of Baptiſm not
in the leaſt intended.

Moreover, I will give you one Inſtance more, in which the moſt minute Action
imaginable is intended, and yet ſo much as was put into the Water is ſaid to
be dipt.

Luke 16\. 24. Where the rich Man being in Hell, deſired Fa­ther Abraham to
ſend Lazarus, that he might dip the tip of his finger in Water, to cool his
tongue, &c.

By this it appears, that our Tranſlators did thus underſtand the Word to
intend Dipping; and have never rendred it to Sprinkle in all the New
Teſtament.

I would only add, That when Learned Men come to have but the ſame Wiſdom as
the Jewiſh Rabbies have, to reduce all doubtful Words to their Roots and Theme
from whence they are derived, then much of our preſent Diſputes will iſſue in
the Knowledge of the Truth; and we ſhall ceaſe to ſtrive about Words to no
profit, but to the ſubverting of the Hear­ers.

Upon this followed a confuſed Jangling and Noiſe, ſo that the Amanuenſis could
not take it down, neither did he think it worth the taking.

But Mr. Williams, the Presbyterian Miniſter, ſaid, he thought there had been
little ſaid to the purpoſe.

Upon this Dr. Ruſſel ſaid, Mr. Williams, I think there hath been a great deal
ſaid more than hath been anſwered: but if you are not ſatisfied, we will wave
all that hath been ſaid, and I will diſpute it over with you de novo.

Mr. Williams ſhrugged, and anſwered no; I am not very well.

Although he had not been engaged at all in the Diſpute himſelf, and the Doctor
had been fatigued by ſo long a Diſpu­tation, yet Mr. Williams refuſed to
accept his Offer.

It was at laſt thought meet by them to put an Iſſue to the Diſputation. And Mr
Leigh (after he had made a Speech to thank the Governour and the Mayor for
their Civility towards [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=39) them, and the
Baptiſts had returned their Thanks alſo) he then concluded in Prayer; and ſo
diſmiſt the Aſſembly. It was be­tween the hours of Six and Seven of the Clock
when the Diſ­pute ended.

I do now think it proper to give you an Account of thoſe Learned Mens
Teſtimonies to juſtifie our Practice of Dipping, which Dr. Ruſſel was then
prevented to recite, by reaſon of the Miniſters Hiſſing, and the Noiſe and
Clamour of their Party, that would not ſuffer him to be heard.

### 1.2.

#### 1.2.1. Pool's Annotations.

Matt. 3. 6 Were Baptized: that is, Dipped in Jordan.

Matt. 28\. 19. It's true, the firſt Baptiſms of which we read in Holy Writ,
were by Dipping of the Perſons Baptized. Where it may be we judge it
reaſonable, and moſt reſembling our Burial with Chriſt by Baptiſm into Death.

John 3\. 22, 23. There John was Baptizing, becauſe this Aenon was a Brook or
River that had much Water. It is from this apparent, that both Chriſt and John
Baptized by Dipping the Body in the Water; elſe they need not have ſought
places where had been a great plenty of Water.

Acts 8\. 38. In hot Countries this was uſual, to Baptize by Dipping the Body
in the Water.

Rom. 6\. 4. He ſeems here to allude to the manner of Bapti­zing in thoſe warm
Eaſtern Countries, which was to Dip or Plunge the Party Baptized; and, as it
were, to bury him for a while under Water.

#### 1.2.2. Dr. Hammond's Annotations.

Matth. 3. John put the Perſons whom he Baptized into the Water, Dipped them
all over, and ſo took them out again. And in his Paraphraſe on

Mark 1\. 5. And John's Baptiſm was done in Jordan, a River convenient for that
purpoſe.

#### 1.2.3. The Learned Perkins.

Rom. 6\. The ancient Cuſtom of Baptizing was to Dip, and as it were to dive
all the Body of the Baptized in the Water; as may appear in Paul, Rom. 6\. And
the Councils of Laodicea, and Neocaeſarea. The Action of the Miniſter, is his
waſhing of the Party Baptized with the Element of Water.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=40) Of
Waſhing there be three parts: The putting into the Wa­ter, the continuance in
the Water, and the coming out of the Water. Perkins's Order of the Cauſes of
Salvation and Dam­nation, cap. 33. pag. 74. vol. 1.

And in his Comment on Golat. 3. 27. vol. 2. pag 257\. the Dipping of the Body
ſignifies Mortification, or Fellowſhip with Chriſt in his Death: the ſtaying
under the Water, ſigni­fies the Burial of Sin; and the coming out of the
Water, the Reſurrection from Sin to Newneſs of Life.

And upon Matth. 28 19. Here (ſaith he) a Queſtion may be made, whether waſhing
the Body in Baptiſm, muſt be by Dipping or Sprinkling? His Anſwer is this; In
hot Countries, and in the Baptiſm of Men of years, Dipping was uſed, and that
by the Apoſtles: And to this Paul alludes Rom. 6\. 3, 4. And Dipping doth more
fully repreſent our ſpiritual Waſhing, than Sprinkling. Ibid. pag. 257.

#### 1.2.4. Mr Baxter, in his Paraphraſe.

Matth. 3\. 5. We grant that Baptiſm then was by waſhing the whole Body.

Matth. 3\. 6. Baptiſm was in John's time, by waſhing the whole Body.

Rom. 6\. 4. Therefore in our Baptiſm we are Dipped under the Water.

Coloſſ. 2\. 12. Ye are dead and buried with him; for ſo your Baptiſm
ſignified, in which ye are put under the Water, to ſig­nify and profeſs that
your Old man, or fleſhly Luſt, is dead and buried with him; and you riſe
thence, to ſignify and pro­feſs, that you riſe to Newneſs of Life.

In his third Argument againſt Mr. B [...]ake, he ſaith, quoad mo­dum, with
reſpect to the Manner, It is commonly confeſt by us to the Anabaptiſts (as our
Commentators declare) that in the Apoſtles time, the Baptized were Dipt over
head in Water. And though we have thought it lawful to diſuſe the manner of
Dipping, yet we preſume not to change the Uſe and Signifi­cation of it.

#### 1.2.5. Dr. Cave.

In his Primitive Chriſtianity, pag. 320. ſaith, That the Party baptized was
wholly immerged, or put under Water; which was the almoſt conſtant and
univerſal Cuſtom of thoſe times: whereby they did moſt notably and
ſignificantly expreſs the great End and Effects of Baptiſm; for as in
Immerging there are in a manner three ſeveral Acts, the putting the Perſon
into [[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=40)
Water, his abiding there for ſome time, and his riſing up again, thereby
repreſenting Chriſt's Death, Burial, and Reſurrecti­on, &c.

#### 1.2.6. Dr. Nicholſon, late Lord Biſhop of Gloceſter.

In his Expoſition of the Church-Catechiſm, ſaith, in pag. 174\. And the
ancient manner in Baptiſm, the putting the Perſon Baptized under the Water,
and then taking him out again did well ſet out theſe two Acts, the firſt his
dying, the ſecond his riſing again. And in the ſame Page, upon Col. 2\. 12. he
ſaith, Into the Grave with Chriſt we went not, for our Bodies were not, could
not be buried with his; but in our Baptiſm, by a kind of Analogy or
Reſemblance, while our Bodies are under the Water, we may be ſaid to be buried
with him.

#### 1.2.7. Dr. Fowler, preſent Lord Biſhop of Gloceſter.

In his Scope of the Chriſtian Religion, upon Rom 6 4. ſaith, Chriſtians being
pl [...]nged into the Water in Baptiſm, ſignifieth their undertaking and
obliging themſelves, in a ſpiritual ſenſe, to die and be buried with Jeſus
Chriſt, that ſo anſwerably to his Reſurrection, they may live a holy and godly
Life.

#### 1.2.8. Dr. Tillotſon, late Archbiſhop of Canterbury.

In his Sermon upon 2 Tim. 2\. 19. ſaith, Anciently thoſe who were Baptized put
off their Garments, which ſignified the put­ting off the Body of Sin; and were
immerſed and buried in the Water, to repreſent the Death of Sin; and then did
riſe up again out of the Water, to ſignifie their Entrance upon a new Life.
And to theſe Cuſtoms the Apoſtle alludes, Rom. 6\. 4.

#### 1.2.9. Dr. Jer. Taylor, late Lord Biſhop of Down.

In his Ductor dubitantium, lib. 3 cap. 4. ſaith, The Cuſtom of the ancient
Church was not Sprinkling, but Immerſion, in purſuance of the ſence of the
Word  [...], both in the Commandment and Example of our Bleſſed Saviour. And
this agrees with the Myſtery of the Sacrament it ſelf; for we are buried with
him in Baptiſm (ſaith the Apoſtle;) The Old-man is buried and drowned in the
Immerſion under Water: and when the Baptized Perſon is lifted up from the
Water, it re­preſents the Reſurrection of the New-man to Newneſs of Life.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=41)

#### 1.2.10. The Learned Joſeph Mede.

In his Diatribe on Titus 3\. 5. ſaith, There was no ſuch thing as Sprinkling
uſed in Baptiſm in the Apoſtles time, nor many Ages after them.

#### 1.2.11. Mr. Daniel Rogers.

None of old were wont to be Sprinkled, and (ſaith he) I confeſs my ſelf
unconvinced by demonſtration of Scripture for Infants Sprinkling. It ought to
be the Churches part to cleave to the Inſtitution, which is Dipping. And he
betrays the Church, whoſe Officer he is, to a diſorder'd Error, if he cleave
not to the Inſtitution, which is to Dip. Rogers's Treatiſe of the two
Sacraments, part 1. chap. 5.

#### 1.2.12. The famous Reformer Luther.

Luther de Baptiſmo, tom. 1. fol. 71. in the Latin Edition, printed at
Wittemburgh, ſaith, Baptiſm is a Greek word; it may be tranſlated a Dipping,
when we dip ſomething in Water, that it may be covered with Water. And
although it be for the moſt part altogether aboliſhed, for that they do not
Dip the whole Children, but only Sprinkle them with a little Wa­ter, they
ought nevertheleſs to be wholly dipt, and preſently to be drawn out again.

And in Tome 2. fol. 79\. concerning Babylon's Captivity. The other thing
(ſaith he) which belongs to Baptiſm, is the Sign, or the Sacrament, which is
the dipping it ſelf into the Water: from whence alſo it hath its Name. Nam
baptizo Graece, mer­go Latinè, & Baptiſma merſio eſt. For Baptizo in Greek, is
in Latin Mergo, to dip; and Baptiſma, is dipping. And a little af­ter,
ſpeaking of Rom. 6\. 4. he ſaith, Being moved by this Rea­ſon, I would have
thoſe that are to be Baptized, to be wholly dipt into the Water; as the Word
doth ſound, and the Myſte­ry doth ſignifie.

And when Complaint was made to him and other Divines at Wittemburgh, That a
Child had been Sprinkled at Hamburgh, and their Advice deſired upon it; he
wrote to Hamburgh to ac­quaint them, that their Uſe of Sprinkling was an
Abuſe, which they ought to remove. Ita merſionem Hamburgi reſtitutam eſſe. So
Dipping was reſtored at Hamburgh Author Joannes Bugen­hagius Pomeranius, in
his Book printed Anno 1542\. He was Contemporary with, and a Succeſſor of
Luther at Wittemburgh.

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=41)

#### 1.2.13. The Learned Grotius.

On Matth. 3. 6. Merſatione autem, non perfuſione agi ſolitum hunc ritum
indicat & vocis proprietas, & loca ad eum ritum de­lecta, John 3. 23. Acts 8.
38. Et alluſiones multae Apoſtolorum quae ad aſperſionem referri non poſſunt,
Rom. 6. 3, 4. Col. 2. 12.

#### 1.2.14. Mr. John Calvin.

On John 3\. 23. Baptiſm was performed by John and Chriſt, by dipping of the
whole Body in Water.

And in his Inſtitutions, lib. 4. cap. 15. ſect. 19\. he ſaith thus, Caeterum
mergaturne totus qui tingitur, idque ter an ſemel, an infu­ſa tantum aqua
aſpergatur, minimum refert: ſed id pro regionum diverſitate Eccleſis liberum
eſſe debet. Quanquam & ipſum bapti­zandi verbum mergere ſignificat, & mergendi
ritum veteri Eccleſia obſervatum fuiſſe conſtat.

Here you may ſee, that although he thinks it a thing indif­ferent whether it
be done by Dipping or Sprinkling, and that thrice or once only; and that it's
left to the Churches Liber­ty, according to the diverſity of Countries: yet he
comes in at laſt with his Quanquam, notwithſtanding the word Baptiſm ſignifies
to Dip, and it is evident that the Rite of Dipping was obſerved by the Old
Church.

The Caſe is ſo clear (as a learned Writer hath noted) that Calvin up and down
his Works doth often confeſs, that the ancient manner of Baptiſm in the
Primitive times was by Dip­ping the whole Body under Water.

#### 1.2.15. Piſcator,

On John 3: 23. ſaith, That Baptiſm was performed by Dip­ping the whole Body
under Water.

#### 1.2.16. The Dutch Tranſlators.

Matth. 3. 1. Joannes de Dooper, John the Dipper. Verſ 6. Gedoopt in de
Jordaen, Dipt in Jordan. Verſ. 16 Ende Jeſus ge­doopt zynde epgeklommen uyt
het water. And Jeſus being Dipt, he (climbed or) came up out of the Water.
Matth. 28 19. Onderwyst alle de volckeren, deſelve dopende in den name des
va­ders, &c. Inſtruct all the People, dipping the ſame in the name of the
Father, &c. Mark 1. 9. Ende wiert van Joanne gedoopt in de Jordaen. Ende
terſtont als by uyt het Water opklaem, &c. [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=42) And was dipt of
John in Jordan. And ſtraightways as he climb'd up out of the Water, &c.

Acts 8. 36. Wat verhindert my gedoopt te worden? What hin­ders me to be dipt?
v. 38. Ende hy doopte hem. And he dipt him. v. 12. Wierden ſy gedoopt beyde
Mannen ende Vrouwen. They were dipt both Men and Women.

Rom. 6. 3. Ofte en wetet ghy niet dat ſoo vele als wy in Chri­ſtum Jeſum
dedoopt zyn, wy in Synen doodt gedoopt zyn? Know ye not that ſo many of us as
were dipt into Chriſt Jeſus, we were dipt into his Death? And the ſame in
Coll. 2\. 12. And (according to what I find) in all other places where this
Ordi­nance of Baptiſm is mentioned.

#### 1.2.17. Dutch Annotations.

On John 3\. 23. And John alſo Baptized in Aenon near Salim, &c. ſeeing there
were many Waters there, that is Brooks or Rivelets, or much Water, Becauſe
they that were Baptized by John, went into the Water with their whole Bodies.
See Matth. 3. 16. Acts 8\. 38.

And on Rom. 6. 3. We are Baptized into his Death. The Apoſtle ſeems here to
allude to the manner of Baptizing much uſed in thoſe warm Eaſtern Countries;
where Men were wholly Dipt into the Water, and remained a little while under
the Water; to ſhew that this Dipping into, and remaining in the Water, is a
Repreſentation of Chriſt's Death and Burial: and the riſing up out of the
Water, of his Reſurrection.

#### 1.2.18. Beza on Matth. 3. 11.

The Word  [...], ſignifies to die by dipping or waſhing, and differs from the
Word  [...], to drown, or go down to the bottom like a Stone.

#### 1.2.19. Cauſabon's Annotations

Upon Matth 3\. He ſaith, Immerging was the proper Rite in Baptiſm, which the
Word it ſelf ſufficiently declares; which as it ſignifies not  [...], a going
down to the bottom without any aſcending; ſo not  [...], a ſwimming like a
Cork above the Water; but  [...], a going down and coming up again.

[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=42)

#### 1.2.20. Tilenus, a Learned Proteſtant Writer,

In his Diſputation, page 886, 889, 890. ſaith, Baptiſm is the firſt Sacrament
of the New Teſtament Inſtituted by Jeſus Chriſt.

#### 1.2.21. The Outward Rite in Baptiſm is Three fold.

  * Firſt, Immerſion into the Water.
  * 2dly, Abiding under the Water.
  * 3dly, A riſing again out of the Water.

And he there ſhews at large, what a moſt lively Similitude it is of the
Sorrows of Chriſt which he was plung'd into un­der Divine Juſtice, and of his
Burial and Reſurrection, &c.

#### 1.2.22. Leigh, in his Critica Sacra.

He ſaith,  [...], is derived from  [...], tingo, to dip or plunge into the
Water, and ſignifieth primarily ſuch a kind of waſhing as is uſed in Bucks,
where Linen is plunged or dipt. It implieth the waſhing of their whole Body.
The Native and Proper ſignification of it is, to dip into Water, or to plunge
under Water, John 3. 22, 23. Matth. 3. 16. Acts 8\. 38.

[...], Dipping into Water, or waſhing with Wa­ter, &c.

And in his Annotations on Rom 6 4. He alludes to the man­ner in which Baptiſm
was then Adminiſtred, which was to plunge them in the Water; the plunging of
them into Water that were Baptized, was a Sign of their Death and Burial with
Chriſt.

#### 1.2.23. Wollebius in his Compendium, &c.

Speaking of their preſent Practiſe, ſaith, The Action is ſprinkling of Water,
which is uſurped in the ſtead of Dip­ping. And then adds, Immerſio & emerſio
illuſtre Symbolum fuit Sepulturae & Reſurrectionis Chriſti. Their being
plunged into the Water, and coming up again out of the Water, was an
Illu­ſtrious Symbol of the Burial and Reſurrection of Chriſt.

#### 1.2.24. Daille, on the Fathers.

Lib. 2\. p. 148. ſaith, It was a Cuſtom heretofore in the An­cient Church, to
plunge thoſe they Baptized, over Head and Ears in the Water; and cites for his
Authority, Tertullian, [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=43) Cyprian,
Epiphanius, and others. And this is ſtill (ſaith he) the Practice both of the
Greeks and Ruſſians at this Day. And Cites Caſſander de Baptiſmo, pag. 193.
and yet notwithſtanding this Cuſtom, which is both ſo Ancient and ſo
Univerſal, is now aboliſhed by the Church of Rome.

And this is the reaſon that the Moſcovites ſay that the Latines are not
rightly and duly Baptized; becauſe they do not uſe this Ancient Ceremony in
their Baptiſm.

Alſo, in that Greek Lexicon, Publiſhed and Recommended to all, for the
encreaſe of Knowledge (and explained in Engliſh) by Mr. Joſeph Caryll, Mr.
George Cockayne, Mr. Ralph Vening, Mr. William Dell, Mr. Matthew Barker, Mr.
William Adderly, Mr. Matthew Mead, Mr. Henry Jeſſey. They render  [...], to
dip, plunge, or drown. In the paſſive Voice,  [...], to be plunged, or
overwhelmed.  [...], to dip in, as one doth his Finger in Liquor. [From this
we may allow, that the Presbyterian Miniſters do Baptize their Fingers when
they dip them into the Waters: but cannot be ſaid to Baptize the Children,
becauſe they do not dip them in the Water, but ſprinkle only a little Water
upon their Faces] Mat. 26. 23. John 13. 26. Mark 14\. 20.  [...], to plunge,
to overwhelm, to waſh, to dip, Mat. 3. 11. John 1\. 25. Chap. 3. 26. John 4.
1. 1 Cor. 1. 17. John 1. 31. Matth. 28. 19. John 3. 22. John 4\. 2. Chap. 1.
28.

[...], to be plunged, to be Baptized, or Dipt.

By a Metaphor, it's taken for Affliction, Matth. 20\. 22. which is familiarly
read in Scripture; whereby Afflictions are compared to the Gulphs and Whirl-
Pools of Water, into which thoſe are plunged, who ſtruggle with the Miſeries
and Calami­ties of this Life. Yet they are ſo plunged, that they can lift up
themſelves again.

I might alſo add, what thoſe ſeveral great Maſters of the Greek Tongue, us
Scapula, Stephanus, Schrevelius, and divers others, have ſaid concerning the
Etymology thereof. But the Learned being ſo well acquainted therewith, I ſhall
only touch upon it: They confirming what I have already obſerved from others.
They tell us in their Lexicons, that  [...], &c. from  [...], ſignifies mergo,
immergo, ſubmergo, obruo; item tingo, quod fit immergendo. To dip, to
overwhelm, to plunge or dip in, to drown or ſink in the Water, to overwhelm,
to dip, or plunge; to put under, to cover clean over, &c. And that  [...],
Rantizo, is Aſpergo, to ſprinkle:  [...], Aſperſio, ſprinkling.

Now theſe two different Words, do ſignifie two different Actions: For he that
is only ſprinkled, cannot be ſaid to be dipt, or plunged under the Water, and
to come up again out [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=43) of the Water,
(when they were never in it) as thoſe are ſaid to do, in Acts 8\. 38. They
went both down into the Water, and they came up again out of the Water.
Beſides, I challenge all the Learned in the World to ſhew one Inſtance in the
New Teſtament, that theſe words Rantizo, Rantiſmos, or Rantiſma, are ever made
uſe of by the Spirit of God, to expreſs that Or­dinance of Baptiſm by. For
they know right well that Bapto, and its Derivatives are always made uſe of to
expreſs it by. And where they are tranſlated into Engliſh, the one is rendred
Dipping, and the other Sprinkling. But if theſe Men will keep up a Practiſe
contrary to Holy Scripture. and the Judg­ment of the moſt Learned
Lexicographers and Criticks in the Greek Tongue, it's their own fault, and not
ours.

#### 1.2.25. The Aſſembly of Divines Annotations.

Acts 8\. 38. They went both down into the Water.

They were wont to dip the whole Body, or go down into the Water, as here, and
Matth. 3\. 16.

And upon Rom. 6\. 4. Buried with him by Baptiſm.

See Col. 2\. 12. In this Phraſe the Apoſtle ſeemeth to allude to the Ancient
Manner of Baptiſm; which was to Dip the Parties Baptized, and as it were, to
bury them under the Water for a while, and then to draw them out of it, and
lift them up; to repreſent the Burial of our Old Man, and our Reſurrection to
newneſs of Life.

The late Dr. Gabriel Towerſon, in his Explication of the Ca­techiſm of the
Church of England, Part 4. pag. 20 &c. ſpeaks largely upon it, in Vindication
of the Rite of Dipping in Bap­tiſm; of which I ſhall recite ſome few Paſſages,
and refer you to his Book for the reſt.

Baptiſm is intended as a Sign, and that in reſpect of the Manner of
Application uſed; I mean the dipping, or plun­ging the Party Baptized in it. A
ſignification which St. Paul will not ſuffer thoſe to forget, who have been
acquainted with his Epiſtles, for which he Quotes Rom 6 4. and Col. 2\. 12. It
was performed by the Ceremony of Immerſion, that the Perſon Immerſed, might by
that Ceremony (which was no obſcure Image of a Sepulture) be minded of the
pre­cedent Death, as in like manner by his coming again out of the Water, of
his riſing from that Death to Life, after the Example of the Inſtitutor
thereof.

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=44) Then he
puts this Queſtion, Whether it ought to be per­formed by an Immerſion, or an
Aſperſion, &c?

His Anſwer is, It may be a more material Queſtion than is commonly deemed by
us who have been accuſtomed to Bap­tize by a bare Effuſion and Sprinkling of
Water upon the Party.

For things which depend for their force on the meer Will and Pleaſure of him
who Inſtituted them, there ought (no doubt) great regard to be had to the
Commands of him that did ſo; as without which there is no reaſon we ſhould
receive the benefit of that Ceremony to which he has been pleaſed to annex it.

Now what the Command of Chriſt was in this particular, cannot be well doubted
of by thoſe who ſhall conſider; Firſt, The words of Chriſt, Matth 28\. 19.
concerning it, and the Practice of thoſe Times, whether in the Baptiſm of John
or our Saviour; for the words of Chriſt are, That they ſhould Baptize or Dip
thoſe whom they made Diſciples to him; for (ſo no doubt) the word  [...],
Baptizontes, properly ſignifies: Though if there could be any doubt concerning
the ſignification of the words themſelves, yet would that doubt be removed by
con­ſidering the Practice of thoſe Times. For ſuch as was the Practice of
thoſe Times in Baptizing, ſuch in reaſon we are to think our Saviour's Command
to have been concerning it, &c. there being not otherwiſe any means either for
thoſe, or future Times to diſcover his intention concerning it.

What the Practice of thoſe Times were, will need no other proof, than the
reſorting to Rivers and other ſuch Receptacles of Water for the performance of
that Ceremony, as that be­cauſe there was much Water there, Matth. 3\. 5. John
3\. 23. And the Scripture expreſly affirming concerning the Baptiſm of the
Eunuch, Acts 8\. 38. That Philip and the Eunuch went both down into a certain
Water (which they met with in their Journey) in order to the Baptizing of the
latter.

For what need would there have been of the Baptiſts re­ſorting to great
Confluxes of Water; or of Philip's and the Eunuch's going down into this, were
it not that the Baptiſm both of the one and of the other, were to be performed
by an Immerſion; a very little Water (as we know it doth with us) ſufficing
for an Effuſion or Sprinkling.

The ſame is to be ſaid yet more, upon the account of our conforming to the
Death and Reſurrection of Chriſt, which we learn from St. Paul to be the
deſign of Baptiſm to ſignifie; for though that might, and was well enough
repreſented by the Beptized Perſons being buried in Baptiſm, and their riſing
[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=44) out of
it; yet can it not be ſaid to be ſo, or, at leaſt but very imperfectly, by the
bare pouring out, or ſprinkling the Bap­tiſmal Water on him.

But therefore; as there is ſo much the more Reaſon to repre­ſent the Rite of
Immerſion as the Only Legitimate Rite of Baptiſm, becauſe the Only One that
can anſwer the ends of its Inſtitution, and thoſe things that were to be
ſignified by it; ſo eſpecially, if (as is well known, and undoubtedly of great
force) the general Practice of the Primitive Church was agreea­ble thereto,
and the Greek Church to this very Day: for who can think that either the one,
or the other, would have been ſo tenacious of ſo troubleſom a Rite, were it
not that they were well aſſured (as they of the Primitive Church might very
well be) of its being the Only Inſtituted and Legitimate One. I cannot but
think the forementioned Arguments to be ſo far of force, as to evince the
neceſſity thereof, &c. For what benefit can Men ordinarily expect from that
which depends for its force upon the Will of him that Inſtituted it; where
there is no ſuch compliance in the leaſt with it, and the Com­mand of the
Inſtitutor; as may anſwer thoſe ends for which he applied it.

# Dr. Barlow, late Biſhop of Lincoln, in his Letter to Mr. John Tombes,
Printed in his Life-time and owned by him.

He ſaith thus; I believe and know, that there is neither Precept nor Practice
in the Scripture for Paedo-Baptiſm; nor any juſt Evidence for it, for about
two hundred Years after Chriſt. Sure I am, that in the Primitive Times they
were to be Catechumeni, and then Illuminati, or Baptizati: And this not only
Children of Pagans, or Pagans Converted; but Chil­dren of Chriſtian Parents.
Nazianzen, though a Biſhop's Son, being not Baptized till he was about Thirty
Years of Age, as appears in his Life. And the like is evident in ſome others.

I have ſeen what my Learned and Worthy Friend Dr. Ham­mond, Mr. Baxter, and
others, ſay in defence of it; and I confeſs I wonder not a little, that Men of
ſuch Parts ſhould ſay ſo much to ſo little purpoſe: For I have not ſeen any
thing like an Argument for it.

I ſhall add no more, but my hearty Wiſhes, That as God was pleaſed to make the
Hearing of the Diſpute, of ſuch uſe to ſeveral Perſons, that they were fully
convinced (by the Grace of God towards them) of the Truth of the Doctrine of
Holy Baptiſm, and did in few Days after ſubmit them­ſelves [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=45) to be Dipt in
Water, upon Profeſſion of their Faith, according to the Commiſſion of our Lord
and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt, That it may alſo be of the like uſe to many others,
in the Reading of it; that ſo there may be added to the Church daily▪ ſuch as
ſhall be Saved. And then my deſign will be anſwered in its Publication; and I
ſhall count it a ſufficient Reward for all my Pains and Labour therein.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=31621&page=45)

[Home](/)

Date: 1699  

