## (unknown project)

# Choice sermons preached upon selected occasions Viz. The happinesse of
peace: before K. James at Trinitie Colledge in Cambridge. The love-sick
spouse: at St. Pauls Crosse. The burning light: at a visitation in Christs
Church, London. The magistrates commission, or wisdome justified: before the
judges. By John Stoughton, Doctor in Divinitie, sometime fellow of Emanuel
College in Cambridge, late preacher of Aldermanbury, London. According to the
originall copie which was perfected by the author before his death.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=1)

THE Burning Light. A SERMON PREACHED at a Viſitation in CHRISTS Church,
London.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes for Daniel Frere. 1640.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. A SERMON PREACHED AT THE VISITATION IN CHRIST-CHVRCH, LONDON.SERM. 3

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=2)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=2)

## 1\. A SERMON PREA­CHED AT THE VI­SITATION IN CHRIST-CHVRCH, LONDON.SERM. 3

IOHN 5. 35.‘He was a burning and a ſhining Light, and ye were willing to
rejoyce in his Light for a ſeaſon.’

THey ſay of the Nightingale,Introductio. 1. Apologia. that when ſhe is
ſolitary in the Woods, ſhe is careleſſe of her note; but compoſes her ſelfe
more quaintly and elegantly, if ſhe conceives there be any Auditors, or if ſhe
be neere houſes: ſhe can chirpe it in a [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=3) corner and chant it
in a Quire more delicate­ly. Though I had thought to have accommo­dated my
ſelfe, in ſome reſpect to the Audi­tory (for I know there is a great
difference to which due reſpect may be had; Modus orationis eſt auditor) Yet
as the Martyr ſayd, I ſhall coſen many this day, meaning the wormes, whom
(ſaith he) I ſhall deceive of this fat carcaſe (which they would have made a
feaſt on) it being likely to bee offered in Sacrifice to God with fire. If
there be any here that bring a worme of Curioſi­ty in their eare, expecting
quaint and elegant ſtraines, I ſhall deceive them, I make no pro­viſion for
them; I muſt confeſſe as Nazianzen ſayd of himſelfe, he never affected in his
life the glory or Pompe of the world, or riches and great eſtate; but (ſaith
he) learning and eloquence I muſt confeſſe I have affected, but I ſet no other
price upon that, but onely this, that I have ſomething of worth to eſteeme as
nothing for Chriſt, I have layd all theſe low at the feete of Chriſt to
advance his Kingdome, though in a plaine and home­ly manner. I liſt not to
ſpeake in a vie; as the two Artificers who contended for the ma­ſtery in their
Art and facultie; the firſt draw­ing Grapes ſo lively that hee cozened the
birds; the other a Vaile ſo exquiſitely that he cozened the Artificer
himſelfe. But if I may have ſo much Eloquence and learning, [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=3) as to draw the
attentions of the godly, I ſhall not be ſollicitous nor ambitious, to attaine
to ſuch a pitch, as to exceede the expectation of the learned. So much by way
of Apolo­gie.

To come towards of the Text,2\. Technologia capitis. not to ſtay in the
entrance; but to give a little touch of the coherence of the Chapter. The
whole Chapter conſiſts of an Historicall narration,1\. Hiſtorica. and an
Apologeticall Sermon of our Savi­ours.2\. Apologetica. There is a Narration of
a glorious mira­cle done on a poore Cripple 38. yeares lame; and our Saviour
is faine to make an Apologie for this gracious worke of his; and ſo in the
latter part of the Chapter, he juſtifies his Authoritie and power, by which he
tooke upon him that Office in the execu­tion of which he did this Miracle.

This ſpeech of our Saviour his Sermon, is partly Didaſcalicall Doctrinall,
[...]:, partly Elenchticall reproving their fault and their ſinne?

In the Doctrinall part you have a plaine and vehement aſſertion of his power
and autho­rity in the 19. verſe and ſo following,1\. Aſſertio Po­teſtatis.
where he affirmes a greater power than yet they have ſeene him exerciſe.

Secondly we have a Confirmation from two ſorts of Testimonies.

Firſt of Iohn, Iohn bare witneſſe of me, from 31. verſe, of which the words of
the Text [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=4) are
a part: and partly of his Workes, his Workes beare a greater, and more cleere
Teſtimony and evidence,Iohannis. Operum. The workes I doe they beare witneſſe
of me.

And ſecondly a Teſtimony more remote, yet more pregnant,2\. Remolo po­tenti.
Patris. Scripturae. the The Teſtimony of his Father; The Father he beareth
witneſſe of me: the 37. and 38. v. and the teſtimony of Scrip­ture, in the 39.
v. Search the Scriptures for they beare witnes of me too: 2\.  [...]. All
theſe evidences and ſeales he brings to juſtifie his Cōmiſſion: and therefore
in the latter part he fals to Reprehen­ſion, 1\. Culphr. 2 Cauſa tri­plex. he
reprehends their fault, pointing at the Cauſe, 1\. Malignitas. likewiſe the
fault was, they did not be­leeve to eternal life: the cauſes, partly becauſe
they wanted the love of God, they had a kinde of malignity againſt his
heavenly Father, and being leaven'd with an ill humour, and ill diſ­poſition
towards him; they did not receive nor entertaine him;2\. Superbia. and partly
by rea­ſon of their pride and ſelfe-ſeeking, in the 42 verſ. You ſeeke the
glory of men, and can you beleeve then; you ſeeke glory one from ano­ther: and
ambition ſtopt their cares, cloſed up and hedged up the way from giving
enter­tainement to Chriſt.3\. Infidelitas.

And laſtly the roote and ground of all, was Infidelity, You beleeve not Moſes
and the Prophets, and therefore no wonder you be­leeve not me, and my workes:
If you beleeved them,2\. Tractatio. they would give witneſſe of me, as in
[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=4) the cloſe of
the Chapter.

Theſe words containe a Noble Elogie which our Saviour doth moſt candidly give
to Iohn, He was a burning and a ſhining light, &c.

I purpoſe briefely to runne through the words, there bee many things will
offer themſelves, but I will not inſiſt nor pitch up­on any in particular, but
take the generality, and ſo draw to an Application.

There be two maine things obſervable in the words.

Firſt,1\. Miniſtri. the Office of the Miniſtery (for I will take it rather in
the generality, than fall into any thing perſonally on Iohn) And ſecond­ly the
entertainement which they muſt look for.

The Office of the Miniſtry, repreſents both their Qualities, how they muſt be
qua­lified:1\. Qualitas. and their Dignity, how they are to be dignified; all
in the ſame words a little vari­ed in their conſideration. The Qualities and
Endowments which a miniſter ought to have, are repreſented here in this
Picture of Iohn; wherein our Saviour deſcribes the Character of a Miniſter.
Like as it is in the heavenly bodies, There be three things, Light, and Heate,
and Influence; We have proportionable here, three Endowments of the Miniſters.

1\. They muſt have the Light of Knowledge.

2\. They muſt have the Heate of Zeale.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=5) 3\. They
muſt have the Influence of Ver­tue both in life and Doctrine.

They muſt be Lights.

They muſt be burning Lights. Firſt,

They muſt be endued with Knowledge, 2 Lux ſcientiae eruditio. and
Vnderſtanding, furniſhed with Abilities for the diſcharge of that Office;
their Office being to guide and to leade men in their way, in their path.

The light that furniſhes,1\. Modus. 1. Pulchritu­do, Savitas. and endues them
for that knowledge, which for the manner of it (for I doe but touch things)
requires

Firſt that there be a beauty and ſoundneſſe of the light, that there be
Orthodoxe know­ledge, not tainted, and leavened with corrup­tion in Doctrine.

And there muſt be a plenitude and ſuffici­encie of knowledge,2 Plenitudo,
Sufficientia. that it euqnires too, e­nough to enlighten themſelves, and to
ena­ble and enlighten others, and to guide and direct others.

And for the degrees of that ſufficiency,2\. Gradus. 1. Proportiona­tus. it
muſt bee proportionable to the excellencie of their Office, to the propriety
of their place; Proportionable likewiſe to the rice and growth of time. 1\.
Muneri. Iter caeeos Rex luſcus eſt. Amongſt blinde men,2\. Tempori. hee that
is pur-blinde is a King, he may ſerve for a guide; But where the light is
growne to a higher improvement and generality, there muſt bee a
proportio­nable improvement, a proportionable de­gree [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=5) of ſufficiency is
required in the Mini­ſter: the leſſer light will ſerve to rule the night, the
greater light God hath made to rule the day. In the night of ignorance a
little ſpark may ſhine, a little Candle, a lit­tle ſtarre may doe ſome
ſervice, but there muſt be a Sunne, in the ſun-ſhine of the Go­ſpell, when all
men are growne to ripeneſſe, and maturity of Knowledge, Miniſters muſt ſtill
keepe their diſtance.

Secondly as it is proportionable ſo it is ve­ry variable,2\. Variegatus. a man
cannot ſet one Homer to be a ſtandard and meaſure of all men, that all muſt
needes attaine the ſame pitch and per­fection: There is one glory of the
Sunne, ano­ther of the Moone, and another glory of the Starres; although they
bee all heavenly and glorious lights, yet they have different de­grees and
meaſures, ſo it is with Miniſters; All ſtarres are not of the primae
magnitudinis, there be divers Magnitudes of ſtarres; and there may be in the
Miniſters divers degrees of glory, and all in the compaſſe of that
ſuf­ficiencie, that may bee proportionable to their Office, and the time and
place wherein they are imployed, ſo they keepe within thoſe bounds, wherein
that Latitude, there may be a great deale of difference, there muſt not be
ſuch a ſtrictneſſe and rigour here to ſtretch men as Procruſtes the theefe
did, all he tooke he ſtretcht upon his bed, if they [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=6) were too long, hee
cut them ſhorter, and if they were too ſhort, hee put them upon the Rackes and
drew them to his owne ſtature and meaſure: but there may be a faire, and a
decent, and ſevere ſtretching according to Pauls Canon, as the Father ſpeakes.

That all Miniſters ſhould be able to Teach and to Inſtruct, and to Convince
errours, to be ſtretched according to Pauls Canon, is no Tyrannie.

In the ſecond place,2\. Calor Zeli. light of Knowledge, and ſufficiency is not
ſufficient to qualifie a Miniſter enough, that light muſt be animated with the
heate of zeale.

The Philoſophers diſpute (and if I miſtake not, I rather thinke they be in an
errour) and conceive that thoſe Coeleſtiall bodies, the Sunne and the Moone,
are not Actu Calidi onely they have a virtue, and by way of Emi­nencie as it
were, they doe produce heate below, and are not hot themſelves. I rather
thinke that to containe any thing by way of Eminency, is a property of God,
God containes all things Eminenter: theſe faculties which he hath not
actually, habitually, and ſubje­ctively in himſelfe as faculties, yet hee
con­taines them eminently, as being able to pro­duce all; but no creature can
produce any thing but by ſome vertue put into it, which [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=6) is enabled: but
theſe lights, howſoever theſe heavenly lights muſt be Actu Calidi, they muſt
have a heate in themſelves, viz. Heate of Zeale: let it bee the ſtile of the
Falſe Church to be Filii Carbonis, ſonnes of the Coale, as Iob calls the
ſparkles, ſo hot, as they be all for burning, all for Inquiſitions, and blood
and Martyrdome; let it bee the Commendation of the true Church, and true
profeſſion, that they be Filij Lucis, Children of Light, rather inlightners
than conſumers, by way of burning: though that ſpirit you know ſuites not the
ſtate of the Goſpell, that calls for fire from heaven: though there be
difference betweene calling for fire from heaven, and fetching fire from hell
to con­ſume States and Parlements. There is a dif­ference betweene being
touched with a Coale from the Altar, and being kindled with a match from the
vault to ſet on fire. There muſt be a Heate, but a regular and true Heate,;
1\. Pro. A heate of zeale carried with Pro and Con, as the forme and
difference, as they alſo call, is both Conſtitutive and Diviſive, or
Distinctive. So then they that are infor­med (or inflamed rather) with this
hea­venly heate have a double property,1\. Gloria Dei. poſitive and
oppoſitive. A zeale for Gods glory, not for a mans owne ends: a zeale for the
Sal­vation of the people,2\. Salute ho­minum. to have a tender, and
compaſſionate affection to their ſoules: and [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=7) not to aſcend this
hill, this Pulpit without ſuch a Meditation as Zerxes had, who when he beheld
his Army from an hill, wept that ſo many ſhould dye within the Compaſſe of ſo
few yeares? So they muſt have a tender thought that any poore ſoule ſhould
periſh thats under their view, under their Charge: and as for theſe there muſt
be a Zeale Poſi­tive, 2\. Contr. ſo a Zeale againſt all Errour and Corrup­tion
in Doctrine.1\. Errors. It is the Commendation of a Chriſtians heart, to be
impatient in the point of hereſie:2\. Mores. and a Zeale againſt Corrupt
manners: not to bee able Oſtridge-like to diſgeſt Iron, to diſgeſt oathes, to
diſgeſt all filthineſſe and prophaneſſe, but to have the ſpirit burne within
them as Pauls was at A­thens, againſt all ſinne, and againſt all
ſuper­ſtition, and Idolatry. And yet this is not all, as there muſt be Light
of Knowledge, 3\. Influentia virtutis. and Heate of Zeale to animate and
quicken, ſo theſe two muſt have an Influence of Vertue: The world, the vulgar
know no great matter of uſe, that the ſtarres and theſe glorious lights have,
and therefore will hardly be in­duced to beleeve that they are of that
Mag­nitude that Philoſophers and Mathematickes teach, divers of them to be as
bigge or big­ger than the whole Earth, they thinke that ſuch great bodies
ſhould be made onely for ſhew, for thats all the uſe they can ſee of them, to
beautifie and beſpangle the firma­ment, [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=7) to be an ornament
to the world and to give light, but it is not credible there ſhould be ſo
meane a uſe of ſuch great and glorious bodies; for beſides that, they have an
In­fluence on the earth, thoſe ſtarres of light, the flowers that we ſee here
below, are be­gotten by thoſe flowers of lights, the ſtarres which are above
in the Firmament, they are the meanes and the Inſtruments for the hel­ping
forward of the generation, and produ­ction of all theſe lower things here, by
ha­ving an Influence on them. And ſo the hea­venly lights (as wee are now
ſpeaking of) The Miniſters, their Light of Knowledge, and their Heate of
Zeale, muſt have an In­fluence upon the people that be committed too them,
both in Integrity of life, and Dili­gence of Doctrine and Inſtruction;1\.
Aſsiduitate Doctrinae. they muſt be Trees of Knowledge, and Trees of Life to
in Gods garden, to build up to both, and with both. Our Saviour that was the
higheſt in his owne Church, in his owne houſe, made that the higheſt of his
Offices, to imploy himſelfe diligently in his Fathers worke. We reade of
nothing, nor heare of nothing, but Preaching and doing good, nothing but of
his Influence continually. And Paul (as the Father ſpeakes) like ſome winged
Triptole­mus that went about in his Chariot to teach men the Art of ſowing
Corne throughout the world; hee went about ſpreading, and [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=8) ſowing, and
planting the Goſpell every where he came, with infinite diligence, and paines:
there muſt be holineſſe and integri­ty of Life added to it. (I will not
inlarge my ſelfe in an Argument ſo common,2\. Integritate vitae. and which
would afford ſo many and ſo full diſcourſes, of wit and illuſtration as all
know) Miniſters muſt not be like the drugge that the Phyſitian ſayes (or at
leaſt the world takes it ſo ordina­rily) is hot in the mouth, and cold in the
operation; hot in the Pulpit, and zealous there, and frequent there, but
careleſſe and unconſcionable in their lives: Origen com­ming to Hieruſalem,
and being deſired to Preach; after he had denyed the truth, and his ungodly
offering Sacrifice to an Idoll; (though he was conſtrayned, and conſtrai­ned
on hard tearmes) the booke happens to open upon that place of the Pſalmist,
What hast thou to doe to take my word into thy mouth, ſeeing thou hateſt to be
reformed? The re­membrance of his owne fault reflected up­on his Conſcience,
and made him cloſe the booke, and ſit downe and weepe: ſo theſe that are not
content to joyne holineſſe of life, to their diligence of Preaching, the beſt
way for them is to repent of their Preaching; and ſo to Preach Repentance to
the people.

But to come to the ſecond; beſides the Qualities of the Miniſter in theſe
three pro­perties expreſſed. There is the dignity of a [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=8) Miniſter, ſecretly
coutched, and the true de­grees and diſtances of that dignitie: A Mi­niſter is
[...],2\. Dignitas. 1. Gradus ſub Deo. a Light, but an inferiour light.

Not the Sunne, the Fons caloris, the foun­taine of life and heate, the
Miniſter muſt know his diſtances, he is but under God, Viri radiis chorus can
[...] mulier [...]s: as the Lawier ſaith, the Miniſter ſhines as the Moone,
with bor­rowed beames from the Sunne; all his light is kindled at Gods fire,
it is derived from him.

Secondly,2\. Ort [...] a Deo. there is an Inferiour light, but yet ſet up by
God  [...], kindled and tin­ded by God, God ſets it up. It is his Ordi­nance,
his Inſtitution, and his hand holds theſe Lights.

And in the laſt place he is  [...],3\. Actus ad Deum. a Light burning and
kindled by God, and a ſhining light. This is the ſame, the Aſpect of all the
Miniſteriall dignities: as they are under God and from God, ſo they are guides
to God, ſhining and leading us in the way to happi­neſſe and eternity, this is
the dignity of the Miniſtery. There is another thing which I will runne over
briefely,2\. Hoſpitium in mundo apud. beſides the office: The Hoſpituim, the
Entertainement of the Miniſtrie in the world.

If we looke upon the people we have that expreſſely ſet downe,1\. Populum.
beſides the degrees of extremity which are paſt over and omitted [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=9) here, ſometimes
they meete with better en­tertainment than our Saviour expreſſes here,1\.
Meliuſculè. 2. Duriuſculè. ſo that their Doctrine is embraced faith­fully, and
men bring forth fruite with pati­ence, having not onely a flaſhing Joy in the
light of it, but fruitfulneſſe with patience; ſo ſometimes they meete with
better entertain­ment, and ſometimes they meete with worſe entertainment, men
doe not alwayes gather about the light, and dance about it, as boyes about the
Bone-fire, making glee, and be­ing jolly at it, glad of it; but goe about to
quench the light, to extinguiſh it, to perſe­cute it, and to labour to
oppreſſe and over­whelme it; ſometimes they meete with ſuch. But theſe
extremities are not here expreſſed in the Text.

A middle kinde of entertainement is here noted,2\. Mediocre propoſitum. I will
inſtance but in three particulars, which comprize all that is here expreſſed
with an intimation of defence.

Firſt of all,1\. Actu. the firſt thing is in the Act of that entertainment
given,  [...]: It ſignifies in the Originall, as it were to dance a Galliard,
you are willing to dance a Gal­liard, as I obſerved in the Embleme before
which notes ſome defect, ſome externall and formall Joy, and jollity rather.
As learned Calvin doth ſweetely expreſſe it,Externè potius from the place; As
ſervants that have a Candle allow­ed them by their Maſter, to worke by at
[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=9) night; they
ſpend the Candle not in doing their Maſters worke, but in dancing about it,
and making good cheere, and revelling and ſporting, and ſo weare and teare out
the light that way;Quam Iuteru. rather I ſay ſuch a jolly rejoycing at the
light, a vaine ſinfull thing, than any in­ward ſolide ſincere joy ſeemes to
bee noted.

Secondly,2, Ortu. I doe obſerve the rice of this joyfull entertainment, in
which alſo there may ſeeme ſomething defective,  [...] [...], In his light you
rejoyced: Many rejoyced in the light,Luce potius q0uam calore. in an innocent
and harmeleſſe light, that will not bite, that hath no teeth, that cannot
burne, that is plauſible, men re­joyce in it. But it was his light that they
re­joyced in rather than his heate, yea Iohns light rather than
Chriſts:Iohannis quam Chriſti. ſo a man may reverence ſuch a mans ſtraine,
rather than the Word of God, to receive it as the Word of God; where­as they
ſhould paſſe by, and over-looke men, and ſubmit to it, yeeld to it as the Word
of God,2\. Exitio. man being but the Inſtrument.

In the laſt place doe but marke the iſſue, or the degree of duration, and
ſtability in this joyfull entertainement, and there is ſome­thing defective
likewiſe there  [...]. It was but a fit, and unſetled, unconſtant, un­grounded
joy: Faſt and looſe, backeward and forward, as men doe at dancing, one ſtep
forward and two backward: as the Graſhop­per, [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=10) that jumpes, and
falls againe to the ground, leapes a little up, and then dyes and goes out
againe,  [...], for an houre. Many men are content for an houre to be­ſtow
it,Horam non ultra but if the houre be out, if the glaſſe be out, then they be
quickly a weary of Iohn: [...] ſignifies the ſeaſon and the flowre of a
thing.Florem non facem. Many Miniſters have their prime, and have their
flowres, and many are willing to flocke about him, till they have got a little
taſte of their gifts, for curioſity and novelty; to know what's in him: And
then the prime is quickely gone; nothing fades ſooner than a Miniſters
reputation, and reſpect in his caſe, it is too frequent in the world. As they
ſay of another thing, of inferiour nature, gold in the morning, and ſilver at
noone, and lead at night: men decline and fall, much a doe, much exalting and
much joy about the light, when it is firſt ſet up, but it quicke­ly weares it
ſelfe out, men be quickely tyred like horſes, that bee metled at firſt, but at
length grow tyred and give out.

The laſt branch of the Text, which is not directly in the words,2\. Hospitium
apud Chri­ſtum. yet couched in them too, beſides the entertainment, Mini­ſters
are like to finde in the world with the people; here is an expreſſe intimation
what acceptance they ſhall finde with Chriſt. Chriſt gives a Noble and royall
Teſtimony of Iohn. Now if you will conſider Chriſt in a three­fold [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=10) relation, and
threefold reſpect, it may ſuggeſt good Items, and occaſious to us, (I will but
touch things.)

1\. Chriſt in ſome reſpect is a Fellow ſer­vant wi [...]h his Miniſters,1\.
Conſorium. a joynt Commiſſio­ner, he the Miniſter of the New Teſtament, though
he be the Prince: And hee had no envie at the flowriſhing of Iohn, at the
flock­ing about his light, but envy was baniſhed: And he gives a liberall and
a canded teſti­monie, Hee was a burning and a ſhining light. Will you know
Chriſts Teſtimony of him, hee will not take him downe and make him lower, to
raiſe on his body a greater reputation, to raiſe a greatneſſe on the ruines of
others, but gives him an honou­rable Teſtimony. He was a burning and a ſhining
Light.

Take him more than an ordinary Miniſter,2\. Praelatum. hee was likewiſe the
Prince of Pastors, The Arch-biſhop of our Soules: the great Sheep­heard that
had power, directive and corre­ctive, and the Cenſurer of the Miniſters. Iohn
came under his cenſure and juriſdiction, but he doth not bite and ſnib, and
curbe and trample upon Iohn; but gives him faire Quarter and faire reſpect, a
due Teſtimony, He was a burning and a ſhining light.

Conſider him as the Lord,3\. Dominum. the Supreame Lord and Iudge of all,
though the world doth not acknowledge them, nor thoſe that [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=11) ſhould have
Iuriſdiction doe not acknow­ledge them, yet Chriſt will acknowledge and owne
his faithfull Miniſters and Servants at that great Day, we ſhall bee ſure to
have him keepe to his word: as hee doth freely here, ſo he will freely there,
he will give an Abſolution and diſcharge; He was a burning and a ſhining
light. I have runne over many things and ſhall now deſire to come to ſome
application of the point, I will onely faſten upon a few.

Firſt the conſideration of this what Mi­niſters are and ought to
be;Applicatio. and what enter­tainement they may looke for with Chriſt, and in
the World

May ſerve for Inſtruction;1 Inſtructio. wee may learne what is the glorious
ſtate of the Church when it is in the prime and higheſt pitch of beauty.1\.
Eccleſiae glo­ria. Not when it is adorned with Pur­ple and Scarlet, and
Iewells and Gold: as the woman in the 17. Revel. Thats an Ar­gument of a true
ſpouſe of Chriſt, of a beautifull and glorious Church, theſe out­ward earthly
ornaments. As he ſayd of a Painter that made the Picture of a woman, he aymed
to have made her beautifull, but not reaching that, he made her gawdie, hee
dawbed her with laces, and with rich appa­rell. Non potuit pulchram, pinxit
divi­tem. The whoriſh Church could not attaine to the pure beauty of the
Spouſe Chriſt: [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=11) and therefore
they have dawbed it over in Gallantry and bravery. But will you have the
Church repreſented in her beauty, you have it in Revel. 12\. There is the true
Spouſe of Chriſt with no earthly Ornaments a­bout her indeede, but all
heavenly a Crowne of 12. ſtarres on her head, the Do­ctrine of the 12.
Apoſtles; Cloathed with the Sunne; the Sunne of Chriſts Righte­ouſneſſe, the
doctrine of Iuſtification by faith, as ſome have interpreted it, and the
Moone, all theſe mutable and earthly things under her feete; it is her Crowne
to have thē her footſtoole; when the Church is beau­tified with burning and
ſhining lights, thats the greateſt glory and beauty of the Church.

And concerning the Miniſters we under­ſtand here the Nobleneſſe,2\. Miniſtri.
and neceſſitie of the Miniſtry.1\. Nobilitas. Herod promiſed Herodias (on her
dancing) Iohn Baptists head, and would not refuſe (for he had bound it with an
oath) for his oathes ſake, though he was ſorry for it afterwards: but as the
Father notes hee neede not to have held his bargaine, for hee promiſed but
halfe his Kingdome; but Iohn Baptiſts head was more worth, a faithfull
Miniſter is worth a Kingdome: Satius Solem non lucere quam Chryſostomum non
docere: as they ſayd ſometimes at Conſtantinople, better the Sunne ſhould be
taken out of the firma­ment, than Chryſoſtome our worthy and faith­full [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=12) Miniſter ſhould
be taken out of the Pul­pit, better to loſe the Lights of heaven, than theſe
lights that guide to heaven: there is a great deale of Nobleneſſe and
excellencie in them, they be heavenly Lights. The ſay­ing is, if God ſhould
take a ſhape to repreſent himſelfe viſibly to men, the outward part of it, as
it were the Garment, ſhould be light animated and quickened with truth for our
ſoules. They that have the light of divine Knowledge, in the purity of Divine
Truth, theſe Meſſengers and Ambaſſadors, Types and repreſentations of God,
they have a great deale of glory in them,2\. Neceſcilas.

And there is a great neceſſitie of it, for Miniſters, burning and ſhining
Lights are as Neceſſary as lights in a darke place, in a dark roome, upon
which the Soule and the ſafety, the walke and the Iourney, and the good iſſue
of all Chriſtians doth depend; as he makes the ſum of his ſtory,  [...]. The
Lampes went out, and Leander was drowned: for want of proviſion the people
periſh.

We may note here the condition of the world, the malignity of it,2\. Mundi.
the true rice of this malignity. What's the reaſon that men riſe up in Armes
againſt the Miniſters of Gods Word,1\. Malignitus unde. as it is too frequent,
they are Lights, and theſe love the workes of darke­neſſe: the theefe cares
not to come at the light: they ſay when Hercules drew up [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=12) Cerberus from
hell, he led him in a chaine, and he went quietly till he came to the
Ho­rizon, and ſaw the peeping of the light; but then he puld ſo ſtrongly that
he had like to have puld the Conquerour and all backe againe. Cerberous his
helliſh brood cannot in­dure heavenly light; they ſtumble at that light it is
offenſive: though the ſweeteſt and grate­fulleſt thing in the world, to the
eyes that be ſound and whole, yet to the eyes that be not ſound, light is
troubleſome; or if a man have a minde to ſleepe on ſecurely in courſes of
darkneſſe and ſin, light is offenſive, and that's the Reaſon of this
malignitie. The world hath thought (though experience hath con­futed it) that
the Torrid Zone is uninhabi­table, it is ſo hot that there is no inhabitati­on
there. Men thinke a burning light is too hot, it is not habitable, not able to
be dwelt in and endured, the burning is ſo offenſive: and therefore as they
that dwell under the line (they ſay) curſe the riſing of the Sunne, they are
glad when it ſets and riddes them of their burning, and when it riſes fall a
cur­ſing, fretting, and chaſing; men are angry at the light▪ when it beginnes
to ſcorch and burne, to come neere and cloſe to ſinne, when it meetes with
their corruptions; the true Reaſon why there is ſuch a repugnancie is we ſee
it in the light, and wee feele it in the heate. And would you ſee their foule
de­formity, [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=13) what they doe
that oppoſe the Light, what a foule ſinne it is: It is as if they ſhould goe
about to deprive us of the light of the Sunne,2\. Caecitas & Deformitas
quarta. that we may live in perpetuall darkeneſſe, and what would we thinke of
ſuch perſones: None but ſuch as are kinne to darkeneſſe can count the light
grievous, be weary of light, and complaine of too much light: not to endure
burning and ſhi­ning lights, it is an Argument they bee very neere a kinne to
darkeneſſe that hate it ſo: the light muſt needs be gracious and accep­table
to the children of the light onely: they were wont to Father it on the
Chriſtians, that in their meetings they meete by night; as they were faine to
doe in perſecution, and ſo uſed Candles: at laſt towards the cloſe of all,
they put out the Candles and fell to promiſcuous mixtures, and commix­tures:
No it concernes them that be Chil­dren of darkeneſſe to put out the light,
then Creſcite & multiplicamini, then they breed and multiply in the darke, but
the Children of God multiply and grow in the light, and in­creaſe and flouriſh
there.

Secondly,Commiſeratio. this may ſerve for gratulation, (for the other branch
of it for cōmiſeration to ſtirre up a tender compaſſion towards thoſe many
people in the world, under Hea­theniſme or Superſtition and Popery, or
Ma­humetaniſme, or againſt our ſelves that have [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=13) not theſe burning
and ſhining lights I ſhall paſſe by) and for reproofe and reprehen­ſion, I
will not take ſo much upon mee to meddle with reprooving of ſuch as are not
lights. I know the ſnuffers of the Temple ſhould be of pure gold. I am not of
mettle good enough to take on me to doe that. But I hope you will all joyne
with me in gratula­tion,Gratulatio. to bleſſe and magnifie God that he hath
raiſed up, and kindled and ſet up amongſt us, ſo many bright and ſo many
ſhining lights, though not in every point of heaven (as it is not in the
cleereſt night when the moſt ſtarres appeare, every point hath not a ſtarre in
it) but in every quarter there bee ſtarres. Though every Candleſticke, every
place hath not ſuch a burning and ſhining light, yet ſo many burning and
ſhining lights are in e­very quarter of the Kingdome as the world affords not
the like.2\. Exhortatio.

In the laſt place this may ſerve for exhor­tation (I know not how I may
incroach up­on the occaſion, and therefore I doe but touch things briefely)

Firſt to the people,1\. Populumta­les honorant▪ are Miniſters burning and
ſhining lights, then honour the Miniſters, give them double honour; it is
worth the while to afford maintenance to them: he that makes uſe of the light
to worke by it,2 Alant. it is hard if he cannot get ſo much by his worke, as
will pay for his light.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=14) And
eſpecially honour them in walking according to the light, and according to
their direction,2\. Audiunt [...]. and in yeelding and ſubmitting to them when
they come in Gods name, and convey Gods light to convince us. When Gods heate
warmes us let us not reſiſt and oppoſe but ſubmit: as a Father ſpeakes of fire
and light, the light is moſt ſweete and gracious, but the burning moſt
terrible; ſo if we miſuſe the Goſpell, and miſuſe the light, onely to play
with the light and pleaſe our ſelves with light, and will not be ſet on fire,
will not be enflamed, it will ſcorch in the end, it will bring burning,
Iudgements, and calamities, to contemne and trample up­on Gods Word and
Miniſters.

In the ſecond place Magiſtrates and thoſe in Authority,2\. Ad Magi­ſtratum
tales. are Miniſters burning and ſhi­ning Lights; 1\. Tueantur Intueantur.
then thoſe that are ſuch it be­comes Magiſtrates very well to advance, to
protect; to ſet a burning and ſhining light up­on a Golden Candleſticke, and
to make a Caſtle, a Caſtle at leaſt of horne-worke, to defend and protect
them, that theſe lights may be according to that in the ſtory; the lampe that
never went out: that they may not eaſily be puffed or blowne out, by thoſe
that doe maligne and oppoſe them; and thoſe that have power in this kinde of
Iuriſdiction, influence and over-ſight, ſhould remember they may be ſnuffers
to make the light burne [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=14) more cleere; they
muſt not be extinguiſhers to extinguiſh and to quench the light, they
themſelves ſhould be lights, lampes; take heede, take order that ſuch perſons
be not dampes to put out the light. The Flye whe­ther buſily or enviouſly,
clings about the light, but ſinges his owne wings with it, and they that
thinke to extinguiſh the light will but burne their owne wings.

And to adde one word to the particular occaſion, that which Pariſienſis ſayd
ſome­times concerning excommunicating of men for trifles, it is (ſaith he) as
if a man ſhould ſee a flye or flea on a mans forehead, and for that ſhould
preſently take a bettle and knock him in the head to kill the flye: It muſt
not be for toyes and trifles; and ſo likewiſe not for every ſmall failing and
exorbitancie or defect in the light, preſently to extinguiſh and put out the
light, but rather to recover and to helpe it.

And for ſuch as are not ſuch,2\. Non tales amoveant. not burning and ſhining
lights. The Canon law, as it is reported out of that and it is very pertinent
to make this order and conſtitution (according to the Popiſh faſhion) if the
Hoaſt be conſu­med (ſay they) in a nights viſitation, the Prieſt ſhall be
bound to put out the Candle, leſt the people ſhould worſhip an empty Pix ſo if
there be any that have conſumed integritie, and holineſſe of life, if the hoſt
[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=15) be gone,
it is fit that the Candle ſhould bee put out, that men doe not worſhip an
empty Caske, which hath no worth anſwera­ble.

In the laſt place (I ſee I muſt of neceſſity be forced to contract things, but
I had rather breake off abruptly, than incroach too much on the time,3\. Ad
Clerum. and other occaſions) the laſt concernes the Miniſters and the Clergie:
I ſhould have preſcribed ſomething both concerning their duty;1\. Officia. a
little to have preſt home the things that are contained in the application of
their duty:1\. Splendor vitae. For holineſſe of life for diligence of
Doctrine: to be painefull and industrious in Preaching, joyn'd with a holy
life,2\. Fulgor Do­ctrinae. for otherwiſe, as it is ſaid of a ghoſt, a leane
meager ghoſt, with a Torch in the hand, it makes it looke more gaſtly; ſo to
have a Miniſter that hath light in his Do­ctrine, and yet an ugly and filthy
life, there is not a more gaſt and ugly ſight in the world: and for another
thing too:3\. Candor Ani­mi. to have commen­ded that Candidneſſe, and that
ingenuity of brethren towards their brethren, which wee ſee our Saviour
affords to Iohn, that not to backebite, or detract, or draw downe the price
and excellencie of our fellow Mini­ſters, ſuppoſe they doe as they may out-
ſtrip us, but candidly an ingenuouſly to give them their due; He is a burning
and a ſhining light, and to agree unanimouſly, and lovingly, and [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=15) Chriſtianly;
there is nothing of more con­ſequence, nor more uſe than for Miniſters to
cohere, and ſo to ſtregthen and fortifie them­ſelves. The ſcales of the
Leviathan (as Lu­ther makes the compariſon) ſticke cloſe to­gether, wickedmen
in their projects and their deſignes, ſticke cloſe like the ſcales of the
Leviathan, repreſenting the Devill as moſt interpreters expreſſe it. And the
ſtones of the Temple (they ſay) were ſo cloſe, ſo ſi­mented together, as if
there were but one ſtone, there was no pieecing appear'd or was ſeene by any,
though they looked narrowly. The ſtones of the Temple, they that would helpe
to build up Gods Temple, ſhould ſtand cloſe together, and remove bones of
conten­tions, and difference, and rivality, and emu­lation. It was a Noble
ſpeech of but a Hea­then man: a Lacedemonian, when he happe­ned not to be
choſen (where the Citie ex­pected it ſhould be ſo) into the number of the 30.
to be one of the principall officers of the Citie, when all the reſt of his
friends were diſcontent and angrie to ſee that hee the moſt noble and worthy
of all the reſt (as they thought) was paſt over, he himſelfe tooke it well; I
am glad ſayes hee that the Citie hath ſo many men of more worth than my ſelfe.
It ſhould be the honour and inge­nuity of every one to rejoyce that there bee
thoſe that doe excell them, not to deſire the [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=16) priority, or
precedencie themſelves, but to be content to put it where God hath given it.

And in the laſt place principally for zeale, to have preſt that,4\. Ardor.
Zeli. all light, and all diligence, and all holineſſe, and all unanimity,
except there be ſome edge of zeale put upon it, is nothing worth: and I
thought to adde ſome directions:2\. Incentivum. 1. Tempus eri­git. Peccantes
Gigantes. and in the laſt place ſome Incen­tives that might ſtirre and kindle
all to the exerciſe of this heavenly grace; the time re­quires it, ſinne is
Gyant-like, Popery growes bold, witneſſe the late fire (I thought to have
added ſomething more concerning it.) If they be bold to claime kinne of us,
and to beare the world in hand, that our owne Ar­ticles maintaine a ſecret
correſpondence with Popery, it is time for our zeale to breake out to quit the
Church, this Noble and honourable Church, from ſuch a diſho­nourable
imputation: The Act it ſelfe of zeale is very opportune and ſeaſonable: Nunc
ſi unquam, 2\. Actus. 1. Oportunus. niſi nunc quando? as the ſay­ing is: if
not now when ſhall we ſhew our ſelves zealous; when Popery growes ſo bold and
ſo high, ſhall we expect greater matters, and is it not time to make an
oppoſition a­gainſt them, and now if ever.

They that write the ſtory of the Travailes of the Apoſtles report that Simon
Zelotes, preached here in England; if ever there nee­ded [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=16) ſome Zelotes to
come againe it is now, ſuch as Epiphanius ſpeakes of Eliah, that hee ſuckt
fire out of his Mothers breſt, that have beene moulded to a holy heate and
fire: nothing elſe can defend and preſerve the chaſtitie and integritie of the
Church. A cold modeſty betrayes a woman invites, and provokes an impudent
ſoliciter, a coy magnanimous countenance muſt vindi­cate her aſſaulted
Chaſtity. An angry coun­tenance drives away fleerers, and fawners, and
flatterers, it hinders ſo much as the at­tempt, whereas coldneſſe gives way,
and hope and poſſibilite.

Againe,2\. Fructu oſus. as the time requires it, and the act very ſeaſonable,
I will adde this too; Our timely and ſeaſonable zeale may bee more effectuall
than perhappes wee may imagine. The leaſt beame of light is able to breake
through the thickeſt darkeneſſe, to ſhine in the darkeſt place. The leaſt
ſparke of fire is enough (if well husbanded and impro­ved) to kindle the whole
world. And as at the day of Conflagration, that purgatory fire that ſhall
purge and refine all the ele­ments, is conceived it ſhall be out of a
contri­bution and commixion of ſtarres. That of all the burning and ſhining
lights, there ſhall be made that great heate that ſhall conſume all the
burning and ſhining lights of Sathans Kingdome, if they would contribute and
[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=17) make a
ſhot together of their zeale, to make an oppoſition of ſinne and ſuperſtition.

And in the laſt place,3\. Munus. our duty and office doth require it, it is as
proper for to have zeale in the Miniſtry,1\. Neceſſari­um in nos in­cumbit. as
to have fire in the Al­tar. We are the keepers (as it were) of the fire, to
ſee that the fire goes not out; as thoſe of Athens in the Games in which they
runne with,1\. Cura. Lampes in their hands, One ranne as farre as hee could
and there delivered it to another, to carry farther, and to a third, and ſo
the ſucceſſion was continued. We have received the Lampe of Gods Word and
truth from our Predeceſſors, who have de­livered it us: let us runne on
cheerefully and couragiouſly, to deliver it to our ſucceſſors, and ſo to all
poſterity. Though fire in the houſe may be dangerous, there's no man but
deſires to have fire on the hearth that's uſeful: though among inferiour and
ignorant peo­ple, heate with light may be dangerous, yet among the Clergie,
among the Judicious and able Clergie, if their light were quickned to heate,
there would be no danger but excel­lent uſe of it.

And the world expects ſo much of us,2\. Culpa: and will be ready to lay all
the blame on us; that which Luther ſayd ſometimes Nunquam pe­riclitatur
Religio niſi inter Reverendiſsimos: The vulgar are ready enough to take this
up as a Maxime, as an Oracle. It is obſerved [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=17) when Chriſt was
Crucified, Pilate the civill Magiſtrate abſolved him, Caiphas the high Prieſt
condemned him, Iudas his Diſciple he betrayed him to the People: the Laity are
willing to waſh their hands as Pilate did, and thinke they have done all wel
enough, if they can lay the blame at the doore of the Clergy: all the blame
will lye on the unfaithfull Mini­ſters that ſhould be burning and ſhining
lights if ſin grow to a height, if ſuperſtition increaſe all will lye there,
it concernes therefore and God expects it, as having laid the charge up­on us,
I will ad this one thing by way of con­cluſion, I have not yet ſpoken one
ſtrong line, (as they ſay) affectedly▪ but give me leave to conclude with one
ſtrong line drawne out of the Proverbe of the Germans, the pavement of hell
(ſay they) is made of the bare ſculs of the Prieſts, or ſhaved Prieſts, & the
glorious Creſts of great gallants. The meaning is, the greater and more
eminent any one is in the Church, and doth not employ his Eminency for the
maintenance of Gods truth, they ſhal lye loweſt in hell, they will have the
deepeſt condemnation: and now the choyſe is be­twixt theſe two, we muſt either
burne in zeale or hazard it to burne in hell: and therefore to conclude all, I
know not whether is more ad­mirable, the reſolute meſſage that Mordecai ſent
to Heſter, (Let not the Queene thinke that ſhe ſhall eſcape in the Kings
houſe, more than the [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=1967&page=18) reſt of the
Iewes, for if thou hold thy peacnow, deliverance ſhall come from another place
but thou and thy houſe ſhall periſh) or the Noble reſolution of Heſter upon
this meſſage, (If I periſh, I periſh, I will goe to the King though contrary
to the Law, I will interceede and in­terpoſe the utmoſt grace that I have with
the King, caſting away all care, and committing unto God in a holy, pious, and
zealous way) I know not whether is more admirable: but I will winde up all;
let us all learne to be burning and ſhining lights, ſo to conſume and chaſe
away the darkneſſe of Ignorance, the dregs of ſin, and all the ſtubble of
Superſtition; and then though the people ſhould be inconſtant and profidious,
though our fellow brethren ſhould be malignant and cenſorious, though our
fathers ſhould not be ſo benigne norr o­pitious: yet who is ſuch a Coward that
dares not venture all upon the expectation of a Chriſtian and gracious
abſolution from our Saviour; though all faile, miſ-judge, mm-re­port, and miſ-
thinke, we ſhall be ſure to have a free, a candid teſtimony from our Saviour
at the great Day: He was a burning and a ſhining Light.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Stoughton, John, d. 1639.. Date: 1640  

