## (unknown project)

# The gang or The nine worthies and champions, Lambert, &c. To the tune of
Robin Hood.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. THE GANG OR THE NINE WORTHIES AND CHAMPIONS, LAMBERT, &c.
    * 1.1. The ſecond Part.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=163653&page=1)

## 1\. THE GANG OR THE NINE WORTHIES AND CHAMPIONS, LAMBERT, &c.

To the Tune of ROBIN HOOD

IT was at the Birth of a Winters morn,

With a Hey down down a down down,

Before the Crow had piſt,

That nine Hero's in ſcorn

Of a Parliament forlorn,

Walk'd out with Sword in fiſt.

Johnne Lambert was Firſt, a dapper Squire,

With a Hey down, &c.

A mickler man of might

was ne're in York-ſhire;

And he did conſpire

With Vane Sir Harry a Knight.

Desborow next, a goodlier ſwain,

With a Hey down, &c.

An Eaſter Sun nere ſee;

He drove on a main

Without any brain,

Such a jolthead knave was he.

Kelſey was a brave button-maker,

With a Hey down, &c.

As ever ſetmould upon ſcewer;

And this wiſe-Aker

Was a great pains taker,

T'make Lamberts Noſe look blewer.

The Devout and Holy Major Creed,

With a Hey down, &c.

I known't of what Faith or Sect,

Had mounted a Steed,

And vow'd he would bleed

'Fore Lambert ſhould be checkt.

Duckenfield (Steel was nere ſo true,)

With a Hey down, &c.

And as wiſe as ere was Toby

Lay in the Purlew.

The Cock-pit Avenue,

To hinder the Speakers Go-by.

A man of Stomack in the next Deal,

With a Hey down, &c.

Was hungry Colonel Cobbet,

He would eat at a Meale,

A whole Commonweale,

And make a Joint but a Gobbet.

The following Champion is Barrow,

With a Hey down, &c.

An Ominous name for a Swine-Herd,

He flew like an Arrow,

Thither, whence Lord Harry

But durſt not draw his Whinyeard.

Room for Packer a toyling Ditcher,

With a Hey down, &c.

He had ſet his Spade on edge,

He hop't to be Richer

By being a Britcher

And Lambert his Stake in the hedge.

For Nobilities ſake we may not forget,

With a Hey down, &c.

That Valiant Mars his true Son,

His Cobling Feat,

Lack't a Parliament Seat

That Marks-man one eyed Hewſon.

Theſe being aided with Red Coat & Creepers,

With a Hey down, &c.

After a ſhort Diſpute

The Liberty Keepers,

Were made boo-peepers

And the Speaker ſtrucken Mute.

But well ſaid Sir Arthur, what time of the day?

With a Hey dewn, &c.

The Parliament's now in their Prime

They ſtand at a Bay,

And have miſt their Prey

And Cowardly curſe the time,

### 1.1. The ſecond Part.

Now Johnne is gone to the North Country.

With a Hey down, &c.

And glad he is to Retire,

He crys Cramme O Cree,

Have mercy on me

My tail is ſet a Fire,

And Desborough gotten into his Farm.

With a Hey down, &c.

Untill they doe him need

'Meant the Houſe no harm,

But took it for a Barn

His Lord & he's not agreed.

Kelſey is praying for the Dole,

With a Hey down, &c.

Of the Hoſpital thats Suttons

He is out of the Roll,

And hath ne're a Loap-Hole

And now his Arſe maks Buttons.

And Creed will now believe Sir Arthur,

With a Hey down, &c.

His Steed is Chop't for a Jade

He will be a Carter,

Before a Martyr,

And is turned Renegade.

Duckenfeld's in a pitiful Caſe,

With a Hey down, &c.

The Speakers Horſes and Coach,

Were at ſtake with the Mace,

And he's thrown Aums Ace

Tyburn owes him a reproach.

By being too greedy Colonel Cobbet,

With a Hey down, &c.

H [...]s got a Bone in his throat

He hath ſighed and ſobbed

And grievouſly throbbed,

But it will not help the choak.

Pray take your turn too Mr. Barrow,

With a Hey down, &c.

What think you of your Plot?

Your Sow would not Farrow,

The Hang-mans Harrow

That Hurdle will be your Lot.

Tye him up DƲN, 'tis Goodman Packer,

With a Hey down, &c.

That would ſet up another Noſe

Had he been a Backer

As Colonel Hacker,

H'ad liv'd in ſpight of his Foes.

Hewſon's Companions as ſcabby as Coots,

With a Hey down down a down down.

Have infected him with the mange,

They have piſt in his boots,

He muſt cry roots,

And TƲRN OƲT to Turnup muſt change.

## Appendix A

London, Printed for Charls Guſtavus.

[Home](/)

Date: 1660  

