## (unknown project)

# The petition of the Rump to the honourable City of London

## Table of contents

  * 1\. THE PETITION OF THE RUMP To the Honourable CITY of LONDON.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=163700&page=1)

## 1\. THE PETITION OF THE RUMP To the Honourable CITY of LONDON.

SHEWETH,

THat having a wrinkle more in their Arſe ſince they knew of General Monk's
Fidelity to his Countrey, and it being now all in a pucker, and rumpled with
the Frownes of an incenſed, and inraged people, they humbly im­plore the ſoft,
and tender hands, of your fair, and pittifull Dames, to ſtroke it, and ſmooth
it out; although they well know, that the general cry, and vogue of the
Nations, is to have it ſtretched out according to the Kings Lawes.

That they are ſick of a new, and ſtrange diſeaſe, called the Vertigo of the
Tayl, a dizzineſſe, wherein they perceive Divine Vengeance going round; and
are informed, that the City Doctor Dun, hath a ſoveraign remedy a­gainſt it,
which, with Paddingtons wholeſome air, never yet fail'd the Patient.

That they would make it their requeſt to this Honourable City, that they would
be graciouſly plea­ſed to paſſe by, and forget their high inſolencies and
affronts, in the breaking down their Gates, and deſtroying the Perculliſes,
though in point of Honour, you are obliged to ſet up their quarters, and your
gates together.

That having now a rattle at their Tail, if you once but cry Halloe, they will
run over the three Kingdomes without any purſuit, till they have run
themſelves down to Old Nick, where you may be ſure they ſhall never trouble
you any more; elſe, give them but breathing time, and up riſeth the Rump, as
plump as any Partridge. Back again they will to the Onions and Garlick in
Lambert's Gardens, rather then you ſhall taſte the Manna of a Free Parliament;
for as for this Monk, they know not what he is.

Remember their unwearied deſires, and endeavours after your wealth and goods,
and with what an envious eye they have aimed at your peace and proſperity;
think on their frugal, and mild adminiſtration of Government, which hath
begger'd, and butchered three Kingdomes, and left not any intire part of the
body, but a miſhapen, ſhameleſſe, Sr. Rump.

They have little more to add to this heap of confuſion you are brought to, but
to offer to your ſerious conſideration, the Merits of the Good Old Cauſe,
which they have intruſted in the hands of Alderman Tichburn and Ireton, till
their return, but yet before they goe, if you prevent them not by paring their
nayles, they will ſcratch their Arſe to the Bare bones, but they'l be revenged
on you all; For that party by a new carving, are the Sides-men to the RUMP.
They have but theſe following requeſts to make you,

That you would ſend a T—Sirreverence, to Collonel Overton, for the victualling
the Garriſon at Hull; there the Rebellion begun, and thither will the Reliques
of it take to for Refuge. That you would tye up the tackle of this Har­ricane
which hath overturned theſe Nations, in a knot, and ſend it by your Marſhals
Man, to Vice Admiral Lawſon for a Token. That you would ſend a Fleet of
Oyſter. VVhores to demand the Tower from Morley, and if he ſhall refuſe the
firſt Summons, upon Reducement of it, let the Jades ſcrape with their ſhells
his hump Shoulder even with the other, and whip off his Monkeys Teſticles.
Laſtly, Let the memorable 11th. day of February be known and called by the
name of Rump Fair, to be anniverſarily held at their chief Mannor of Sodom and
Gomorra.

And your Petitioners ſhall ever Pray, &c▪

[Home](/)

Date: 1660  

