## (unknown project)

# Six important quæres, propounded to the re-sitting Rump of the long
Parliament, fit to be satisfactorily resolved by them upon the question,
before they presume to act any further, or expect the least obedience from the
free-born English nation, after so manie years wars and contests for the
privileges, rights, and freedom of Parliaments, and their own liberties.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. SIX IMPORTANT QUAERES, PROPOUNDED To the Re-ſitting Rump of the long Parliament, fit to be ſatisfactorily reſolved by them upon the Queſtion, before they preſume to Act any further, or expect the leaſt Obedience f•om the Free-born Engliſh Nation, after ſo manie years Wars and Conteſts for the Privileges, Rights, and Freedom of Parliaments, and their own Liberties.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=163626&page=1)

## 1\. SIX IMPORTANT QUAERES, PROPOUNDED To the Re-ſitting Rump of the long
Parliament, fit to be ſatisfactorily reſolved by them upon the Queſtion,
before they preſume to Act any further, or expect the leaſt Obedience f
[...]om the Free-born Engliſh Nation, after ſo manie years Wars and Conteſts
for the Privi­leges, Rights, and Freedom of Parliaments, and their own
Liberties.

1\. WHether their ſudden ſtealing into the Houſe by night, on Monday the 26.
of December after their forced Diſſolution by Lambert, Octob. 13. without any
new Summons or notice of their ſitting given to any of their Fellow-Members,
in the City, or people of the Nation; was not a work of Darkneſs, rather than
of Light, better beſeeming Theeves than Freemen, a Guy Faux with his dark
Lan­thorn to blow up a Parliament, than the Honour and Dignity of Members of a
real Engliſh Parliament, and a bad Omen of ſome dark D [...]ſigns againſt
their Fellow-Members, and Liberties both of the City and Engliſh Nation?

2\. Whether their placing armed Gards that Evening at the Houſe, and all
approaches to it and the next Morning too, and giving Colonel Okey, and
Colonel Alured (the Commanders of their Gards) their Serjeant and Door-
keepers, ſtrict ſpecial Commands and Orders, not to ſuffer any of the old
ſecluded Members ſo much as to come into the outward Lobby before the Houſe,
(whether Footboys, Apprentices, and other Perſons of all ſorts had free
ac­ceſs,) much leſſe to enter into the Houſe; and their forcible ſecluding of
Sir Gilbert Gerard, Sir Anthony Irby, Sir William Waller, Sir John Evelin, Mr.
Anſ­l [...]y, Serjeant Maynard, Mr. Prynne, and 15. other Members more on
Tueſday morning, Decemb. 27\. out of the very Lobby, in purſuance of their
Orders, till they crowded into the Lobby by degrees againſt the Door-keepers,
and Gards wills, who at firſt oft ſhut the Doors againſt them, though they
admitted Ap­prentices, and others to paſs in and out: And their ſecluſion of
them out of the Houſe when in the Lobby, by keeping the Houſe door faſt locked
againſt them, and ordering the Door-keeper and Serjeant not to open it,
notwithſtanding many demands to open it, and Meſſages to them for that
purpoſe, which they ſlighted; not vouchſafing to take any notice of, after two
full hours attendance by the Members on them in the Lobby; nor ſo much as
ſending any Member, nor their Serjeant out to them; as they uſually do to
every ordinary Petitioner, or perſon attending them upon publick or private
occaſi­ons; Be not a juſt ground and provocation for theſe and all other
ſecluded Members, (being about 4. times more in number and intereſt to thoſe
then ſitting, and the real Houſe of Commons,) with all the reſpective
Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Ports for which they ſerve, with as high contempt
and ſcorn to neglect them and their illegal Conventicle, (not the tenth part
of a Commons Houſe,) to proteſt againſt all their Votes, Proceedings as null
and void to all intents, and not to yield the leaſt obedience to any Orders,
Votes, or Commands of theirs, till all the Members be freely admitted without
any reſtrictions, to ſit and act amongſt them; it being both their Privile
[...]e, Birthright, and Inheritance, and they obliged by their Proteſtation,
and Solemn League and Covenant, con­ſtantly, zealouſly and chearfully to
defend the ſame with their Lives and Eſtates againſt all Violations, all the
daies of their lives; and therefore now if ever, in this ſad poſture of
publick diſtractions?

3\. Whether this their diſdainfull, uncivil, unbrotherly Treating of their
fellow-Members (deſiring nothing elſe but a brotherly aſſociation with them,
to compoſe the manifold Diſtractions, and make up the wide Breaches of our
Sinking, Dying Nations, by their United Councils and Endeavours, and to
Regulate all Exorbitances, occaſioned by their heady Councils and Miſcariages)
in not allowing them the Privileges of Porters and Footboyes to enter into
their outward Lobby, in taking no notice of them, and putting this freſh
affront upon them, after ſo many former Indignities, in the midſt of their and
our Domeſtick Confuſions and fears from forein parts, be not an evident
Demonſtration; that they intend neither the publike Peace, Unity, nor
ſettle­ment of our Government, Laws, Liberties, or Nations, but their unjuſt
ſupport of their own private Intereſts, Rapines, ambitious Tyrannical
Uſurpations and Exerciſes of Supreme Parliamentary Civil and Military
Authority over our three Nations; to imbroyl them in new Wars and Confuſions,
to prey upon the ſmall remainder of their Real and Perſonal Eſtates, by the
power of the Sword, now gotten into their hands, out of the Army-Officers; who
abuſed it likewiſe to the oppreſſing and enſlaving of the people, and created
them a Parliament without the ſecluded Members, and Houſe of Peers?

4\. Whether their diſdainfull, Injurious forcible ſecluſion of the Members, by
their own ſpecial Orders and Commands to their Gards and Officers now, be not
a ſhrewd Evidence, that their former ſecluſions, Decemb. 6\. and 7. 1648. and
May 7\. and 9. 1659. (acted by, and fa [...]red on the Army-Offi­cers, and
ſeemingly diſowned by themſelves) were ſecretly procured & countenanced by
them, thus openly owning their laſt ſecluſion, by their precedent Orders and
ſubſequent approbation of it; and that at their very firſt re-aſſembling,
after their own late forcible ſecluſion, by Lamberts and Hewſons Regi­ments,
now Entertained and Imployed in their ſervice, to ſeclude, and keep out their
old honeſt fellow Members, of Untainted Integrity and merit? Whe­ther it be
not a greater breach of Privilege, Truſt, Duty, Tyranny, Perjury, and Treaſon
in them, againſt all former Declarations, the Proteſtation, So­lemn League and
Covenant, taken and Subſcribed by them, with hands lifted up to the moſt High
God, thus to ſeclude their fellow Members; than it was in Cromwell and
Harriſon, April 20\. 1653. or for Lambert October 13\. laſt to ſeclude and
turn themſelves out of doors, after their declaring and voting it Treaſon,
Perjury and Tyranny in them? Whether this their ſecluding of the Members by
Col. Okey himſelf, and others who appeared moſt active againſt their Excluſion
by Lambert, will not draw a ſelf-condemnation on them, as acting by their
commands, againſt their Conſciences; and juſtify both Crom­wels and Lamberts
ſecluſion of themſelves? And juſtly encourage all their newly reduced Soldiers
and others, to ſhut and turn themſelves out of the Houſe again upon any
emergent occaſion or diſcontent, with greater boldneſs and impunity than
before, ſince they juſtified their laſt ſecluſion, by their former underhand
encouragements of them to ſeclude the Majority of the Members, who over-voted
them in Decemb. 1648. and give them Orders to ſeclude them now again upon the
ſame account in the ſame month of December, for fear they ſhould over-vote
them if re-admitted?

5\. Whether their printed Vote, Decem. 27. To take the buſineſs of their
abſent Members into debate on the 5\. of January next; inſtead of giving
admittance, or any anſwer to the 22. ſecluded Members waiting for an anſwer in
the Lobby above 2. hours, be not a meer dilatory Cheat put upon the ſecluded
Members, the City of London, and whole Nation; to delay their admiſſion till
they have put new Gards on, and drawn up all their forces to London, to over-
awe the City, and hinder their long-delayed Militia for their own ſecurity;
and ſetled the Militia of every County under their own commands, to enſlave
the whole City and Nation to their Tyranny and uſurped Parliamentary Power;
and then they will not only forcibly keep out all the Members, but abſolute­ly
eject them, unleſſe they will take their new Oath and Ingagement: As is
evident by their Speakers prohibiting the Lord Maior and Common Coun­cil on
Saturday laſt to ſet up their Chains and ſettle their Militia; and their Order
and Vote on Munday night againſt all forces raiſed without their Order, to
hinder the Militia in the City, when they commanded the Militia in the Suburbs
and Weſtminſter to meet and Act that day: And by ſome of their diſcourſes
[...] ſecluded Members; That there was no hopes of their admiſſion, unleſſe
they were for a Commonwealth, would take the Ingagement, and confirm what they
had done: and thereby become as guilty, treacherous, perfidious, diſloyal, and
hurtfull to the publike as themſelves) which thoſe Members aſſured them, they
would never ſubmit to, being againſt the Privilege of Parliament, their
Judgements, Conſciences, Proteſtation, Covenant, former Oathes upon their
firſt admiſſion as Members.

6\. Whether the City, or Engliſh Nation, can expect the leaſt juſtice eaſe or
redreſſe of their inſupportable Burdens, Taxes, and Impoſitions from theſe new
Tax-maſters, who (though they are not yet the Tenth part of a full Commons
Houſe) preſumed to paſs and print a New Act of Parliament, to continue their
expired Cuſtoms and Exciſes on them, till March next? Whether their
unpreſidented preſumption▪ in arrogating to themſelves the Title, power and
au­thority of a Parliament; when all Laws, and Lawbooks reſolve, their own
Conſciences and the whole Nation infallibly know them to be no Parliament, nor
Commons houſe, hath not brought them within the compaſſe and penalty of this
Clauſe in their own laſt Act, before their Diſſolution by Lambert, October
11\. intituled, An Act againſt raiſing of Money upon the people without their
Conſent in Parliament: And be it further enacted, That no perſon or perſons
ſhall after the 11\. of October, 1659\. Aſſeſs, levy, collect, gather or
receive, any Cuſtoms, Impoſts, Exciſe, Aſſeſſment, Contribution, Tax, Tallage,
or any ſum or ſums of money, or other Impoſitions whatſoever, upon the People
of this Commonwealth, without their conſent in Parliament, or as by Law might
have béen done before the Third of November, 1640\. And be it further enacted
and declared, That every perſon offending againſt this Act, (therefore every
of themſelves who paſſed this new Act, Decemb. 27. and thoſe who ſhall put it
in execution) ſhall be and are hereby adjudged to be guilty of High Treaſon,
and ſhall forfeit and ſuffer as in caſe of High Treaſon. Whether the people of
this Commonwealth (the thouſand part whereof knew not of their new ſitting)
did ever conſent to this ſudden extemporary new Act, made the firſt morning of
their ſitting in leſſe than two hours ſpace, when there were but 42. Members
in the Houſe; 22. ſecluded Members at the door, and near 250. more Members yet
living, (beſides the whole Houſe of Lords, who muſt ſtand for Cyphers) abſent,
and not privy to their Seſſion, or this Act? If not, (as is unqueſtionable)
whether by this their own Law and Act, they be not adjudged to be guilty of
High Treaſon, and to forfeit and ſuffer as in caſe of High Treaſon, for this
their impoſing and continuing of Cuſtoms and Exciſes on the people; as well as
for their ſecluſion of their Members; which they voted to be Treaſon in
Lambert? And whether the Offices and Common Soldiers can upon this acccount
expect any pay from the City or Country, or Indemnity for ſecluding thoſe Now
ſitting, if they of­fend again in ſecluding the greatest part of the Members,
which are in truth the only Houſe, which can only really pay and indemaifie
them?

[Home](/)

Prynne, William, 1600-1669.. Date: 1659  

