## (unknown project)

# Beauties triumph: or, The joys of faithful lovers made compleat; shewing the
amorous address of a young gallant to a fair virgin, whose consent,
notwithstanding her many coy objections, & concluded the happy marriage, under
the feign'd names of Amintor and Silva. Being a most pleasant and delightful
new play-house song. All that's call'd beauty, for mans use was made, why then
should he of females be afraid? Encounter them but brisk, you'l find them
yield, 'tis seldome known they long do keep the field; but if you fear to
court f[ai]th, e'n despair, for cowards never Cupids plunder share. To a new
play-house tune; or, The reward of loyalty, &c.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Beauties Triumph: OR, The Joys of Faithful Lovers made compleat;

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=181766&page=1)

## 1\. Beauties Triumph:  
OR, The Joys of Faithful Lovers made compleat;

Shewing the amorous Addreſs of a young Gallant to a fair Virgin, whoſe
conſent, notwith­ſtanding her many coy objections, & concluded the happy
Marriage, under the feign'd names of Amintor and Silva, Being a moſt pleaſant
and delightful New Play-Houſe SONG.

All that's call'd Beauty, for Mans uſe was made,

Why then ſhould he of Females be afraid?

Encounter them but brisk, you'l find them yield,

'Tis ſeldome known they long do keep the Field;

But if you fear to court faith, e'n diſpair;

For Cowards never Cupids Plunder ſhare.

To a New Play-Houſe Tune; Or, The Reward of Loyalty, &c.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

A Pox upon this needleſs Scorn,

Sylva for ſhame the Cheat give o're;

The end to which the fair are Born,

is not to keep their Charms in ſtore:

But laviſhly diſpoſe in haſte

of joys, which onely youth improve;

Ioys which decay when Beauty's paſt▪

and who when Beauty's paſt, will love?

When age thoſe Glories ſhall deface,

revenging all the cold diſdain;

And Sylva ſhall neglected paſs

by every one admiring Swain;

And we can onely pitty pay,

when you in Love too late ſhall burn;

If Love increaſe, and Youth decay,

ah! Sylva, who will make return?

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

Then haſte my Sylva to the Grove,

where all the ſweets of May conſpire

To teach us every art of Love,

and raiſe our charms and pleaſures higher:

Whilſt in each others arms we lye,

cloſely embrac'd on banks of flowers,

The duller World whilſt we defie,

Years ſhall be minutes, ages hours.

Sylva.

Forbear Amintor to deceive,

a harmleſs Nymph thus to betray;

Could you of Honour me bereave,

your pasſions ſoon would melt away:

Oh blame not Virgins that are coy,

but that your conſtancies we prove;

For if our truſt you once enjoy,

farewel for ever conſtant Love.

Our Beauty's like a new blown Roſe,

when ſully'd you will caſt away;

And ſeek out where a freſh one grows,

no more will you our Charms obey.

I bluſh to think ſhou'd I be kind,

how ſoon I ſhou'd my fault Repent;

When you unconſtant as the Wind,

wou'd all my new-born joys prevent.

And for ſome fairer leave my Love,

ſlye my imbraces with diſdain;

Oh then my ſighs wou'd nothing move,

I might regardleſs then complain,

Then ceaſe your ſuit Amintor now,

ſay not I'm coy nor yet unkind;

When Man ſo often breaks his Vow,

and is to change ſo oft inclin'd.

Amintor.

Thou brighteſt form that I adore,

faireſt of Creatures ſay not ſo;

My Love ſhall laſt for evermore,

and endleſs pasſion ſtill ſhall flow:

No Beauty ſhall divide my Love,

to thee it ſhall be ever ſure;

Then haſt we to this pleaſant Grove,

to try the Charms that e're endure.

Sylva.

Could I poor harmleſs Nymph but truſt

you'd conſtant prove, then cou'd I raiſe

My pasſion high, and 'twas but juſt,

but then perhaps your Love decays:

While I am like a Phoenix fry'd,

in ſcorchings of ſelf-kindl'd flame;

Yet were I once in Wedlock ty'd,

methinks I'd bluſh away my ſtain.

Amintor.

A thouſand bleſſings on my Love,

thoſe Sacred Bands ſhall tye us faſt;

Come let it be, and then we'l prove

thoſe tranſports that will ever laſt.

Sylva. I yield, I yield, tho' bluſhing ſtill,

methinks I dread, but let's preceed;

For once Love conquer ſhall my will,

Venus our Nuptials are decreed.

Amintor.

And Venus witneſs now we haſte

to pay our Offerings at thy ſhrine;

No more will we Loves moments waſte,

nor looſe a pleaſure that's Divine:

But in each Grove we'l ſport and play,

and feed our Flocks, while the ſweet ſtrain

Of Philomelia cloſe the Day,

and calls us to our home again.

Finis.

## Appendix A

Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, in Weſt-ſmithfield.

[Home](/)

Date: 1670-1696?  

