## (unknown project)

# The breech wash'd by a friend to the Rump.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The Breech Waſh'd By a Friend to the RUMP.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=182854&page=1)

## 1\. The Breech Waſh'd By a Friend to the RUMP.

IN an humor of late I was

Ycleped a dolefull dump.

Thought I — we're at a fine paſſe;

Not a man ſtands up for the Rump:

But lets it be laſh'd o'r and o'r.

While it lies like a ſenſeleſſe Fop—.

'T would make a man, a Whore,

To ſee a Tail tew'd like a Top.

Though a Rump be a dangerous Bit,

And many a Knave runs mad ont't,

Yet verily as it may hit,

An honeſt man may be glad on't.

To abuſe a poor, Blind Creature —

I had like to have ſaid, and a Dumb;

But now it ha's gotten a Speaker,

And Say is the Mouth of the Bum,

When Beſſe rul'd the Land there was no man

Complain'd, and yet now they Rail:

I beſeech you what differs a woman

[...] From a thing that's all Tongue, and Tail?

Though a Rump, &c.

The Charter we've ſworn to defend,

And propagate the Cauſe.

What call you thoſe of the Rump-end

But Fundamental Laws?

The Caſe is as clear as the Day,

There had been no Reformation,

If the Rump had not claw'd it away,

You had had no Propagation,

Tho' a Rump, &c.

As a Body's the better for a Purge,

Tho' the Guts may be troubled with Grip [...]s:

So the Nation will mend with a Scourge,

Tho' the Tayl may be ſick of the Stripes.

Ill Humors to conve [...]gh,

When the State hath taken a Looſneſſe, [...]

(Who can hold what will away?)

The Rump muſt doe the Bus'neſſe.

Tho' a Rump, &c.

The bold Cavalier, in the Field,

That laughs at your Sword, and Gunſhot,

An Ordinance makes him to yield,

And he's glad to turn Tayl to Bum-ſhot.

Old Oliver was a Teazer,

And waged warr with the Stump;

But Alexander, and Caeſar

Did both ſubmit to the Rump.

Tho' a Rump, &c.

Let no man be further miſled

By an Errour, paſt Debate.

For Sedgwick has prov'd it the Head,

At well of the Church as the State;

onest Hugh; that ſtill turnes up the Tippets,

When he Kneels to Adminiſter;

Sayes — a Rump, with Skippons ſippets,

Is a Diſh for a Holy Sister,

Tho' a Rump, &c.

Through Pr [...]de of Fleſh, or State

Poor Souls are overthrown:

How happy then is our Fate?

Wee've a Rump to take us down,

In matter's of  [...] 'tis true,

[...] Some Differings  [...] may

But give the Saints their due,

In the Rump they all agree.

Tho' a Rump, &c.

'Tis good at Bed, and at Bord;

It gives us Pleaſure and Eaſe,

Will you have the reſt in a word?

'Tis good for the new diſeaſe,

(The Tumult of the Guts;)

'Tis a Recipe for the Kings Evil,

Waſh the Members as ſweet as Nuts,

And then throw them all to the Devil.

Though a Rump be a dangerous Bit,

And many a Knave runs mad on't,

Yet, verily, as it may hit,

An honeſt man may be glad on't.

## Appendix A

Printed at Oxford for Carolus Guſtavus.

[Home](/)

Friend to the Rump.. Date: 1660  

