## (unknown project)

# A courtly new ballad of the princely wooing of the fair maid of London, by
King Edward. The tune is, Bonny sweet Robin.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. 〈…〉 of the princely wooing of the fair Maid of London, by King Edward.
    * 1.1. The Fair maid of Londons anſwer to King Edwards wanton Love.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=174337&page=1)

## 1\.  [...] of the princely wooing of the fair Maid of London, by King
Edward.

The Tune is, Bonny ſweet Robin.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

FAir Angel of England thy beauty moſt bright,

Is all my hearts pleaſure, my joy and delight,

Then goant me ſwett Lady thy true love to be,

That I may ſay welcome good fortune to me.

The Turtle ſo chaſt and true in her love,

By gentle perſwaſions her fancy will move,

Then be not intreated fair Lady in vain,

For nature require [...]h what I ſhould obtain▪

The phoen [...]x ſo famous that liveth alone,

Is vowed to chaſtity being but o [...]e,

But he not my darli [...]g ſo ch [...]ſt in deſire,

Leſt thou like the phoenix doſt penance in fire.

But alas gentle L [...]dy I pi [...]ty thy ſtate,

In being reſolved to live without Male,

For if of our coursing the pleaſure thou knew,

You would have a liking the ſame to enſue.

Long time I have ſued the ſame to obtain,

Yet I am req [...]d with ſcornful diſtain,

But if you will grant your good will unto me,

You ſhall be advanced to Princely degree:

Promotions and honour may often en [...]ice,

The chaſteſt that liveth,  [...]hough never ſo nice,

What woman ſo worthy but could be content

To live in a Pallace where Princes frequent.

To brides young and princely to church I have l [...]d

Two Ladies now lately have becked my bed,

Yet hath thy love taken more root in my heart,

Then all their contentments whereof I have part.

Your gentle heart cannot mens tears much abide,

And women leaſt angry when moſt they do chide,

Then yield to me kindly and ſay that at length

Men do want mercy and poor women ſtrength.

I grant that fair Ladies may poor men reſiſt,

And Princes may conquer and Love who they liſt

A King may co [...]and her to lye by his ſide.

Whoſe feature deſerveth to be a Kings bride.

In granting your love you ſhall purchaſe ren [...]wn,

your head ſhal be deck'd with Englands fair crown

thy garments moſt gallant of gold ſhall be  [...]ought,

If true love with treaſure with thée may be boght

Great Ladies of honour ſhall tend on thy train,

Moſt richly attired with Scarlet in grain,

My Chamber moſt princely thy perſon shall keep,

Where Virgins with muſick shall r [...]k thée aſléep.

If any more pleaſures thy heart can invent,

Command them ſweet Lady thy mind to content,

For Kings gallant courts where princes do dwell

Affords ſuch ſweet paſtime as Ladies love well.

Then be not reſolved to dye a true M [...]id,

But print in thy boſome the words I have ſaid,

And grant a King favour thy true love to be.

That I may ſay we [...]come ſweet Virgin to me.

### 1.1. The Fair maid of Londons anſwer to King Edwards wanton Love.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

OH wanton King Edward thy labour is vain,

To follow the pleaſure thou canſt not attain,

With getting thou looſeſt, and having doſt waſt it,

the which if thou pure haſt is ſpoil'd if thou haſt it.

But if thou obtaineſt it thou nothing haſt won,

And I looſing nothing yet quite am undone,

But if of that jewel a King do deceive me,

No [...]R can reſtore though a Kingdom he give me.

My colour is changed ſince you ſaw me laſt,

My favour is vaniſht my beauty is paſt,

The Roſe red bluſhes that ſat in my cheeks,

To paleneſs is turned which all men diſlikes.

I paſs not what Princes for love do proteſt,

The name of a Virgin contenteth me beſt,

I have not deſerved to ſleep by thy ſide,

Nor yet to be counted for King Edwards bride.

The name of a Princeſs I never did crave.

No ſuch tipe of honour thy hand-maid will have,

My breaſt ſhall not harbour ſo lofty a thought,

Nor be with rich proffers to wantonneſs brought.

If wild wanton Roſamond one of our ſort,

Had neved frequented  [...]. Henries brave Court,

Such heaps of deep ſorrow ſhe never had ſeen,

Nor taſted the rage of ſo jealous a Quéen.

All Men have their freedom to ſhow their intent,

They win noe a woman except ſhe conſent;

Who then can impute to them any fault?

Who ſtill go upright until Men do hault.

Tis counted a kindneſs in men for to try,

And vertue in women the ſame to deny,

For women unconſtant can never be prov'd

Until by their betters therein they be mov'd.

If women and modeſty once do but ſever

Then farewel good name and credit for ever,

And Royal King Edward let me be exil [...]d,

Ere any Man knows my body's defil'd.

If women and modeſty once do but ſever,

Too deep an  [...]mpreſſion within my heart bears,

Nor ſhall his bright honour that blot  [...]y me have,

To bring his gray hairs with grief to the grave.

The heavens forbid that when I ſhall dye,

That any ſuch ſin upon my ſoul ſhould lye,

It I have thus kept me from doing this ſin,

My heart ſhall not yield with a Prince to begin.

Come rather with pitty and weep on my tomb,

Then for my birth curſe my dear mothers womb,

That brought forth a bloſſom that ſtained th [...] tree,

With wanton deſires to ſhame her and me.

Leave me moſt noble King tempt not in vain,

My m [...]lk-white affection with lewdneſs to ſtain,

Though England will give me no comfort  [...]

Yet England will give me a ſad  [...]

[Home](/)

Date: 1684-1686?  

