## (unknown project)

# The London lasses hue-and-cry after her dearly beloved Robin, whom she
unluckily lost last Saturday night. To the tune of the Rant. Licensed
according to order.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. The London laſſes Hue-and-Cry After Her Dearly Beloved Robin, Whom ſhe unluckily loſt laſt Saturday Night.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=181903&page=1)

## 1\. The London laſſes Hue-and-Cry After Her Dearly Beloved Robin, Whom ſhe
unluckily loſt laſt Saturday Night.

To the Tune of the Rant.

Licenſed according to Order.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

GOod People pray give your Attention,

Vnto this my new Hue-and-cry,

Tis after my Love, and I'll mention

his Form, and Apparrel, for why,

Without him I can't be contented,

he is the Sole-joy of my life,

For him I have went, and lamented,

I fear I ſhall ne'er be a Wife.

O he is my joy, love and honey,

I loſt  [...]im laſt Saturday night,

I'd give twenty Shillings in Money

to thoſe that bring him to light.

He has I muſt tell ye, two Faces,

his head it ſtands quite all awry,

He Amb' [...]s and h [...]th all his Paces,

likewiſe he is ſeven hands high.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

YOu'll ſay that there is not a ſweeter

young man in the Kingdom than he,

I now will d [...]ribe e'ry Feature,

if that you will liſten to me.

His Skin is as fair as tann'd Leather,

likewiſe his ſweet Face to adorn,

His Noſe and his Hat meets together

turn'd up like a Sow-gelders-Ho [...]n.

His Teeth they are black, green and yellow,

thoſe changeable Colours are fine,

And like to the fair Crimſon  [...]allow,

his Cheeks too with Beauty does thine.

His pretty ſweet Mouth I admire,

which froaths like a Tankard of Purt,

The hair of his Head like ſoft Wire,

you'll find than of  [...]aggot-ſtick Curl,

His pretty ſweet Eyes like two Saweers,

his wounded my heart now I ſee,

His Ears they ſtand out like two  [...]aw [...]ers,

a pretty ſweet Creature is he.

Now having deſcribed his Beauty,

his Body muſt no ways eſcape,

For here I account it my Duty,

is tell ye his delicate ſhape.

I think in the waſte he is ſmaller

than the largeſt  [...] of a Drum,

Beſides I am ſure he is taller

by the head, than honeſt Tom Thumb.

O he  [...]s a moſt delicate Og [...]re,

his Hips they do ſtand out behind

As broad as a Buſhel and bigger,

would I this ſweet Creature could find.

Some Uillains his death has contrected,

[...] he'd not have left me I'm ſure,

I ſhall go quite mad and diſtracted,

this loſs I can never endure.

Look after my love Friends and mind him.

his Age is about twenty five,

A Guinay I'll gi [...]e thoſe that find him,

and bring him now dead or alive.

Perhaps they have preſt my ſweet Iewel,

to give him as  [...]rers place,

But ſure they wou'd ne'er be ſo cruel,

to take ſuch a pretty ſweet f [...]ce.

Goods People with pitty be fill'd  [...]o,

and ſeek  [...] all with one accord,

Then come to the ſign of the Dildoe,

and there you ſhall have your Reward.

## Appendix A

Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. Blare, and [...]. Yack.

[Home](/)

Date: 1688-1692?  

