## (unknown project)

# Poor Robin's dream; commonly called, Poor charity. I know no reason, but
this harmless riddle, may as well be printed, as sung to a fiddle. To a
compleat tune, well known by musicians, and many others: or, Game at cards.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Poor Robin's Dream; Commonly called, Poor Charity.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=174554&page=1)

## 1\. Poor Robin's Dream; Commonly called, Poor Charity.

I know no Reaſon, but this harmleſs Riddle,

May as well be Printed, as Sung to a Fiddle.

To a compleat Tune, well known by Muſicians, and many others: Or, Game at
Cards.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

HOw n [...]w good fellow, what all amort?

I pray thee tell me w [...]at is the News,

Trading is dead, and I am ſorry fort,

Which makes me look worſe than I uſe,

If a man hath no imployment whereby to get a penny,

he hath no enjoyment if that he wanteth money,

And Charity is not uſed by any.

I have nothing to ſpend, nor I've nothing to lend,

I've nothing to do, I tarry at home,

Sitt [...]ng in my Chair, drawing near to the fire,

I fell into a ſleep like an idle d [...]one

And as I ſlept, I fell into a dream

I  [...]e [...] a Play acted without e're a Theam,

But I could not tell what the Play did mean.

But afterwards I did perceive,

and ſomething more I did underſtand;

The Stage was the World wherein we live,

the Actors they were all mankind.

And when the Play's ended, the Stage down they fling,

then there will be no difference in this thing,

Between a Beggar and a King.

The firſt that Acted I proteſt,

was time with a Glaſs and Sithe in his hand,

With the Globe of the World upon his breaſt,

to ſhew that he could the ſame command:

There's a time for to work, & a time for to play,

a time for to borrow, and a time for to pay,

And a time that doth call us all away.

_[figure]_

COnſcience in order takes his place,

and very gallantly plays his part;

He fears not to flie in a Rulers face,

although it cuts him to the heart:

He tells him that all this is the latter Age,

Which put the Actors into ſuch a rage,

That they kick'd poor Conſcience off the ſtage.

Plainly Dealing preſently appears,

in habit like a ſimple man:

The Actors at him mocks and jears;

pointing their fingers as they ran:

How came this fellow into our company?

away with him many a Gallant did cry,

For Plain-Dealing will a Beggar dye.

Diſſimulation mounted the Stage,

but he was cloathed in Gallant attire;

He was acquainted with Youth and Age,

many his company did deſire;

They entertain'd him in their very breaſt,

There he could have harbour, and quietly reſt,

For Diſſemblers and Turn-coats fare the beſt.

Then cometh in poor Charity,

methinks ſhe looked wondrous old

She quiver'd and ſhe quak'd moſt piteouſly,

it griev'd me to think ſhe was grown ſo cold:

She had been I' th' City, and in the Country,

Amongſt the Lawyers and Nobilty,

But there was no room for poor Charity.

Then comes in Truth, not cloathed in Wool,

but like unto Youth in his white Laun ſleeves,

And ſays the Land it is full, full, full,

too full of Rebels, worſe than Thieves.

The City's full of Poverty, the French are full of pride,

Phanaticks full of Envy, which order can't abide,

And the Uſurers bags are full beſide.

Hark how Bellona's Drums they do beat,

methinks they go rattling through the Town

Hark how they thunder through the ſtreet,

as though they would ſhake the Chimneys down

Then comes in Mars, the great God of War,

And bids us face about, and be as we were,

But when I wak'd I ſat in my Chair.

## Appendix A

Printed by and for A.M. and ſold by the Bookſellers of London.

[Home](/)

Date: 1693  

