## (unknown project)

# Poor Robins observations upon Whitsun-holidays. Concerning the fair and foul
weather happening thereon. Together with the manly exercise of the Cornish-men
of hurling the ball in Hide-Park on Whitsun-Tuesday last.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. POOR ROBINS Obſervations upon Whitſun-Holidays. Concerning the fair and foul weather happening thereon. TOGETHER With the Manly exerciſe of the Corniſh-men of Hurling the Ball in Hide-Park on Whitſun-Tueſday laſt.
    * 1.1. Iſlington.
    * 1.2. Whitſun Monday.
    * 1.3. Whitſun Tueſday.
    * 1.4. The Corniſh Hurling of the Silver Ball.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=182833&page=1)

## 1\. POOR ROBINS Obſervations upon Whitſun-Holidays.  
Concerning the fair and foul weather happening thereon.  
TOGETHER With the Manly exerciſe of the Corniſh-men of Hurling the Ball in
Hide-Park on Whitſun-Tueſday laſt.

### 1.1. Iſlington.

VVHat ails ye O ye clouds why do you frown

With angry influence upon our Town?

Spoiling the Harveſt hopes of all our gains,

And makes us lower when we ſee it rains,

Was not our loſs enough the firſt of May

When as the rain got all our gains away?

When company we wanted who conſumes

Our Cheeſe-cakes, Bottle-Ale, and our Stew'd-Prunes.

All which hung on our hands (the more's the pitty)

And ſent with loſs afterwards to the City.

What would have yeilded us a pound ſold dear

Scarcely an Angel doth for them appear.

How can we pay our Rent at ſuch a rate,

When Rain does make our Trading out of date?

### 1.2. Whitſun Monday.

The Heavens weeps tears, which makes us too to weep,

Wee'r at a loſs for thoſe things which we keep.

For when the Sky with ſhowers doth on us frown

It brings the price of Cakes, and Cheeſe-cakes down:

The weather did our hopes ſo fouly cozen

Eel-pics muſt go now eighteen to the dozen.

Now Dick the Prentice with his Neighbour William

Who meant to walk abroad with Nell and Jilian.

Feaſting their guts with Flawns and Fools and Cuſtard,

And drinking Bottle-Ale till they are fluſter'd.

When merry catches they do ſit and ſing,

And love each other like to anything;

The Rain which on the earth the Clouds did ſpil

Made them good Husbands ſore againſt their will.

Citizens wives who did new cloaths provide

To ſhow themſelves abroad at this ſame tide,

And vvould be generous novv in ſpending chink

Though they three days before ſcarce eat or drink;

Beſides their Husbands vvho abroad do vvalk

To hear the Cuckovv his ſvveet Tune to talk.

When after they have tane the pleaſant air

Unto our houſes uſe to make repair,

But this foul vveather vvill not let them rome

The Cuckovv they may ſtay to hear at home.

We Servants did provide againſt this day

To vvait on them vvhich do at Nine-pins play,

Beſides the others vvhich vvait in the houſe,

But all our Tradings novv not vvorth a louſe;

Our Rooms are empty and to tell you truly,

No Red-noſes being ſeen; makes us look blewly.

Had Sol ſhin'd on us vvith a glorious ray

And been ſo kind to give us a fair day,

Our houſes had been throng'd, and every Arbor

To young men and to maids had been a harbor,

Our profits vvould come in as ſweet as honey,

We ſcarcely could have time to change their money.

But being wet weather our Trading fails,

Maids would not budge out to have dagled tails.

### 1.3. Whitſun Tueſday.

But Whitſun-Tueſday was more kinde unto us,

Had that been wet ſuch weather would undo us,

The ſun ſhin'd on the earth with Radiant face

Which ſent unto us cuſtomers apace;

The Rooms now throng'd with Gueſts, Arbors not empty

Of young men and of maids we then had plenty,

Our Sider, Mum, Chees-cakes, Cakes and ſtew'd Prunes,

This numerous company them all conſumes.

### 1.4. The Corniſh Hurling of the Silver Ball.

But yet Hide-Park a man might truly ſay

Had in it much the glory of that day.

Stout Cornwall, always Loyal to their King.

A hundred brave reſolved perſons bring

Of their own County to the Park that day

One of their Countreys exerciſe to play.

Where being come themſelves they do devide

To Eaſt and Weſt, their manhood to decide;

I'th midſt oth park's thrown up a Silver Ball,

VVhich being done, ſtoutly to it they fall:

Heels were tript up, and bodies come to ground.

The Corniſh Hug always good play was found.

Long time it laſted, and novv Eaſt then VVeft

At ſeveral times had each of them the beſt.

Thouſand ſpectators ſtood vvith greedy Eyes

To ſee them Act this Manly Exerciſe:

His Highneſs Yorks great Duke beheld the ſame

VVith other perſons of renovvned fame.

Brave Corniſh men you are to be commended

And vvill be ſo until the vvorld is ended.

## Appendix A

London, Printed by Peter Lillicrap.

[Home](/)

Date: 1670  

