## (unknown project)

# Robin Hood and the bishop. Shewing how Robin Hood went to an old womans
house, and changed cloaths with her to escape from the bishop: and how he
robbed him of all his gold, and made him sing mass. To the tune of, Robin Hood
and the stranger.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Robin Hood and the Biſhop.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=174584&page=1)

## 1\. Robin Hood and the Biſhop.

SHEWING How Robin Hood went to an Old Womans Houſe, and changed Cloaths with
her to eſcape from the Biſhop: And how he robbed him of all his Gold, and made
him Sing Maſs.

To the Tune of, Robin Hood and the Stranger.

_[figure]_

COme Gentlemen all, and liſten a while,

with hey down, down and a down;

And a ſtory I'le to you unfold.

Ile tell you how Robin Hood ſerved ye Biſhop

When he robb'd him of his Gold.

As it  [...]ell  [...] in a Sun-ſhining day,

with a hey, &c.

When Phoebus was in his prime;

then Robin Hood, that Archer good,

In mirth would ſpend ſome time.

And as he walked the Forteſt along,

with a hey, &c.

Some Paſtime for to ſpy,

there was he wa [...] of a proud Biſhop,

And all his Company.

O what ſhall I do, ſaid Robin Hood then?

with a hey, &c.

If the Biſhop he doth take me,

no mercy he'l ſhew, unto me I know,

But hanged ſhall I be.

Then Robin was ſtout, and turned him about,

with a hey, &c.

And a little Houſe there he did ſpy:

and to an Old Wife, for to ſave his life,

He aloud began to cry.

Why, who art thou, ſaid ye Old Woman,

with a hey, &c.

Come tell it to me for good.

I am an Out-Law, as many do know,

My Name it is Robin Hood.

And yonders the Biſhop and all his man,

with a hey, &c.

And if that I taken be,

then day and night, he'l work me ſpight,

And hanged ſhall I be.

If thou be Robin Hood, then ſaid ye Old wife

with a hey, &c.

As thou doſt ſeem to me;

I'le for thée provide, and thée I will hide,

From the Biſhop and his Company:

For I remember on Saturday night,

with a hey, &c.

Thou bought me both wh [...]es and Hoſe:

therefore I'le provide. thy perſon to hide,

And kéep thée from thy Foes.

Thou give me ſoon thy Coat of Grey,

with hey down, down and a down.

And take thou my Mantie of Gréen;

thy Spindle and Twine, unto me reſign,

And take thou my Arrows ſo kéen.

_[figure]_

ANd  [...] Robin Hood, [...]s thus ar­rayed

with hey down down and a down,

He went ſtraight to his Company,

with his Spindle and Twins, he a [...]t look'd behind,

For the Biſhop & his company.

O who is yonder, quoth Little John,

with a hey down, &c.

That now comes over the Lée:

an Arrow at her I will let fly,

So like an Old Witch looks ſhe.

O hold thy hand, hold thy hand, ſaid Robin then

with hey, &c.

And ſhoot not thy Arrows ſo kéen,

I am Robin Hood, thy Maſter good,

And quickly it ſhall be ſeen.

The Biſhop he came to the Old Womans houſe,

with hey, &c.

And he called with furious mood.

come let me ſoon ſee, and bring unto me,

That Traytor Robin Hood.

The Old Woman he ſet on a Milk White Stéed,

with hey, &c.

Himſelf on a D [...]pple Grey.

and for  [...] Robin Hood,

H [...] [...] the way.

But  [...] Riding the forteſt along

with hey &c.

[...] to ſée,

[...] men bold,

[...] under  [...] Green-wood frée.

O who  [...] yo [...]er, the Biſhop then ſaid,

with hey, &c.

That's ranging within yonder Wood?

marry ſaies the old woman, I think it to be

A man call'd Robin Hood.

Why, who art thou, the Biſhop he ſaid,

with hey, &c.

Which I have here with me?

why I am a woman, thou Cuckol [...]ly Biſhop

Lift up my Leg and ſée.

Then woe is me, the Biſhop he ſaid,

with hey, &c.

That ever I ſaw this day,

he turned him about, but Robin Hood is ſtout,

Call'd him and bid him ſtay.

They Robin took hold of the Biſhops Horſe,

with hey, &c.

And ty'd him faſt to a Trée:

then Little John, ſmil'd his Maſtat upon,

For joy of his Company.

Robin Hood took his Mantl [...] from's back,

with hey, &c.

And  [...] the Gr [...]und,

and out  [...] Biſhops Portmantle, he

So [...]n told  [...] hund [...] pound.

Now let him go, ſaid Robin Hood,

with hey, &c.

Said Little John that may not  [...]e,

for I vow & proteſt he ſhall ſing us a Maſs,

Before that he go from me.

Then Robin Hood took the Biſhop by'th hand

with hey, &c.

And bound him faſt to a Trée,

and made him ſing a Maſs, God-w [...]t,

To him and his Yeomandry.

And when they brought him thorow the wood

with hey down, down and a down.

And ſet him an his Dapple Grey.

and gabs the Tayl within his hand,

And bade him for Robin Hood pray.

## Appendix A

Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.

[Home](/)

Date: 1674-1679?  

