## (unknown project)

# Robin Hood newly reviv'd. To a delightful new tune.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Robin Hood newly reviv'd.
    * 1.1. The Second Part,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=174585&page=1)

## 1\. Robin Hood newly reviv'd.

To a Delightful New TUNE.

_[figure]_

COme liſten a while you Gentlemen all,

with a hey down down a down down,

That are in this Bower within,

for a ſtory of gallant bold Robin Hood

I purpoſe now to begin.

What time of the day, qd. Robin Hood then,

with a hey down, &c.

Quoth little John, 'tis in the prime,

why then we will to the green wood gang,

For we have no victuals to dine.

As Robin Hood walkt the forreſt along,

with a hey down, &c.

It was in the midſt of the day,

there was he met with a deft young man,

As ever walkt on the way.

His Doublet was of ſilk, he ſaid

with a hey down, &c.

His ſtockings like ſcarlet ſhone,

and he walkt on along the way

To Robin Hood then unknown.

A herd of Deer was in the Bend,

with a hey down, &c.

All feeding before his face,

now the beſt of ye i'le have to my dinner,

And that in a little ſpace.

Now the ſtranger he made no mickle ado

with a hey down, &c.

But he bends a right good Bow,

and the beſt Buck in the Herd he flew,

Forty good yards him fr [...].

Well ſhot, well ſhot, qd. Robin Hood then,

with a hey down, &c.

That ſhot it was ſhot in time,

and if thou wilt accept of the place,

Thou ſhalt be a bold Yeoman of mine.

Go play the Chiven, the ſtranger ſaid,

with a hey down, &c.

Make haſte and quickly go,

or with my fiſt beſure of this,

I'll give thee buffets ſtore.

Thou had'ſt not beſt buffet me, ſaid Ro. Hood,

with a hey down, &c.

For though I ſeem forlorn,

yet I can have thoſe that will take my part

If I blow but my horn.

Thou waſt not beſt wind thy horn, the ſtranger ſaid.

with a hey down, &c.

Be'eſt thou never ſo much in haſte,

for I can draw out a good broad ſword

And quickly cut the blaſt.

Then Robin Hood bent a very good bow,

with a hey down, &c.

To that ſhot and he would fain,

the ſtronger he bent up a noble bow

To ſhoot at bold Robin again.

O hold thy hand, hold thy hand, qd. Ro. Hood,

with a hey down, &c.

To ſhoot it would be in vain,

for if we ſhould ſhoot the one at the other,

The one of us muſt be ſlain.

### 1.1. The Second Part,

to the ſame Tune.

BVt let's take our ſwords and our  [...]ro [...]d  [...]u­  [...]klers,

with a hey down &c.

And gang under yonder tree;

as I ho [...]e to be ſa [...]'d (the ſtranger ſaid)

One foot I will not flee.

Then Robin Hood lent the ſtranger a blow

with a hey down, &c.

Moſt ſcared him out of his wit;

thou never felt blow (the ſtranger ſaid)

That ſhall be better quit.

The ſtranger he drew our a good broad ſword,

with a hey down, &c.

And hit Robin on the crown,

that from every hair of bold Robins head

The blood ran trickling down.

God-a-merry good fellow (qd. Ro. Hood then)

with a hey down, &c.

And for this that thou haſt done,

tell me good fellow what thou art,

Tell me where thou doſt woon.

The ſtranger then anſwered bold Ro. Hood,

with a hey down, &c.

I'le tell thee where I did dwell;

in Maxfield was I born and bred,

My name is young Gamwel.

For killing of my fathers Steward,

with a hey down, &c.

I am forc'd to this Engliſh Wood,

and for to ſeek an Vncle of mine,

Some call him Robin Hood.

But art thou a Couzen of Robin Hoods then?

with a hey down, &c.

The ſoone [...] we ſhould have done,

as I hope to be ſav'd (the ſtranger then ſaid

I am his own ſiſters ſon.

But Lord what kiſſing & courting was there

with a hey down, &c.

When theſe two Couzens did meet,

and they went all that ſummers day

And little John did meet.

But when they met with little John,

with a hey down, &c.

He thereunto did ſay:

O Maſter where have you been

You have tarried ſo long away?

I met with a ſtranger (qd. Robin Hood then)

with a hey down, &c.

Full ſore he hath beaten me;

then i'le have about with him (qd. little John)

And try if he can beat me.

Oh no, Oh no (quoth Robin Hood)

with a hey down, &c.

Little John it may not be ſo,

for he is my own dear ſiſters ſon,

And Couzens I have no mo.

But he ſhall be a hold Yeoman of mine,

with a hey down, &c.

My chief Man next to thee,

and I Robin Hood, and thou little John,

And Scarlet he ſhall be.

And we'll be three of the braveſt Out-laws

with a hey down, &c.

That is in the North-Country.

if you'll have any more of bold Robin Hood,

In this ſecond Part it will be.

Then bold Ro. Hood to the North he would go,

with a hey down, &c.

VVith valour and mickle might,

with ſword by his ſide which oft had bin try'd

To fight and recover his right.

The firſt that he met with was a bold Scot,

with a hey down, &c.

His ſervant he ſaid he would be;

no, qd. Robin Hood, it cannot be good,

For thou wilt prove falſe unto me.

Thou haſt not been true to Sire nor Cuz,

with a hey down, &c.

Nay, marry, the Scot he ſaid,

as true as your heart i'le never part,

Gude Maſter be not afraid.

Then Robin Hood turn'd his face to the Eaſt,

with a hey down, &c.

Fight on my merry men ſtour,

our caſe is good quoth brave Robin Hood,

And we ſhall not be beaten our.

The Battle grows hot on every ſide,

with a hey down, &c.

The Scotch-man made great moan,

quoth Jockey gude ſaith they fight on each ſide

Would I were with my Wife Joan.

The Enemy compaſt brave Robin about,

with a hey down, &c.

'Tis long e're the battel ends,

there's neither will yield, nor give up the field

For both are ſupply'd with friends.

This ſong it was made in Robin Hoods days,

with a hey down down a down down,

Let's pray unto Jove above,

to give us true peace, that miſchief may ceaſe,

And war may give place unto love.

## Appendix A

Printed for Alex. Milbourn at the Stationers-Arms in Green-Arbor-Court in the
Lit­tle Old-Baily.

[Home](/)

Date: 1682-1700?  

