## (unknown project)

# To her brown beard. For i'le warrant the girl he'l love the [sic]. This
counsel doth advise all maidens, kind, to have a care lest Cupid make them
blind, whereby to dote on young mens fickle love, which their actions will
unconstant prove: husbands enough, and plenty may be had, some very good, and
some exceeding bad; then come fair maids, pray pick and chuse thebest [sic],
and let Old Nick make use of all the rest, tune of Sweet is the lass, or My
maidenhead will not o're load me.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. To her brown Beard.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=181879&page=1)

## 1\. To her brown Beard.

For i'le warrant the Girl he'l Love the.

This Counſel doth adviſe all Maidens, kind,

To have a ca [...]e leſt Cupid make them blind,

Whereby to dote on Young mens fickle Love,

Which their actions will unconſtant prove:

Huſbands enough, and plenty may be had,

Some very good, and ſome exceeding bad;

Then come fair Maids, pray pick and chuſe the beſt,

And let Old Nick make uſe of all the reſt,

Tune of Sweet is the Laſs, or my maidenhead will not o're load me.

_[figure]_

_[figure]_

YOu pretty Ladies all

That merrily are diſpoſed

Once again to you I call

To hear what is diſcloſed?

It's but a jeſt, yet 'tis the beſt,

And ſuch conceits doth move me,

To tell you true, as you may know

Which is the man doth love thee.

In the firſt place I ſhall you tell

How you may eaſily find him;

Do but obſerve his carriage well;

Yet make tho you did not mind him:

Obſerve alſo how he doth go,

As thy fancy it doth move thee,

I ſhe he fair and honeſt too

I'l warrant thee girl he'l love thee.

If he be of nature meek and mild,

Or of a carriage civil,

But if he has a Girl with Child

Oh that's an action evil,

Such a beard do not come near,

Though he vows to lye above thee,

But it he's one that's fair and young

Ile warrant thee girl he'l love thee.

But of a wanton have a care,

That will both drink and ſwagger,

He'l bring his Touſhold poor and hare

Himſelf will turn a Beggar:

But it thouſ't find one of thy mind

You ſhall no whit diſprove me,

Make choice of one that neer did wrong

Ile warrant &c.

Be not afraid of a Carrot heard

They'r good when they be ſodden,

So is a Ten that hath new ſaid

If ſhe be not too much trodden,

Brown Tair I find is true and kind,

I ſpeak as't doth bohove me,

But black I wis, hath a good kiſs,

Ile warrant &c.

A red Hair'd man will find a Purſe

To ſit long on Alebenches,

But yettow Hair is ten times worſe,

He loves to follow menthes:

And for grey Hair, is full of care,

Young fleſh it will move thee,

But he that's turl'd above the world

Ile warrant &c.

Of ſandy-Hair have a great care.

For fear leſt he be jealous,

And of a red Noſe to beware,

For he doth love the Alehouſe:

Let not a red come in thy bed,

White Hair is it will move thee.

But perfect brown's the heſt in Town,

Ile warrant &c.

The Flaten Hair it is very good,

And of ſuch a civil carriage,

Leather beards of a ſturvy mood:

Ioyn not with him in marriage:

A down lookt man that's pale and wan.

Of all delights hee'l prove the,

Red theary theek is mild and week,

Ile warrant &c.

From others let toy praiſe proceed

When as they do come near thee,

There's ſome do make great ſhows indeed

But will not love you dearly.

Of ſuch beware and have a care.

I ſpeak as't doth behove me.

Chuſe but him that is like to me,

Ile warrant &c.

Some maidens they do ſore lament

Becauſe they are forſaken.

Therefore theſe lines I did invent

That none ſhould ve miſtaken

So maids adieu I did to you,

Tryal it is approv'd in me,

Think what you will, the brown Hair ſtill

Ile warrant thee girl, hee'l love thee.

## Appendix A

Printed for P. Brooksby at the golden ball in Pye-Corner.

[Home](/)

Date: 1670-1696?  

