---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Tarltons newes out of purgatorie Onely such a iest as his iigge, fit for
gentlemen to laugh at an houre, &c. Published by an old companion of his,
Robin Goodfellow.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=1)

Tarltons newes out of Purgatorie.

Onely such a iest as his Iigge, fit for Gen­tlemen to laugh at an houre, &c.

Published by an old Companion of his, Robin Goodfellow.

_[figure]_

AT LONDON, Printed for T. G. and T. N. 1590.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=2)

## The Contents of the whole booke.

  * The tale of Pope Boniface, and why he wore a Mil­lers cap, and a malkin in Purgatorie. fol. 4
  * What kind of men those be that God neuer made. 6
  * What creatures those be, that in sight are Carnati­ons, in smell Roses, in hearing Syrens, in touching Nettles, and in tast wormewood. 9
  * What occupations take more paines about God, then the Pope. 10
  * The tale of Fryer Onyon, why in Purgatorie he was tormented with Waspes. 13
  * The tale of the three Cuckolds, of their Impresses, & Mottoes. 21
  * The tale of the Cooke, and why he sate in Purgato­rie with a Cranes leg in his mouth. 22
  * The tale of the Vickar of Bergamo, and why hee sits with a coale in his mouth in Purgatorie. 29
  * The tale of the Painter of Doncaster, & why in Pur­gatorie he was beaten with a bell rope. 33
  * Why the gentlewoman of Lyons sate with hir haire clipt off in Purgatorie. 38
  * The tale of two Louers of Pisa, and why they were whipt in Purgatorie with Nettles. 42

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=2)

## To the Gentlemen Readers, Health.

GEntlemen, the Horse when hee is first handed to the warres, starteth at the
cracke of euery peece; and e­uery coucht Launce is a censure of death to a
fresh water Souldier: So fareth it with mee, for neuer before being in print I
start at the sight of the Presse, and ha­uing not dared to looke into the open
light, I feared with the Owle to fly before it be twylight: yet I haue heard
others whose bookes haue past your view, ac­count you so fauorable, curteous
and affable, shrou­ding euery scape with silence; that I presumed the rather
to experience with them the hope of your fa­uours: which if I finde as they
haue done, though I bee blinde Bayard, yet I will in the thickest of the mire
plunge vp to the Saddle for your sakes. Virgill afore he wrote his Aeneidos,
wrote his Culex; and as­saide in trifles, afore he attempted in Triumphs.
Lu­can wrote Quaedam Lirica, before he began with Bel­lumper Emathios plusquam
Ciuilia campos. Roome was not builded on a day, and men that venter little,
ha­zard little: So gentlemen, I present you with a toy of Tarltons, called his
newes out of Purgatory; which I
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=3) desire you
accept as curteously as I offer willing to to please: Though they be Crepundia
yet reade them, and if you find any pleasant Facetia, or Quicquid Salis▪
thinke all sauory, and so pleasde without being satiri­cally peremptory: for
Momus will haue a mouth full of inuectiues, and Zoilus should not be Zoilus if
hee were not squint eide. Therefore leauing their hu­mours to the wordmongers
of mallice that like the Vipers grew odious to their owne kinde, hoping of
your curteous censure, I bid you farewell.

## Table of contents

  * The Contents of the whole booke.
  * To the Gentlemen Readers, Health.
  * 1\. Tarltons newes out of Purgatorie.
  * 2\. ¶ Tarltons description of Purgatorie.
  * 3\. The tale of Pope Boniface, and why he wore a Millers cap, and a malkin in purgatorie.
  * 4\. What kinde of men be those that God neuer made.
  * 5\. What creatures those be, that in sight are Carnations, in smell Roses, in hearing Syrens, in touching nettles, and in tast wormewood.
  * 6\. What occupations take more paines about God then the pope.
  * 7\. The tale of Friar Onyon, why in purgatorie he was tormented with waspes.
  * 8\. The tale of the three Cuckolds, of their impreses and mottoes.
  * 9\. The tale of the Cooke, and why he sate in Purgatory with a Cranes leg in his mouth.
  * 10\. The tale of the Vickar of Bergamo, and why he sits with a coale in his mouth in purgatorie.
  * 11\. The tale of the Painter of Doncaster, and why in purgatorie he was beaten with a Belroape.
  * 12\. RONSARDS DESCRIPTION OF his Mistresse, which he weares in his hand in Purgatorie.
  * 13\. Why the gentlewoman of Lions sate with hir haire clipt off in Purgatorie.
  * 14\. The tale of the two Louers of Pisa, and why they were whipt in Purgatory with nettles.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=3)

## 1\. Tarltons newes out of Purgatorie.

SOrrowing as most men doe for the death of Richard Tarlton, in that his
particu­lar losse was a generall la­ment to all that coueted, ei­ther to
satisfie their eies with his Clownish gesture, or their eares with his
wit­tyiests. The wonted desire to see plaies left me, in that although I sawe
as rare showes, and heard as lofty verse, yet I inioied not those woonted
sports that flowed from him as from a fountain, of pleasing and merry
conceits. For although he was on­ly superficially seene in learning, hauing no
more but a bare insight into the Latine tongue, yet hee had such a prompt
witte, that he seemed to haue that Salem ingenij, which Tullie so highly
commends in his Orator. Well, howsoeuer either naturall, or artificiall, or
both, he was a mad merry companion, desired and loued of all: amongst the rest
of whose welwishers myselfe being not the least, after his death I mourned in
conceit, and absented my selfe from all plaies, as wanting that merry Roscius
of Plaiers, that famozed all Comedies so with his pleasant and extemporall
inuenti [...]n: yet at last, as the longest Sommers day hath his night, so
this dumpe had an ende: and forsooth vpon whitson monday last I would néedes
to the Theatre to sée a play: where when I came, I founde such concourse of
vnruely people, that I thought it better solitary to walke in the fieldes,
then to intermeddle my selfe amongst such a great presse. Feeding mine humour
[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=4) with this
fancie I stept by dame Anne of Cléeres well, & went by the backside of
Hogsdon: where finding the Sun to bee hot, and séeing a faire tree that had a
coole shade, I sate me downe to take the aire, where after I had rested me a
while I fell a sléepe: As thus I lay in a slumber, mée thought I saw one
attired in russet with a but tond cap on his head, a great bagge by his side,
and a strong bat in his hand, so artificially attyred for a Clowne, as I began
to call Tarltons woonted shape to remembrance, as he drew more néere and hee
came within the compasse of mine eie, to iudge it was no other but the very
ghost of Richard Tarlton, which pale and wan sate him down by me on the
grasse. I that knewe him to be deade at this sodaine sight fell into a great
feare, insomuch that I swet in my sleepe: which he perceiuing, with his
woonted conntenance full of smiles began to comfort me thus. What olde
acquain­tance, a man or a mouse? Hast thou not heard me verefie, that a
Souldier is a souldier if he haue but a blew hose on his head? Feare not me
man, I am but Dick Tarlton that coulde quaint it in the Court, and clowne it
on the stage: that had a quart of wine for my friend, and as word for my foe:
who hurt none beeing aliue, and will not preiudice a­ny being dead: f [...]r
although thou sée me here in the likenes of a spirite, yet thinke mee to bee
one of those Familiares Lares that were rather pleasantly disposed then indued
with any hurtfull influence, as Hob Thrust, Robin Good­fellowe and such like
spirites (as they terme them of the buttry) famozed in euerie olde wiues
Chronicle for their mad merry pranckes. Therefore sith my appearance to thée
is in resemblance of a spirite, thinke that I am as pleasant a goblin as the
rest, and will make thée as merry before I part, as euer Robin Goodfellow made
the coun­try wenches at their Creame boules. With this he drew more neere me
and I starting backe cried out: In nomine Iesu, auoid Sathan for Ghost thou
art none, but a very di­  [...]el (for the soules of them which are departed)
if the sacred [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=4) principles of
Theologie bee true) neuer returne into the world againe till the generall
resurrection: for either are they pla [...]st in heauen, from whence they come
not to in­tangle themselues with other cares, but sit continually before the
seate of the Lambe singing Alleluia to the high­est, or else they are in hell:
and this is a profound and cer­tain Aphorisme, Ab inferis nulla est redemptio:
vpō these conclusiue premisses depart from mee Sathan the resem­blance of
whom soeuer thou dost carry. At this pitching his staffe downe on the end, &
crossing one leg ouer an o­ther, he answered thus: why you horeson dunce,
think you to set Dick Tarlton Non plus with your Aphorismes? No, I haue yet
left one chapter of choplodgicke to tewslite you withall, that were you as
good as George a Gréene I would not take the foile at your hands: and that is
this, I perceiue by your arguments your inward opinion, and by your wise
discretiō what pottage you loue: I sée no sooner a rispe at the howse end or
a Maipole before the doore, but I cry there is, a paltrie Alehowse: and as
soone as I heare the principles of your religion, I can say, oh there is a
Caluinist: what doe you make heauen and hell Contraria immediata, so
contrarie, that there is no meane betwixt them, but that either a mans soule
must in post hast goe presently to God, or else with a whirlewind and a
venge­ance goe to the diuell? yes, yes my good brother, there is Quoddam
tertium a third place that all our great grand­mothers haue talkt of, that
Dant hath so learnedly writ of, and that is Purgatorie. What syr are we wiser
then all our forefathers? and they not onely feared that place in life, but
found it after their death: or els was there much land and annuall pensions
giuen in vaine to morrow­masse priests for dirges, trentals and such like
decretals of deuotion, whereby the soules in Purgatorie were the soo­ner
aduanced into the quiet estate of heauen. Nay more, how many Popes & holy
Bishops of Rome, whose Cānons ācnot erre, haue taught vs what this
Purgatorie is? And [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=5) yet if thou wert so
incredulous that thou wouldest nei­ther beleeue our olde beldames, nor the
good Bishops: yet take Dicke Tarlton once for thine Author, who is nowe come
from Purgatorie, and if any vpstart Protestant de­nie, if thou hast no place
of scripture ready to confirme it, say as Pithagoras schollers did (Ipse
dixit) and to all bon companions  [...]t shall stand for a principle. I coulde
not but smile at the madde merry doctrine of my friend Richard, and therefore
taking heart at grasse drawing more neere him▪ I praied him to tell me what
Purgatorie is, & what they be that are resident there: as one willing to doe
mee such a fauour, he sate him downe and began thus.

## 2\. ¶ Tarltons description of Purgatorie.

AFter thy breath hath left thy body, and thy soule is set frée from this vile
prison of earth, where it hath been long inclosed, then dooth it wander
forward into a fa [...] broade way, where at the tourning of a crosse there
are thrée passages, one on the right hand, and that is very narrow and leadeth
vnto heauen: The second on the left hand, is broad and faire, ouer a greene
vale, and that conducteth vnto hell: now betwixt these is there a lane neither
to broade nor to narrow, and that is the  [...] way to Purgatory: wherin after
you haue wandered a while, you come to a bridge, framed all of Néedle points
and ouer that must you passe bare footed, as the first penance for your
formost offences. Then sir to haue a little ease after that sharpe absolution,
shall you come into a faire medow, and that is all ouergrowne with Aue maries
and creedes, this is to put you in remembrance of our Ladies P [...]alter,
which if you can say a hundreth & fifty times ouer before you passe the
meadow, you escape pas­sing ouer a whole field of hot burning ploughshares,
that [[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=5) day and
night lie glowing hot for such purposes: after these and a many moe of other
miseries, which I am by the law forbidden to vtter, you come to purgatorie
gate, where for an entring penny, you haue fortie lashes with a whip as ill as
euer were giuen in Bridewell: then are you admitted entrance. At the first you
shall come into a very sumptuous hall, richelie hanged with tapistrie, so fine
and so curious, that the most cutthroate Broaker in England would take the
worst of the hangings for a suf­ficient pawne: In this hall shall you see an
infinite num­ber of seates, formed and seated like an Amphitheater: wherein
are roially, nay more then roially placed all the Popes, except the first
thirty after Christ, and they went presentlie to heauen: and the reason was,
because Pur­gatorie was then but a building, and not fully finished. In those
seates I say the popes sit triumphantlie with their pontificalibus, and their
triple crownes, but yet a­biding paines of purgatorie, aswell as the meanest
in all the house, equally proportioned according to the measure of their
sinnes: some for false wresting the scriptures, o­thers for ambition, some for
couetousnesse, gluttonie, extortion, symonie, wrath, pride, enuie, many for
sloth, and idlenesse: and some I can tell you haue come thither for wenching
matters, thats counted in Rome but a ve­  [...]iall sinne, and therfore thrée
dirges and two tapers of­fered to the picture of old Pasquille, is sufficient
to wipe away so small an offence. But amongst all the rest two of them made me
to maruell at the strangnesse of the pu­nishment: The first was Boniface the
fourth, and he sat in this order.

He was richly attired in his pontificalibus, and som­what more rich then the
rest, but vpon his head, in stead of his triple crowne, he wore a dustie
millers cap: and whereas other Popes held in their right hand the keyes of
heauen, and in the left the sworde of Paule, he held be­twéene both his hands
a durtie malkin, such as Bakers [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=6) sweepe their Ouens
withall, and right ouer his head was written this old adage in Latin: ‘Ne
sutor vltra crepidam.’

And because thou shalt know the reason why we was thus punished, marke this
merry tale.

## 3\. The tale of Pope Boniface, and why he wore a Millers cap, and a malkin
in purgatorie.

THere dwelled somtime in the citie of Rome a Baker, named Astasio, who for his
honest behauiour was well accounted of amongst his neighbours, insomuch, that
what  [...]se so­euer his bread was baked after, his loaues neuer past the
ballance. This Astasio had sundry prenti­ses and iourneymen to do his
businesse, for he was chéefe Baker to the popes holinesse: amongst whome there
was one called Miles, who was a strong lusty lubber, and one that was as ripe
conceipted for knauerie, as the Miller that ground their meale for théeuery, &
had as many good conditions, as his mistresse had points of chastitie, and she
was thought a vertuous matron: for a Cardinall lay in her house, to instruct
her with holy sentences, and where such blessed men lie, there can be no
lecherie. Well Miles was a mad wagge, and when he had doone his businesse, to
exercise his wits would diuerse times resort to some one or other of the
cloister of Nuns, amongst these merry wenches, to put in practise the
excellencie of his prattle, he so behaued himselfe, that if higher fortune had
not fal­len him, the Nuns of Santa Maria had intreated their ab­besse to haue
made him their fac totum: but to his grea­ter dignitie, thus it fell out. It
chaunced that Pope Pi­us fell sicke, and for that he knew Cardinals were
ambi­tious, and would flie with Icarus whatsoeuer befall, to a­uoide all
mutinies that might insue after his death about [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=6) the succession, of
the Papacie: he called his Cardinals to­gether, and charged them to elect none
Pope, but he that could absolue these thrée questions.

  * 1 What kinde of men those bee, that GOD neuer made.
  * 2 What creatures those be, that in sight are Carna­tions, in smell Roses, in hearing Syrens, in touch Nettles, and in taste Wormewood.
  * 3 And what occupations take more paines about God then the Pope.

Upon these the Cardinalls were agréed and went home to their seueral lodging,
leauing Pius wel cōtented with their mutuall consent, & resolued to die, sith
he had so well determined of the succession of the papacye to bee briefe, as
euery dogge hath his day, so the Pope had his date, for the next morning hee
died. And vpon this there was a generall mourning through all Roome, the
Cardi­nalls wept, the Abbots howled, the Monks rored, the fry­ers cryed, the
Nuns puled, the Curtizans lamented, the bels rang, and the tapers were
lighted, that such a blacke Sanctus was not seene along time afore in Rome:
wel to be short, his  [...]unerals were solemnly kept, and his body caried
from Castle Angelo to Saint Peters Church and there intombed. After his death
euery one of the Car­dinals aspiring to the papacie, pondred in his braine the
meaning of these questiōs but they were not so good schol­lers that they
could eyther deuide, define, or distinguish vpon them, especially Cardinall
Montecelso that lay at the Bakers house, who along while had these questions
hammering in his head, but to smal purpose, for the more he sought the farther
off he was, which gréeued him full sore: for the day was come wherein they
must giue vp their verdict, and the synod of the Cardinals appointed to méet
Cardinal Montecelso ashamd to go, because he was [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=7) so monstrous a
dunce, knowing yt Myles the bakers man was a fellow of a prompt wit, and
withal so like the Car­dinall, as no man possible could discerne the one from
the other, brought it so to passe, that he perswaded Miles to g [...] and
heare the questions, and to sit in his roabes amongst the rest of the
Cardinals: promising, if he woon the victory by his witte he would when he
were Pope so labour, that he would make him a Cardinal. Miles that was eu
[...]r ma­lepert, and more saucy then honest, vndertook the matter and bluntly
ouer his bakers mealye Cassock for hast put on the Cardinals habit, and went
very solemnly to saint Peters church: where the rest of the holy brotherhood
sate, taking his place amongest them as Montecelso had dire­cted him. Whē
thus they were all gathered together, the eldest of the fraternity laide open
vnto them that now by the death of Pius ye papacy stood sede vacante: yet by
ye good direction of his holines in his life time to anoide further
controuersie in the Church, he had left a meane to know who should be next
successor in the sea, and thereupon he propounded thrée questions, which began
at the eldest, & so gradatim went downeward: sundry men gaue sundry verdictes,
at last it came to Cardinall Montecelso, wh [...] was yongest, to yéeld his
reason, which if it were not pro­bable and plausible, the Synode must deuise
some other meanes to knowe the successor: for the questions were so darke that
amongst the rest they were as inscrutable Aenigmaes. Well to Miles at last
came the matter to bee made manifest, who very demurely in his scarlet roabes
and his graue bennet, began thus: My Lords and fellow brethren in this
dignitie, nowe is the text fulfilled: The last shall be first and the first
shall be last: For I that am youngest in yeres, am like to be eldest in
iudgement, and being last in degrée, am like to be first in dignity. There­for
[...] you foolish dunces thus to absolue these thrée questi­ons.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=7)

## 4\. What kinde of men be those that God neuer made.

I tell you they be Popes, Cardinals, Abbots, Monks, and Priests: for n [...]ne
of all these did God euer make: and thus I proue it. The Creator, both
according to the prin­ciples of Philosophie and Theology, is greater th [...]n
the Creature, and it is impossible that the maker should bec formed or
fashioned by the thing made; as a pot to make a Potter: is it not then as
repugnant to reason that God should make a Priest, when the Priest euery day
in his masse maketh God? and so is he the creator and God the creature:
therefore brethren the Priest is the man that God neuer made, because wee our
selues knowe that the Priest i [...] Gods maker. To this they all applauded
and said: he had spokē as much as Pius meaut. Now quoth hee to the second
question.

## 5\. What creatures those be, that in sight are Carnations, in smell Roses,
in hearing Syrens, in touching nettles, and in tast wormewood.

Thus I answere: they be (my masters quoth he) these kinde of cattle that we
couet so much to keepe, and these be women: for he that sees a gallant wench,
which wee Italians terme Bona Roba, with a fa [...]e face flourisht ouer with
a vermilion blush, shée seemes to his eie as beauti­full as a Caruation: and
hir breath that is as swéete and odoriferous as a Rose: he that listens to hir
words, shall finde them as pleasant and melodious as the Syren, and as full of
flattery as Cyrces: so that hee that will auoide thrée wiles, must with
Vlisses tie himselfe to the mast, or els venture on thrée dangerous shelues:
in tou­ching they be nettles, for they sti [...]g to the quicke: and in tast
whosoeuer tries them, sh [...]l finde them as bitter in [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=8) the ende as
wormewood. When Miles had discourst this, they thought Sphnix himselfe could
not haue yeelded a bet­ter reason, and therefore our gentle man Baker went on
to the third thus boldly: and nowe masters, quoth hee, to the last.

## 6\. What occupations take more paines about God then the pope.

Marry quoth Myles, there be thrée, the ploughman, the Miller and the baker: &
thus I proue it: The ploughman he takes paines to  [...]sse his field, to sow
his corne, and in haruest with toile to reape, in winter to threshe it out
with the sweate of his brows. Then it is conueyed from him to the Miller and
he bestiers him self to set his stones in frame to grind it: next it is
transported to the Baker, & he boults it and sifts the bran from the flower,
and with great paines makes it into afine Cake & bakes it, last it is brought
to the Pope, and he when he is at masse saies but hoc est corpus meum, and it
is God: he spends but alitle fewe wast words about it, whereas the other thrée
labor long ere they bring it to perfection: therefore these three take more
paines about God then the pope. One of the old Cardinals hearing this,
wondring at his wit began to repeate ouer ye names of the plouhgswaine the
Miller and the baker: Myles hearing him name the Baker, tooke straight Pepper
in the nose and starting vpp threw of his Cardinals roabes, standing inhis
dustie Cassocke, swore I by cockesbread the Baker, and he that sayes to the
con­trary, here stand I Myles the Bakers man to haue the prowdest Cardinall of
you al by the ears. The Cardinals all this while thinking it had ben
Monterelso and no [...] séeing it was Myles the Bakers man, to sooth vp the
mat­ter and cl [...]ake their owne ignorances made him Pope & called him in
steade of Myles, Boniface: where he soone forgat being a Priest yt euer he was
a Clarke: in so much [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=8) that on a day
passing to Saint peters Church, his maiste. Astasio met him, and amongst the
rest did his holynesse great reuerence, but Myles now that was Pope, coulde
not loke so low as a poore baker, which his maister espying, as he came by
said that the Pope might heare. Non fuit sic à principio: No Knaue quoth he,
but ye shalt heare sang anon; Sic erit in secula seculorum Amen. Thus went the
Bakers man in solempe porcessiō to Saint Peters church, and there after his
instalment hard masse, & so departed home to Castle Angelo. And for that he
was aduan [...]st frō from a Bakers trough to the papacie, and after grewe so
proud and insolent, that he would not know his old ma­ster: he sits in a
Millers dustie Cappe and a Bakers malking: to signifie, the former pride of
his life.

Next him sat Hildebrand, & he held a red Hering in his hand, because he made
lent: and one Pope sat with a smock sleeue about his necke, and that was he
that made the imbering weekes; in honore of his faire and beatifull curtizan
Imbra.

A litle beyond sat Alexander, who was forest to make cleane rustie Armor, that
like Sisiphus stone had no end: for as fast as he scowred, ye cancker stil
fretted that he did: In caucasum saxum volucre: & this was because he was a
better soldier then a Scholler. Hard by him was Iulius, that vpon the bridge
threw S. Peters keyes into Tiber, & toke him to ye sword of Paul: infinit
other sundry offences: but such a multitude were plangd for wenching, that of
thē al there was not one scapt frée for ye fault. But Vrbane the second, that
was in stalde Pope in the morning and was poysoned before dinner, and yet the
question, whether, if hee had lyued that night, his lemon and he had not
bidden penaunce in purgatorie for their sinnes. Thus when I saw all these
statelye fellowes, as I was redy to go out of the hall, I spied sitting in a
corner a bare faced youth, wel featured, of a liuely countenaunce, and a
swéete looke, in Poopes attire: but on hir head in stead of [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=9) a myter shée had a
kercher, and in hir hand a distaffe: I thought it had béene Hercules that was
found playing the wanton so with Ompha [...]e, or Sardanapalus amongst his
Curtisans. But at last I spied it was a Pope, or had been a Pope: But whether
man or woman, or what it was I sould not tell, till I spied written ouer his
head in great Caracters this stile:

Papa, Pater, Parens Patriae, Prope Portas Petri, Pauli, Paruum Peperit Puerum.

Then I perceiued it was Pope Ioane that honest wo­man, that as shée went a
procession through the Lateran was brought to bed in the stréetes. I smilde at
hir attire, and left hir to hir punishment. Passing from thence I went into a
lower Roome, and there were all kings and princes, and men of name, which for
that I might slan­der their royall titles, I omitte with silence. But thus
they were all punished according to their offences, no more spared for their
wealth then the poore for their po­uerty; vnlesse they died highly in the
popes fauour; and perhaps there was some indulgence to mittigate their
punishment. I left them, and anon I came into a baser roome all full of Monkes
and Friars, what sinnes I saw there figured fo [...]th I am ashamed to
rehearse, onely Fri­  [...]r Onyon the holy Confessour of Florence, hee sate
there naked, all annointed with h [...]ny and miserably tormen­ted with
waspes. The cause of his punishment I learned to be this.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=9)

## 7\. The tale of Friar Onyon, why in purgatorie he was tormented with
waspes.

THere dwelled a widow in Florence of good parentage, & large possessions, more
beautifull then she was wealthie, and yet she was the richest widow in al
Florence, hir name was Lisetta, the onely faulte that was found in hir was,
that hir beau­tie was more then hir wit, and that such a selfeloue of hir
excellencie had made hir ouerweene hir selfe, that she thought none fit to bee
her husband in all Forence. Thus though she were lookde at for hir outward
perfec­tion, yet was she laughde at for hir inward follies. Well howsoeuer
others censured of her, she thought her peny better siluer then the rest, and
would so striue to excell other Gentlewomen in the nicenesse of gesture, that
[...]ft­times she marde all: in so much that hir coy quaint­nesse was a byword
in the citie. Euery wéeke forsooth, be­cause she would seeme as vertuous as
she was faire, she deuoutly went to Friar Onion, to be confessed of hir sins:
the Priest, who was a lustie lubber, and a tall swaine, and nurst vp lust with
idlenesse; began to looke vpon hir more narrowlie, and to take a particular
view of hir per­fections; with that entring with a piercing insight into hir
selfeloue; thought, that she might quickly be ouer­reacht in hir owne
conceipts: for he thought, that if the wisest women were wonne with faire
praises, and large promises, it were more eas [...]e to intrap hir with the
dis­course of her excellencie. Therefore he laid his plot thus: the next time
Lis [...]tta came to shrift, after she had made her confession, and had
receiued absolution for hir sinnes, Friar Onyon looking earnestlie vpon hir,
fetcht a far sigh and said: ah Madam! if you knew as much as I know; as you
are the fairest, so you would thinke your selfe the happiest of all weomen
that are aliue. And why syr I [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=10) pray you, quoth
Lisetta? ah said friar Onyon: it is such a secret as may not be reuealed: for
if I should disclose it to you, and you by any meanes make it manifest, there
were no way with me but a most miserable death. Lisetta, as all women be
desirous of noueltie, was so gréedie to heare what good was toward hir, that
she made a thousand pro­testations, and vttered a thousand oathes, neuer to
be­wray what her ghostly father should tell her in secret. Then Madam, quoth
Friar Onyon, with a graue and a demure countenance, know your beautie is so
excellent, and your persection so farre beyond the common course of all other
women, that not onely all men that sée you, ad­mire you as a miracle: but the
very Angels in heauen are enamored of your proportion. The Angels, quoth she,
is that possible? The angels, madam, and not the mea­nest, but the most
beautifull of all the rest: for the Angell Gabriel is so far in loue with you,
that the other night he appeared vnto me, and charged me to do his earnest
com­mendations vnto you, with promise, that if hee might be assured of your
secrecie, he would at conuenient times visit you, and interteine you with such
loue as befitteth such holy spirits.

This tale so set a fire Lisetta, that she not onely than­ked Friar Onyon for
his commendations; but counted her selfe the most fortunate of all women, that
she was beloued of so blessed a Saint: & therfore when and where it pleased
him, he should be intertained with as honou­rable secrecie, as a poore dame of
her calling might afford. Friar Onyon séeing this géere would worke,
prosecuted his purpose then subtilly: he presently fell downe on his knées
before hir, and desired, that for such happie newes as he had brought, she
would graunt him a boone. Lisetta liberall now to performe any demaund, bad
him aske. Then he began thus: Madam, quoth he, for that the An­gell Gabriell
is a spirit, and his brightnesse such, as no mortall eye can suffer, and
therefore must come vnto you [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=10) in some humane
shape, I pray you vouchsafe, that my bo­die may be the receptacle for him,
that while he putteth on my carcasse, my soule may enioy the sight and
pleasu­res of paradise: so shall you not hinder your selfe, and do me an
vnspeakeable benefit. Lisetta seeing Friar Ony­on was a lusty tall fellow,
willing in what she might, to pleasure him, graunted his request verie
willinglie: wherevpon it was concluded, that she should leaue the doore open,
and about midnight the Angel Gabriell should come to visit hir. Upon this
resolution home went Li­setta, as merry as a pie, tricking vp hir bedchamber
with all brauerie, and rich perfumes for the interteinment of hir paramour.
And, Friar Onyon, as busie as a bée, was making his winges and his trinckets
ready to play the Angell: well, he delt so, that he agréed with an old pandor
that dwelt opposite to the house, and there made himselfe ready, and at the
houre appointed went to Lisetta: where he found the doore open, and so entred
vp till hee came to her bedchamber; where she sat expecting his comming:
assoone as she sawe him with his glorious wings and his white roabes, she
rose, and fell at his féet: but he louingly tooke her vp, imbracst hir, kist
her, and pointed to the bed, whether the Angell went after he had laid apart
his abiliments, and Lisetta followed with as much spéed as might be: Caetera
quis nescit. Early before breake of the day, Gabriell tooke his leaue of his
Liset­ta, and went to his lodging, leauing hir the proudest woman in the
world, that shee was beloued of an An­gell. Friar Onyon hee got him to his
cell, and there tooke vppe his broaken sléepe hee had lost till nine of the
clocke, that hee went into his Oratorie: where hee had not sytten long, but
Lisetta in as great brauerie as might, came to the church, and then offerd vp
in grea­ter deuotion a burning taper to the Angell Gabriell; af­terwards hir
orisons done she came to fryar Onyon, who after some conference demaunded hir
of hir new louer, [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=11) whom shee highly
commended, and he againe gaue hir great thanks, that shee vouchsaft him to be
the re [...]epta­cle of so holy a Saint: for all the while his bodie was with
hir, his soule did tast the Ioyes of paradice. These two thus agreed, it so
fell out that sundry times as oc­casion & oportunity would giue leaue, the
Angell Gabri­el visited Lisetta: The Fryar thus frolicke in this concei­ted
content was thwarted by fortune on this manner: Lisetta waxing very proud with
the remembrance of hir new louer, was so coy and disdainefull, as she thought
neuer a dame in Florence fit for hir company: insomuch that many wondred why
shee grewe so insolent.  [...]ut the more they maruailed, the more shee was
malapert, concei­uing such abundance of selfeloue within hir stomacke, that
shee was with childe till shee had vttered hir minde to some of hir gossips:
on a day sitting with one in whom shee had most affiance, shee beganne to
require secrecy, and shee would vnfold vnto hir a thing not onely strange but
of great import. Hir gossip as the custome is, began to blame those wiues
whose secrets lay at their tongues end, and saide, shée was neuer toucht with
any staine of hir tongue: and therefore what soeuer shée told hir, should bee
buried vnder foote and goe no further. Upon this Ly­setta began to rehearse
vnto hir from point to point, the whole discourse of the Angell Gabriell, howe
hee was in loue with hir, and how sundry nights he lay with hir, and many more
matters which he told hir of the ioyes of Pa­radise. Hir gossip being a wily
wench kept hir counter. āc [...] very demurely, commending the excellencie of
hir beau­ty, that did not onely amaze men, but drew euen Angels to be
[...]amoured of hir: promising to be as secrete in this matter as hir selfe.
Shee thought the time long till they might breake off talke, and therefore
assoone as shée could finde opportunity, shée tooke hir leaue, and  [...]ted
hir home­ward: but to hir house shée coulde not goe, till thée had met with
two or three of hir gossips; to whom in a great laugh­ter [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=11) shée vnfolded
what madam Lysetta had told hir, how shee was beloued of the Angell Gabriell,
and how sundry nights he lay with hir, and tould her of the ioyes of
Pa­radice. This was worke enough for nine daies, for the woonder of Madame
Lisettas barne went through all Florence: so that at last it came to the eares
of Lisettas friends, who gréeued that such a clamor should be raised of their
kinswoman: knowing hir follie, thought to watch néere, but they would take the
Angell Gabriell and clip his winges from flying. Well secret they kept it, and
made as though they had not hard of it, yet kept they such diligent watch,
that they knew the night when the Angell would descend to visit Lisetta:
wherevpon they beset the house round, and assoone as Friar Onyon was in, & had
put off his wings, & was gone to bed, the rush­ing in of the watch wakened him
frō his rest, & that with such a vengeance, that trusting more to his feete
then to his fethers, hee left madam Lisetta amazed at the noise: and he
himselfe was so sharpely beset and so néere taken, that he was faine to leape
out of a hie garret windowe, and so almost breake his neck, into a little
narrow lane. Well his best ioint scapte, but he was sore brused: yet feare
made him forget his fall, that a way hee ran to a poore mans house where he
saw light, and t [...]ere go [...] in, making an excuse how he had fallen
among theeues; and so desired lodging.

The man hauing heard talke of the Angell Grabriell, knowing verie well Friar
Onyon that knew not him, let him haue lodging verie willinglie, but all this
while that he escapt, were Lisettas friends seeking for the saint, that so
tenderlie loued their ki [...]swoman: but they could nor finde him, and to
heauen he was not flowne, for they ha [...] found his wings: sorry they were
that Gabriell had mist them. But they chid harde, and rebuked the follie of
Lisettas selfeloue, that was not onely so credulous, but such a blab as to
reueale hir owne secrets: it was late, [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=12) and because they
had mist of their purpose they departed, leauing Lisetta a sorrowfull woman,
that she was so de­ceiued by the Angell Gabriell. Well night passed, and the
morning came, & this poore man friar Onyons hoast tould him, that he knew not
[...]ow to shift him: for there was that day a great search for one Friar
Onyon that had escapde naked from Lisettas house, and who so kept him in
secret should haue his eares naild on the pillorie: at this the Friar started
and said: alas friend I am the man: and if by any meanes thou caust conuay me
to the Dortor of our Friory, I will giue thee fortie Duc [...]ats: if you
will, quoth his hoast follow my counsatle, fear [...] not, I will conuey you
thither safe and vnknowne, and thus. This day there is great she w [...]s made
before the Duke of Florence, and strange sights to be seene, and di­uerse
wilde men disguised in strange attire are brought into the market place: now I
will dresse you in some strange order, and with a maske ouer your face, lead
you amongst the rest, and when the shew is doone, carrying you as though. I
should carrie you home, I will  [...]nueigh you into the Dortor backside
secret and vnknowne. Al­though this seemed hard to the friar, yet of two euils
the least was to be chosen, and he consented to suffer what the hoast would
deuise. Wherevpon he that was of a pleasant conceipt vsed him thus: he
annointed him ouer with barme mixed with hony, and stuck him full of
fea­thers, and tying him by the neck with a chaine, put a vi­sor on his face,
and on either side tide a great ban Dogge, in this come equipage marched this
poore man with the Friar. He was no sooner come into the open streete, but the
people hauing neuer seene such a sight before in Florence, did not onely
wonder at the strangenesse of his dressing; but maruailed what this nouelty
should meane: wherevpon an infinit number not onely of the common sort, but of
the grauest citizens followed, to see what should be the end of this woonder.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=12) With a
solemne pace marched his kéeper, till he came to the market place, where tying
him to a great piller that stoode there, he then let make in all places of the
ci­tie solemne proclamation, that who so would sée the An­gell Gabriell,
should presently come to the market place, and behould him there in that
amorous dignitie that he did vsually visit the Dames of Florence: at this
procla­mation there was a generall concourse of people, especi­ally of the
better sort that had hard of Lisettas loues: so that the duke himselfe came
thither, and amongst the rest Lisettas kinsmen. When all the market place was
full of people, the hoast pulled the visor from the Friars face: at which the
people gaue a great shoute, clapping their hands, and crying, the Angell
Gabriell, the Angell Gabriell, he that comes from heauen, to make vs wear
[...] hornes. I néed not I hope, intreate you to beléeue, yt poore Friar Onyon
was heauily perplered, especially when the day grew hot, he naked and anointed
with hony, so that all the waspes in the citie, as it were by a miracle, left
the Grocers shops, and came to visit the Friar, because his skin was so
swéete: but alas to the poore mans paines, that he was almost st [...]ng to
death. Diuers of his  [...]ouent came thither to see the strange apparition of
the Angell, who when they saw he was Friar Onyon: then they couered their
shauen crownes with their cooles, and went home with a flea in their eares.
Thus all day stood the poore Friar woondered at of all the people of
Flo­rence, and tor [...]ented with waspes, and at night fetcht home to the
Dortor by some of his brothers: he was clapt in prison, where for sorrow poore
Gabriell died: and be­cause he did so dishonor the other Friars, he bydes this
torment in purgatorie.

The discourse of the Fryar thus past, I viewed them all that were Churchmen:
and after went into a low­er roome, where there was a medley of all manner
[...] people of all trades, sciences, and occupations, [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=13) assigned to such
sundry torments, as mans eye would almost surfet with the varietie of obiects,
euen the very broome men were there for robbing of the broome closes betwéene
Barking and London. And hard by them was there a place empty formed thus: It
was made like the shape of Tiborne threesquare, and all painted about with
halters, and hard by stood two tall fellowes with carters whips so stearnely
looking, as if with euery lashe they would cut a man to the bones: there was
written ouer the place a great romaine B. I could not learne for whom this
torment was prouided, for ye so many men, so many censures: some said it was
for one Boniface which should be Pope, and should proue a great persecutor:
others, that Bonner should be brought from his place among the pre­lates, and
be whipt there for bréeching of Bartlet Greene naked in his garden: but the
most voyces went, that it was for Bul the hangmā, because at his whipping in
lon­don the carters shewed him too much fauour. Well for whōsoeuer it is, God
blesse me from it, for he is like to be well belaboured with two lustie
knaues. Looking still a­bout, I saw thrée men seated as it were in thrones
high­er then the rest, with three shields hanging by them, ha­uing impreses
and mottoes, I stayed and gazed my fill vpon them: for they had no punishment,
but were as pri­soners detayned in purgatorie, but with a preheminence; for
which soeuer of the Ghosts passed by gaue thē a knée with a reuerence. I
maruailed what they should be, and one tould me it was the thrée degrées of
Cuckholds; with that I smilde, and lookde more narrowly vpon them, I spide
written ouer the firsts head this short sentence, One and One. Ouer the
second, None and one: ouer the third One and none. This was to me a darke
Aenigma, that I wished some Sphinx to vnfoulde the secret, at last on [...]
stept to me and told me the whole matter thus.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=13)

## 8\. The tale of the three Cuckolds, of their impreses and mottoes.

THese thrée mē, my friend quoth the ghost, when they liued were thrée famous
men, and yet Cuckoldes, as by their attier thou maiest perceiue: but different
in de­grée, nature and condition. Hee which sits highest, ouer whose head thou
séest is written, One and One, had a beautifull dame to his wife, faire and
well featured; yet a great deale more full of beauty then of honesty: but
howsoeuer qualified, a good wench shée was, and one that was not such a
niggard but shée could kéepe a corner for a friend: to be brief, shée would
beare a man false at tables, and hir husband that loued I­rish well, thought
it no ill tricke at tables to beare a man too many: he saw it and knew very
well, that his wife lo­ued another as well as himselfe: yet hee loued hir so,
that he woulde not discontent hir, but suffered hir to haue hir longing and to
féede hir owne fancie, and like a wittold winkt at it, and therefore worthy to
weare the horne. Thus while he liued the dishonour of his life was shame
enough for his leudnes, & nowe after his death because he was so kind a mā,
they haue plast him there without any punishment, because it was penance
enough to haue his conscience prickt with a restles sting of baudry. And here
they haue made him a gentleman, and in his Scutchion haue giuen him the Ram
rampant, with a mighty paire of hornes hanging ouer his eies: to signifie, if
it be rightly emblasde, that he had such a great head, yt looking through his
hornes he did sée and not see, shocking on with heauy palmes as belwether to
the rest, his Motto is stolne out of Tully: ‘Non solum pro nobis.’ Meaning,
that as we are not borne for our selues, but for [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=14) our Country, so
he did not marry a wife for himselfe, but for his neighbours: this was the
kinde opinion of this graue wittold.

The second, ouer whose head is written, None & One, was a man of an honest and
vertuous disposition, who hauing a faire wife, that though shee coulde not
treade right, yet wrincht hir shooe inward; that was as secret as shée was
false; and though shée could not liue Caste yet shée liued Caute: he neuer
suspected hir; but as he was honestly minded towards hir, and kept himselfe to
the wife of his bosome, so measured hir foote after his owne last, and thought
none in the world to haue a more chast wife, al­though indéed none had a more
lasciuious wanton. This poore man was none in his owne conceit, yet was one
in­déede: and therefore is he placst here without any torture: for that it is
plague enough for him that hee had a whore to his wife. Hee is likewise made a
gentleman and giues Armes the Goate, which by imblasure signifies, that as the
Goate carries his hornes behinde, so hauing hornes because they were not
apparant on his forehead, thought hee had none, and yet carried a faire paire
backward like the Gote, his Motto is: ‘Crede quod habes & Habes.’ Meaning,
that a mans content stands as his beléeuing is; so that if a man in his owne
conscience thinkes he hath a faire wife, it sufficeth, what soeuer proofe
makes mani­fest to others.

The third, ouer whose head is written, One and None, is a man that hath a
woman of surpassing beauty to his wife, excellent and rare in properties, and
euery way as vertuous in honest perfection, a woman as faire as Hee­len and as
chaste as Lucrece: yet forsooth, because his wife is more faire then the
common sort, and there­fore more gazde on for that wheresoeuer shée goes, many
mens eies wait vpon hir and diuers lasciuious youth at­tempt to frequent hir
company; yet shée that is wholy [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=14) resolued vpon
vertue hath the tortue is vnder hir féet and gads not abroad; but kéeping home
auoids all occasions of dishonor: yet for al these manifest instances of hir
honesty, the eie of hir husband fiered with suspition so inflames his hart
with iealousie, as there is none looks on his wife, but he thinks he comes to
court hir, & shee glaunces hir ei [...] on none but straight shee loues him:
if shee smile, it is to thinke how hir loue & shee shall meet; if shee lower,
it is be­cause she hath not seen him to day: thus liuing doth he lead a
hellish life in the labirinth of Iealousie, & therefore is he placst heere
without punishment in Purgatorie, because there can be no greater torment then
to bee plagued with the restlesse sting of Iealousie. He is as the rest are,
made a gentleman, his arms the Asse, with a maruellous paire of long & large
eares. The emblason this, that as the Asse for the length of his eares thinks
them to be hornes, & yet indéed are but a plain paire of eares: so he like an
Asse be­cause he hath a faire wife, thinks that per Consequens he must be a
Cuckold, when indeed he is none, and so suppo­seth his eares to be hornes: his
Motto is, ‘Ne mulieri credas, ne mortus quidem.’ Meaning, that what faire
shewe soeuer a woman dooth heare of honestie, yet there is no credite to be
giuen vnto hir coynesse: but hee resolues with the crue of the yellow hosde
companions, that Mulier, howsoeuer it be spoken or vnderstoode, is a word of
vnconstancie: therefore though he hath no hornes, because his wife is too
honest, yet like an Asse for his Iealousie, hee shall haue a long paire of
eares whiles he liues.

Thus was the order of these Cuckolds discourst vnto me, which assoone as I
heard I went on further to spie a­ny worth the noting, much I saw that were
friuolous to re earse, as diuers women that were hangd vp by the tongues for
scolding, and especially one Botchers wife of Sudbury, who was so famous for
that Art (if we [...] [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=15) may tearme it a
science) that after hir death, shee was chronicled amongst the successiue
scoldes hir neighbours for an Archgossip in that faculty: for hir husband
being a poore painefull man that liued by his daily labour, came home euery
night and brought hir duely and duetifully  [...]is groate, which could not
content h [...]r, but shee would in braue tearmes abuse him, and call him
rascall and slau [...]; but aboue all, prickelowse, which hee coulde not ab
[...]e: wherefore hauing often forbad hir, and seeing shee would take no
warning: on a day tooke heart at grasse, and bela­bourd hir well in a cudgill:
but all would not suffice: the more he beat hir, the more she cald him
prickelowse. See­ing stripes would not preuaile, he threatned to cut out hir
tongue: it is no matter for that knaue quoth shee yet shall the stumpe call
thée pricklowse: at this answer [...] the poore Botcher was so mad, that
taking a rope & tyi [...]g it abo [...]t hir middle, hauing a well in his
yarde, and thereunto he let her downe into the well, and threatned to drowne
hir:  [...]ush all would not preuaile, but she c [...]ied more vehe­mentlie:
wherefore hee duckt her ouer head and eares, and then when her toong could not
wag, she heaued hir hands aboue water, and knack with hir two nailes of hir
thombes: then séeing nothing would preuaile but death, he drew hir vp & left
hir to hir villanie: she aboue  [...] rest was tormented. A litle below hir I
saw a Cooke that was a mad merry fellow, and he sate demurely with a Cranes
leg in his mouth, hauing no other punishment, at this I smilde, and asked the
cause, and it was told me thus.

## 9\. The tale of the Cooke, and why he sate in Purgatory with a Cranes leg
in his mouth.

THere dwelled in Venice a Gentleman cal­led Signor Bartolo, who being one of
the Consil adorie, and greatlie experienced in the ciuill law, was much
frequented of sun­dry sutors, amongst the rest there was a [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=15) gentleman his
neighbour, that by fortune had caught some eight or ten Cranes, a fowle in
high estéeme in that Citie: these as a thing of great price hee bestowed on
Signor Bartolo, who accepted them with that grateful­nes, that so good and
bountiful a gift merited. Proude for­sooth of this present he fedde them vp in
one of his yardes, looking with great care to them, because the Venetians hold
them so rare. On a day desirous to make his neigh­bours partakers of his
dainties,  [...]e bad diuers of them to Supper, and commanded his Cooke to
prouide good chéere, and amongst the rest, chargde him to kill a Crane, and to
sée that it were excellently well rosted. The Cooke, whos [...] name was
Stephano, made all thinges in a readines for Supper, and when the time was
conuenient, laide the Crane to the fire. Now syr this Stephano was a fellow
[...] that was somewhat amorous, and excellent at courting of a Country wench;
in somuch that he was the chief gal­lant of all the parish for dancing of a
Lincolneshire horne­pipe in the Churchyard on sondaies: being thus well
qua­lified, he was generally loued of al the gyrles thereabout, and especially
of one in the towne, whom he had so long dallied withall, that the maide fell
sicke, and hir diseas [...] was thought to be a Timpany with two héeles: wel
how­soeuer shee was spedde, and Stephano had done the déede. This maide
hearing what a great feast should be at sig­nor Bartoloes house, hied hir
thither, not onely to see th [...] good cheere: but that shée must feede hir
eie with the sight of hir Stephano, who now was ruffling and sweating in the
kitchin; shée made an excuse and came in for fier, but in an vnlucky time for
the poore Cooke: for shée no sooner sawe the Crane but shée longd for a leg,
and that so sore, that there was nothing but that or death: whereupon shée
calde Stephano to hir, and told him that shée must needes haue a legge of the
Crane: for shée so déepely longd for it, that if shée had it not, it were able
both to cast hir away and that shée went withall. Although poore Stephano
al­ledgde [[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=16)
[...] [[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=16)
[...] [[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=17) many
excuses, as the displeasure of his Maister, and the feare of the losse of his
seruice: yet no reason could preuaile with hir, who was without reason: and
therfore what for loue hee bare hir, and for dread of discredite that might
ensue, if for want of hir longing shée shoulde fall to trauell, hee ventred a
ioint, and when the Crane was e­nough cut hir off a legge. His wench thus
satisfied went home: And Supper time grew on, for all the guests were come,
and presently because it was somewhat late, sate downe: where they were serued
very bountifully, at last the dainties the Crane forsooth, was brought vp, and
sig­nior Bartolo commaunded the Caruer to truncke hir, which when he had done,
shée was set vpon the table: the gentleman of the house fell to distributing
to his guests, and at last mist a legge, with that looking about he calde the
Caruer, and askt him where the other leg was: Syr quoth hee, your Maistership
hath all the Cooke sent vp: thenquoth Bartolo goe to the Cooke, & aske him
where the other leg is: the Caruer went down and did his Maisters commande;
the Cooke thinking to face out the matter, be­gan to smile: why quoth he, we
may sée Cranes are dainty in this Country, when gentlemen cannot tell how many
legs they haue? goe tell my Maister I sent him vp as ma­ny legges as shée had.
The fellow brought this newes to his Maister, who in a great chafe called for
the Cooke, and asked of him howe many legs a Crane had: marry syr quoth he,
one: why malapert villeine quoth Bartolo, moc­kest thou me before all these
gentlemen? not I syr quoth the Cooke: For I am sure I haue drest many in my
life: & hitherto yet I neuer saw a Crane haue but one leg. With this answer
Bartolo was throughly inflamed wt choller, but that he would shew himselfe to
be patient amongst his neighbours, he suppressed his anger with this mild
reply: Either, gentlemen, you may thinke I or my Cooke is drunke, that hold a
dispute about a Cranes legge: but for that this night I will not bee
impatient, I passe it ouer: [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=17) but to morrow
morning all as you are héere, I humbly re­quest you to take so much paines as
to rise betimes, and to be Iudges betwéene me and my man, whether Cranes haue
two legs or no: for I haue eleauen Cranes more, and wee will early goe into
the yarde where they feede: and this shall be the wager betwéene my man and
me, if they haue but one leg, I will giue him twenty Duckats and a sute of
Satten: if they haue two, hee shall haue twenty blowes with a cudgill, & I
will turne him quite out of ser­uice: with this motion the Cooke seemed very
wel conten­ted, that all the guests smilde to sée poore Stephano so
ob­stinate: vpon this matter they began to descant and fell into pleasant
chat, and so passed away the supper time: at last, although loth to depart,
yet euery man departed with great thanks to Signior Bartolo for their good
chéere, pro­mising, very early in the morning to be with him. Where we leaue
them, and againe to the Cooke, who prouided al his trinckets in a readines, to
trudge away with bag and baggage the next morning: for he knewe his matter was
nought; thus with a heauy hart he passed away the night, and in the morning
fell in a slumber: but hee had not long lien in his dreame, but Bartolo
accompanied with his neighbours knockt at his mans chamber doore, and bad him
rise, that they might end the quarrell: poore Stepha­no started vp and with a
heauy chéere comming out of his chamber, gaue his maister and the rest the Bon
Ioure: Come syrrha quoth his maister, heere are the gentlemen my neighbours
are come to be equal censors of our contro­uersie: hold, take the key of the
yard, & open you the doore, & then let vs sée how many legs a Crane hath: the
Cooke tooke the key & very easily opened the dore, and entred in, and all the
Cranes, because it was so early, were at strud, as their custome is generally
all stoode vpon one leg, and held the other vnder their wing. Stephano séeing
the ad­vantage not willing to let so fair a ball fall to the ground,  [...]
himselfe: now syr (quoth he) I hope your selfe & the [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=18) rest of the
gentlemen will confesse I haue woonne the wager: for you sée heere is neuer a
Crane that hath more then one legge. At this séeing how nimble he was to take
the aduantage, they all laught: Truth syr quoth his Maister, they stand now on
one leg, but straight you shall sée me make them all haue two: with that
Signor Barto­lo lifting vp his hande cried, So ho; and with that the Cranes
let downe their legges, and euery one stoode vpon two: how now you knaue quoth
his Maister, how many legges hath a Crane? hath shee not two? yes marry syr
quoth hée, and so would your other Crane haue had, if you had done this: for
if your worship when you had séene the Crane in the platter had but one legge,
had as lowde as you doe now, cried, So ho, why then shée woulde haue had two
legges as well as these: At this iest, Signor Bartolo fell into such a
laughing and all his guests with him, that hee laught away choller, and
admitted  [...] [...]an into his woonted fauour: whereupon Stephano tolde them
the whole discourse, what happened betwéene him and his wench, and vppon this
merrily they went all to breake­fast. Now Syr, although this fault was
forgiuen: yet because hée died not in fauour with the Priest of the Parish,
hee was appointed for stealing the Cranes leg to stand in Purgatorie with a
legge in his mouth for a certaine season.

After I had heard this discourse of the Cooke, I went on further to sée if I
coulde perceiue any other such Iestes as might make mee merry in so
melancholicke a place, at last, as I cast mine eie aside, I sawe where a poore
Uic­kar sate with a Coale in his mouth, I askde the reason why he was
appointed to such punishment, and it was an­swered me thus.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=18)

## 10\. The tale of the Vickar of Bergamo, and why he sits with a coale in his
mouth in purgatorie.

THere dwelled sometime in Bergamo a vic­kar that was welbeloued in the towne,
for that he was a boone companion, and would not stick to play at trumpe all
day with his parishoners for a pot or two of Als, a faire reader he was, and
pleased the people well, marry for his learning that was little, and toongs he
had no more then were in his mouth: neither would hee trouble himself with the
knowledge of many languages, but applied his idle time vpon good fellowship.
It chaunced that his score growing very great, and much chalke vpon the post,
his hostesse wanting money to pay the Maltman, waxed ha­stie with the vickar
for hir debt, hee being then bare of pence, because his quarterage was not
come in, tould hir she could not haue it as yet, wherevpon they grew to words,
and from wordes  [...]lowes, for masse Uickar went away with a broken
[...]ead, which driude him into such a choller that he sought al meanes how to
reuenge, and he laid his plot thus. Euery sunday morning afore masse all the
youth of the  [...]arish did accustome to come to the Alehouse to eate hot
puddings, which was great pro­fit to the goodwife: now to preuent hir of this
commo­ditie, the vickar spake against it, and forbad it openly: yet it was not
so déepely inueighed against, but that diuerse Sundaies they would make a
steale thither to breake­fast: and one Sundaye amongst the rest, the whole
crew being gathered together, notice was giuen to the vickar: wherevpon he
hied him thither, and sound them all hard at it by the téeth: when they sawe
masse vickar come in, euery man rose vp and ranne away to shift for himselfe,
the hostesse she whipt in with hir puddings; so that there was none left in
the house but Maister vickar: who spy­ing a doozen of lustie large black
puddings hangde in the [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=19) Chimney, whip
them into his wide sléeue, & wēt his way: he was no sooner gone, but the
goodwife comming out mist hir puddings, and little suspected the Uickar, but
thought some of hir guests had caried them away: wher­vpon she tould it to hir
husband, who let the matter passe lightly, and wisht his wife to make hir
hastily ready, that they might go to masse: on goes she with hir holiday
part­let, and spoonging hir selfe vp, went with hir husband to Church, and
came iust to the seruice: wel maister Uickar who was in a great chafe, mumbled
vp his mattins, and after seruice was doone very stoutly got him into the
pul­pit, and began to fall to his collation, his text was vpon the Gospell for
that daye, which hee so coursde and can­  [...]asde ouer that hee fell at last
to talke of the breake­fast: oh neighbours quoth hee, as I came this daye to
Churchward, I came into a house, nay into an Alehouse, where I found a crew at
breakefast before Masse, at a bloudie breakefast, a blacke breakefast, yea
neighbours the Deuils breakefast; and with that he threw his arms about him
with such violence, that his wide sleeue vn­tied, the puddings fellout, and
hit an old wife on the head that she fell ouer againe: the hostesse seeing hir
doozen of puddings that she mist, cried out to hir husband: oh man, quoth she,
thers the doozen of Puddings that were gone out of the Chimney; hie thee least
they bee gone: at this there was such a laughing, and such a rumor, that the
poore Uickar was faine to leaue of his collation, and come downe to answer
what the Alewife obiected against him: but he was so welbeloued in the parish,
that the Alewife was punished, and hir Sonday breakefasts put downe by a
common consent of the Churchwardens. The Uickar thus well reuengde of the
Alewife, indeuoured how to make amends to his parish, and therefore casting in
his head how he might bring it to passe; one day as he tra­uelled towards Pisa
he met a stranger, who had certaine  [...]eathers in his hand of a byrd called
Apis Indica, which [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=19) were long and
large, of the colour of golde, and were so bright as scarse one could looke
against them: such before were neuer séene in Italie. Masse Uickar assoone as
[...]ee saw these, had a reach in his head, and iumpt with the trauailer to
buie one, a prise was pitcht for thirtie Iulios, and Masse Uickar paide it:
hauing this, home he came, and bought a case of crimsin Ueluet imbrodred with
gold, to put his feather in, kéeping it with great curio­sitie and secrecie,
making report that he had one of the ri­chest reliques in the worlde, and
promising vpon Can­dlemas day next to shew it: wherevpon it was not onely
blazed abroad throughout the towne, but in all the villa­ges and hamlets
adioyning, that both olde and yoong pre­pared themselues to sée this holie
relique. Two of the crew, who were brothers at the breakefast of Puddings,
hearing these newes sought how to be euen with maister Uickar: and therefore
brought it so to passe by a wenche of the house where the Uickar lay, that
they might sée the holie relique; she brought them to the chamber and the box
wherein the case lay in perfume, the fellow look­ing in, and séeing a feather,
neither respecting reason, nor religion, tooke it out and put it in his
bosome, and fild the case full of charcoales that lay by, and so putting the
case into the box, kist the wench and went his waye. Seruice time being come,
maister vicar runs vp for his box, claps it vnder his arme, and away he goes
to Church: and for that it was Candlemas day a high day, he sayd and soong a
very solemne Masse; and that being doone, séeing such a multitude of people,
he got him with a great grace into the pulpit, and began his text, which after
he had ratled ouer a litle, he told them what sundry reliques were left to the
Church for the benefit of the people: oh my maisters and good friends quoth
he, parishioners and neighbours: You sée that euery city héer about, nay
through the whole world, hath some holy relique or other, as a blessing
be­longing to their corporation: but our poor [...] towne of Ber­gamo [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=20) hath had none:
But now God hath considered of your estate, and hath sent you a richer and
more holy then all the rest. Some towne, quoth hee, hath a peece of the
crosse, or of the nailes, or a peece of the spoong, that recht Christ Uineger;
at Roome there is the speare that pierst his syde; at Venice the Chawbone of
saint Marke, good for the falling euill; at Vienna the tooth of S. Appolym
wholesome for the toothake; at Pysa the hoofe of Saint Loy [...]s horse that
healeth such kinde of cattell; for the Swine Saint Anthonies bell; for the pos
[...], Saint Dun­stones tonges; for the Squ [...]sey, Saint Martins trough;
for the eye sight Saint Winifrids girdle; for the  [...] Saint Asaphs Beads,
and a thousand more, which are now néedlesse to rehearse: but good people, I
haue héere for your comfort one of the feathers; yea one of those ho­ly and
glorious feathers, that the Angell Gabriell wore when he saide Aue Maria to
the mother of Christ: old [...] wiues, and aged men, yea ritch and poore
knéele downe, and with ioy behold so great a myracle; with that they all fell
vpon their knées, and he puld foorth his box, and drew foorth the case, which
when he hard rattle, he mar­uelled: but when he put his hand in, and found
nothing but coales, his heart was cold in his belly, and he swet for woe: yet
hauing a knauish and a ready wit, he so­dainly and vpon the present shifted it
thus. Good people, quoth he, I haue mist of my box, and haue left the wing of
the Angell Gabriell behind me: but I haue here a relique no lesse precious
then that, which I thought not to sh [...]w you before Easter day, and these
be the coales that Saint Lawrence the holy Martyr was broild with, and with
that he drew the Charcoale out of his poake: these pa­rishioners quoth he,
euen the very marke that is made with these, is good against all euill
spirits, against blast­ing and witchcraft; and therefore séeing it is the will
of God I should shew you these first, I will come downe and marke you all with
the holy relique of Saint Law­rence; [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=20) so he s [...]ept
downe out of the pulpit, and crost them all to his great prof [...]t, and
their content: for which cause in that  [...]e mockt thé people, he is
appointed to stand  [...] purgatorie with a coale in his mouth.

The vickars tale of Bergamo being ended, I went further, and presently I
espyed a little doore, whereout is­sued a most fearefull noise tempered with
such far fetcht sighes and gréeuous shrikes, that it was a sound mu [...]h to
be pitied: the smalenesse of the voice discouered that they were women.
Wherevpon I pressed more n [...]re the doore, and looked in at a little
chinke, and there I might sée a company of beautifull women of all ages pit
[...]fully tormented, as sitting in a place full of smoake and stinck­ing
sauors, and bitten continually about the hearts with scorpions: in all there
were not aboue thrée of them, and yet they vttered as gréeuous laments as
though there had béene a thousand. I demaunded why these were pu­nished aboue
the rest; they said, they were such as died maides and kept their virginitie
without spots, that ha­ted men; and for that they were so hard harted, they
were adiudged to that sharpe punishment. Straight as I cast mine eye vp, I
spide in a blind corner where a Painter sat, hauing the picture of a roode
hung before him, and e­uery time he looked vpon it, he had thrée bastanados
ouer the shoulders with a belroape, as of the rest, so I inquirde the cause of
this, and it was discourst to me thus.

## 11\. The tale of the Painter of Doncaster, and why in purga­torie he was
beaten with a Belroape.

I Know you are not ignorant, how in king Ed­ward the sixts dayes all popery
and superstition was banished, and thè light of the Gospell puld from vnder
the Bushell where it was couered, and to the sight and comfort of all set vpon
a hill: so that [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=21) all his reliques
were abolished, and his idols puld downe, and the Church as néere as they
could, cleansed from the  [...]regs of such an Antichrist: wherevpon the
Painters that liude with such  [...]rash, as trimming of shrines and roodes,
altars and Saints, and the caruers that made such images, were faine with
Alexander the Copper­smith to crie out against Paule and his doctrine, hauing
so little worke that they almost forgot their occupation.  [...]nt when for
the sinnes of this land, and wickednesse of the people, the Lord tooke away
their good king, and de­priued them of the swéete Manna of the Gospell, and
sent them againe Antichrist with all his traditions, Quéene Marie lawfull
successor in the kingdome; made procla­mation, that all those roodes which
were puld downe, should be set vp againe in euery Church. Amongst the rest,
the Church of Doncaster in Yorkeshire, desiring to be one of the formost, to
signifie their obedience and deuo­tion, in all hast sent for the Painter to
make them a roode, and agréed vpon the price. Wherevpon he went about his
worke, but for that his hand had béene out of vse by the space of six yéeres,
he had forgot the lineaments of the visage, and the other woonted proportion,
that he made it very hard fauourde; yet as euery mans worke séemes well to
himselfe, he went forward withall and set it vp on a satterday at night on the
Roodloft: on sunday at masse there was old ringing of Bels, and old and yoong
came to church to sée the new roode, which was so ill fa­uourde, that all the
parish mislikt it, & the children they cried and were afraid of it: vpon this
they fell in greate displeasure with the painter, & when monday came, and he
was with the chéese of the parish for his money, they denyed flatly to pay him
any, because his worke was so ill wrought. He vpon that cald them before the
maior of the towne, who was a man that fauored king Cowards religion, as far
as he durst, & to him the painter made his complaint, that the parishoners now
that hee had made [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=21) their roode,
would not pay him his money: the Maior de­maunded of them why they denide him
paiment: they an­swered, for that he had like a bungler made Christ so hard
fauored, that it was not only vnfit to stand in any church, but their children
were afraid to looke on it: so that euery way it should greatly hinder
deuotion. But yet quoth the maior, the poore man hath done his goodwil, you
must con­sider his hand hath b [...]n long out of vse, & therfore there is no
reason though his cunning hath failde him, but you should pay him his mony:
well syr quoth they, at your re­quest we will giue him what our bargaine was:
but we must buie a new rood, and cannot tell what to do with the old: marry
neighbors quoth the Maior, if he wil not serue you for a god, follow my
aduise, clap a paire of  [...]ornes on his head, and I warrant you hee will
prooue an excellent good deuill: and that sir, quoth the painter, will I doe
ouer and beside their bargaine. Thus were the poore parishio­ners of Doncaster
mockt, and yet paid their money: but their Uickar so delt with bell, booke,
and candle against the poore painter for making the ill fauoured roode, that
he s [...]s in purgatorie beaten with a Belroape.

The tale of the Painter being ended, passing a little further, I might see
where sat a crew of men that woar [...] Baie garlands on theyr heads, and they
were Poets, amongst which was ould Ennius; Virgill, Iuuenall, Pro­pertius, and
wanton Ouid, Martiall, Horace, and many moe: which had written lasciuious
verse, or other heroi­call poems. But aboue them all I marked ould Ronsard,
and he sat there with a scroule in his hand, wherin was written the
description of Cassandra his Mistresse, and because his stile is not common,
nor haue I heard our English Poets write in that vaine, marke it, and I will
rehearse it, for I haue learnd it by heart.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=22)

## 12\. RONSARDS DESCRIPTION OF his Mistresse, which he weares[?] in his hand
in Purgatorie.

DOwne I sat,

I sat downe,

where Flora had bestowed hir graces:

Greene it was,

It was greene

Far surpassing other places,

For art and nature did combine

With sights to witch the gasers eyne.

There I sat,

I sat there

viewing of this pride of places:

Straight I saw,

I saw straight

the sweetest faire of all faire faces:

Such a face as did containe,

Heauens shine in euery vaine.

I did looke,

Looke did I,

and there I saw Appollos wyers,

Bright they were,

They were bright,

with them Auroras head he tiers,

But this I woondred how that now

They shadowed in Cassandras brow.

Still I gazde,

I gazde still,

spying Lunas milke white glase:

Comixt fine,

Fine comixt,

[[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=22) with the
mornings ruddie blase:

This white and red their seating seekes

Vpon Cassandraes smiling cheekes.

Two stars then,

Then two stars

passing Sunne or Moone in shine

Appearde there,

There appearde

and were forsooth my Mistres  [...]ine:

From whence prowde Cupid threw his fiers

To set a flame all mens desiers,

Brests shee had,

Shee had brests

white like the siluer doue;

Lie there did,

There did lie

Cupid ouergrowne with loue,

And in the vale that parts the paine

Pitcht his tent there to remaine.

This was shee,

Shee was this

the fairest faire that ere I see;

I did muse,

Muse did I

how such a creature found could be;

A voice replied from the Aire,

Shee alone and none so faire.

This was Ronsards description of his Mistres, and he is for [...]ll to hold it
in his hande, that euery time hee cast [...] his eies on it, he may with
[...]ghs féel a secret torment, in that he once loued toomuch being aliue. A
little aboue  [...]ate the gh [...] of a young gentlewoman that had béene
false to [[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=23)
hir husband, shée shoulde haue béene grieuously tormen­ted: but that shée
bestowed an annuity for thrée yeares pension vpon a morrow masse priest, who
so laboured it with dirges, trentals and masses Ad requiem, that shée had no
other punishment but this, that hir beautifull haire wherein shee so much
delighted, and whose tramels was a traine to intrappe young gentlemen, that
nowe was clipt off bare to the scull, and so shée sate ashamde and mourning:
the cause as I learnde was this.

## 13\. Why the gentlewoman of Lions sate with hir haire clipt off in
Purgatorie.

IN the Citie of Lions there dwelt a gentle­man of good account amongst his
neighbors, called Monsieur Perow; this gentleman ha­uing lands and reuenues
sufficient to main­taine his estate, thought fully to heape to himselfe
content, and therefore sought out a yong virgin of equall parentage to
himselfe, with whom he had a suffi­cient dowry, and hir he loued, and shée
likte him, and so they maried, liuing in good estimation amongst their
Te­nants. As they were thus linked together in wedlocke, so it séemde in
outward appearance that they were so strict­ly tied in affection, as no meanes
might alienate. But women, whom nature hath framde to be inconstant, can­not
be altred by nurture. The Palme will grow straight though it bee neuer so
depressed; and a wanton will bee a wanton, were shee married to Cupid, and so
it proude by Maria; for so was the gentlewomans name: who because shée was
faire had many Sutors, that attempted to bee riuals with hir husband in hir
loue; a­mongst the rest as shée resolued to choose one, there was a yong
amorous youth of Lions calde Pier, he sought diuers meanes to créepe into hir
fauor, past by hir house, and cast vp looks that pleaded for pitty, and had
banded him again [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=23) glances that
foreshewed good will: Thus with inter­change of fauours they liued. Pier
séeking oportunity how to reueale his minde to Maria, at last as hee walked
one day forth the towne, he saw where shee was walking on­ly with one of hir
maides, taking therefore oportunity by the forehead he stept to hir, and
beganne to court hir with sundry protestations of his loue, which had béen
long and so surely set as no dispaire coulde race out, promising not onely to
be a faithfull seruant in constancie: but to bee so carefull of hir honour as
of his owne life: & for your gra­uitie, think Mistres quoth he, that faults in
affections are fleight follics, that Venus hath shrines to shade hir
trew­ants, & Cupids wings are shelters for such as venter far to content their
thoughts, vnseene is halfe pardoned, and loue requires not chastity, but that
hir Souldiers be cha­ry. Maria hearing the wag thus play the Orator, hauing
loue in hir eies and desire in heart, after a fewe faint de­nials, thrusting
him away with the little  [...]inger, and pul­ling him to hir with the whole
hande, shée graunted him that fauour to be cald hir seruant. Grarde thus he
grewe in such credite, that there was no man with Maria but Pier, hauing thus
a loue beside hir husband, although hee was a faire man and well featured; yet
shée found fault with him, because he was a meacocke and a milkesoppe, not
daring to drawe his sworde to reuenge hir wrongs: wherefore shee resolued to
entertaine some Souldi­er, and so shée did: for one Signor Lamberto a braue
Gentleman; but some thing harde facde, sought hir fauour and founde it, and
him shée intertained for hir Champion.

Thus had shée a white liuerd Adon to féede hir eie with beauty, and a stoute
Hercules to reuenge all hir wrongs with his sworde, and a poore husband to
shadowe both with his hornes. Liuing thus contentedly in hir owne conceite,
hir husband went into the Country to a Farme of his, and thither with him hee
carried his wife, [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=24) where hee passed
away many merry daies in such plea­sure, as Country sports can affoord: at
last serious affairs forcing him to it, he rid his way for thrée or foure
daies to certaine of his friends there adioining. Maria seeing hir husband
gone thought not to let time slippe, nor to lose o­portunity: and therefore
the next day after sent for Pier, who hasted as fast as might be, till he came
to his Mi­stres, where he had such friendly intertainement as fitted both
their humours; shée caused hir maide to make great chéere, and assoone as it
was ready, to dinner they went, where they were scarce set but one knocked at
the doore, the maide looked out and it was Signor Lamberto, shée ran and told
hir Mistres; who fearefull that he should sée Pier or know of him, hid him
vnder the bed, and comman­ded hir maide to bid Signor Lamberto come vp: shee
like a cunning Curtizan giuing him such fauourable inter­tainement as though
hee were the man whom aboue all other shée made account off. Faith swéete
(quoth hee) I heard thy husband was from home, and so I tooke my nag and came
gallopping hither: set him into the stable quoth the Mistres: No quoth (Signor
Lamberto) let him bee there still and bite of the bridle, for my busines is
such, as I will onely dine with you, and then bid you farewell: with that he
sate him downe to dinner. Poore Pier lying close vnder the bed; thinking euery
minute an houre till he were gone: as thus they sate in their cuppes and were
wantonly qua [...]ing one to another; came in the maide running, and said, hir
Maister came riding: at this Sig­nor Lamberto started vp and was amazed: but
the gen­tlewoman was in a feare that had two louers at once in hir house, and
yet could haue hidden them both had it not béene for the horse that stoode
tied in the Court yarde: well a shift must bee had, & where sooner then out of
a womans head. What shall I doe quoth Signor Lamberto? marry I pray you good
swéet heart quoth shée, to saue your owne credite and mine, drawe your sworde
and goe downe the [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=24) staires, and as
you goe, sweare & say, that you shall finde a time and place more conuenient,
when you will bee re­uengde to the vttermost; so he did, & by that time was
the gentleman of the house come in, who maruailed to sée a horse tied in the
Court, and therefore alighting off came vp the staires, and as he came, met
Lamberto with his sworde drawne, and his face full of frownes, swearing, when
fitter time and place shoulde serue hee woulde re­uenge and that with
extremitie. What is the matter quoth the Master of ye house? he answerd
nothing, but put vp his sword, tooke horse & away towards Lions. Assoone as
the gentleman came vp, he found his wife amazde, sitting in the hall in the
middest of the flowre, as halfe beside hir selfe: what is the matter wife
(quoth hée) that thou art so amazed, and that Signor Lamberto went downe with
his sworde drawne in such a rage? Ah husband (quoth shée) as I sate héere at
my worke, came running into the court yarde a proper young man hauing throwne
away his Cloake and his Hatte, and desired mee, as I tendered the state of a
man, to saue his life, for Signor Lamberto would kill him: I pittying his case
stept in and hidde him in my bedchamber: with that came Sig­nor Lamberto
gallopping, dismounted in the court and drawing his sworde, came running vp
and woulde haue broken open my chamber dore, but that on my knées I in­treated
him to the contrary: at my request hee went his way, frowning as you sée, and
so hee is rode to Lions: the poore young man (alas) husband lies hidde vnder
the bed in great feare: and this tale shée tolde so lowde that Pier heard
euery worde, and therefore had his lesson what hee should answere: smyling at
the prompt witte of his Mi­stres that had so sodaine a shift. Bidde him come
out wife quoth he: then shée oapt the doore, and Pier he came as one greatly
affrighted from vnder the bedde. The gen­tleman séeing him a proper young man
and weaponlesse, had pittie on him and saide: hee was glad that his house
[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=25) was a
sanctuary for him, and greatly commended his wife that shée had saued him from
the fury of Signor Lamberto, whom all Lions accounted a most desperate man:
vpon this taking Pier by the hand they sate downe to dinner, and when they had
taken their repast, the gen­tleman very curteously conducted Pier home to
Lions. Now for because shée was thus inconstant, shée to quali­tie hir pride
and insolencie, sate in Purgatory with the punishment afore rehearsed.

This tale béeing ended, I lookde a little further, and I might sée where a
young man and a young woman sate together naked from the middle vpward, and a
very olde man whipping of them with nettles: they as per­sons that little
regarded his punishment, woulde often times kisse, and then the olde man as
one inwardly ver­ed, woulde bestirre all his strength to torment them: the
reason of this strange shewe was thus discourst vnto mee.

## 14\. The tale of the two Louers of Pisa, and why they were whipt in
Purgatory with nettles.

IN Pisa a famous Cittie of Italie, there liued a gentlemā of good linage and
landes, feared as well for his wealth as honoured for his vertue; but indéede
well thought on for both: yet the better for his riches. This Gentleman had
one onely Daughter called Margaret, who for hir beauty was liked of all and
desired of many; but neither might their sutes, nor hir owne eie preuaile
about hir fathers resolution, who was determined not to marry hir, but to such
a man as should be able in abundance to maintaine the excellencie of hir
[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=25) beautie.
Diuers young gentlemen proffered large  [...] ­ments, but in vaine: a maide
shée must bee still till at last an olde Doctor in the towne that professed
Phisicke, be­came a sutor to hir, who was a welcome man to hir fa­ther, in
that he was one of the welthiest men in all Pisa. A tall stripling he was and
a proper youth, his age about foure score, his heade as white as milke,
wherein for of­fence sake there was left neuer a tooth: but it is no mat­ter,
what he wanted in person he had in the purse, which the poore gentlewoman
little regarded, wishing rather to tie hir selfe to one that might fit hir
content, though they liued meanely, then to him with all the wealth in Italie.
But shée was young and forest to follow hir fathers dire­ction, who vpon large
couenants was content his daugh­ter should marry with the Doctor, and whether
shée likt him or no, the match was made vp, and in short time shée was
married. The poore wench was bound to the stake, and had not onely an olde
impotent man: but one that was so iealous, as none might enter into his house
with­out suspition, nor shée doe any thing without blame: the least glance,
the smallest countenance, any smile was a manifest instance to him, that shée
thought of others bet­ter then himselfe: thus he himselfe liued in a hell and
tor­mented his wife in as ill perpleritie. At last it chaunced, that a young
Gentleman of the Citie comming by hir house, and seeing hir looke out at hir
windowe, noting hir rare and excellent proportion, fell in loue with hir, and
that so extreamely, as his passions had no meanes till hir fauour might
mittigate his heartsicke discontent. The young man that was ignorant in
amorous matters and had neuer béene vsed to Court anie Gentlewomen, thought to
reueale his passions to some one friend, that might giue him counsaile for the
winning of hir loue, and thinking experience was the surest Maister, on a day
seeing the olde Doctour walking in the Churche that was Margarets husbande,
little knowing who [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=26) he was, he
thought this the fittest man to whom he might discouer his passions, for that
hee was olde and knewe much, and was a Phisition that with his drugges might
helpe him forward in his purposes: so that séeing the olde man walke solitary
hee ioind vnto him, and after a cur­teous salute, tolde him that he was to
impart a matter of great import vnto him; wherein if hee woulde not onely be
secrete, but indeuour to pleasure him, his paines should bee euery way to the
full considered. You must imagine gentleman, quoth Mutio, for so was the
Doctors name, that men of our profession are no blabs, but hold their se­crets
in their hearts bottome, and therfore reueale what you please, it shall not
onely be concealed; but cured, if ei­ther my Art or counsail may do it. Upon
this Lionel, so was the yong gentleman called, tolde and discourst vnto him
from point to point howe he was fallen in loue with a gentlewoman that was
maried to one of his profession, discouered hir dwelling and the house, and
for that hee was vnacquainted with the woman, and a man little ex­perienced in
loue matters, he required his fauour to fur­ther him with his aduise. Mutio at
this motion was stung to the heart, knowing it was his wife hee was fal­len in
loue withall: yet to conceale the matter and to ex­perience his wiues
chastity, and that if shée plaid false he might be reuengde on them both; he
dissembled the mat­ter and answered, that hee knewe the woman very well, and
commended hir highly; but said, shée had a Churle to hir husband: and
therefore he thought shée woulde bee the more tractable: trie hir man quoth
hee, saint heart neuer woonne faire Ladie: and if shée will not be brought to
the bent of your bowe, I will prouide such a potion as shall dispatch all to
your owne content, and to giue you fur­ther instructions for oportunitie, know
that hir husband is forth euery after noone from thrée till sixe. Thus farre I
haue aduised you, because I pitty your passions as my selfe being once a
louer: but now I charge thée reucale it [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=26) to none
whomsoeuer, least it doo disp [...]rage my credit to meddle in amorous
matters. The yoong Gentleman not onely promised al carefull secrecie, but gaue
him har­ty thanks for his good counsell, promising to méete him there the next
day, and tell him what newes. Then hee left the old man, who was almost mad
for feare his wife any way should play false: he saw by experience, braue men
came to besiege the castle, and séeing it was in a wo­mans custodie and had so
weake a gouernor as himselfe, he doubted it would in time be deliuered vp,
which feare made him almost frantike: yet he driude of the time in great
torment, til he might heare from his riual. Lionel­lo he hasts him home and
sutes him in his brauery, and goes downe towards the house of Mutio, where he
sées hir at the window, whome he courted with a passionate looke with such an
humble salute, as she might perceiue how the Gentleman was affectionate.
Margareta looking earnestly vpon him, and noting the perfection of his
pro­portion, accompted him in hir eye the flower of all Pisa, thinkte hir
selfe fortunate, if she might haue him for hir fréend, to supply those
defaults that she found in Mutio: sundry times that afternoone he past by hir
window, and he cast not vp more louing lookes then he receiued gra­tious
fauoures: which did so incourage him, that the next day betwéene thrée and
sixe hee went to hir house, and knocking at the doore, desired to speake with
the Mistres of the house, who hearing by hir maids description, what he was,
commaunded him to come in, where she intertei­ned him with all curtesie.

The youth that neuer before had giuen the attempt to court a Ladie, began his
exordium with a blush: and yet went forward so well, that hee discourst
[...]nto hir howe hee loued hir, and that if it might please hir so to accept
of his seruice, as of a friend euer vowde in all dutie to bee at hir
commaunde, the care of hir honour should bee deerer to him then his life, and
he would be [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=27) ready to prise
hir discontent with his bloude at all times.

The Gentlewoman was a little coye, but before they past they concluded, that
the next day at foure of the clock he should come thither and eate a pounde of
cheries, which was resolued on with a succado des labres, and so with a loath
to depart they tooke their leaues. Lionello as ioyfull a man as might be, hyed
him to the church to méete his ould Doctor, where he found him in his ould
walke: what newes syr quoth Mutio? how haue you sped? Euen as I can wish quoth
Lionello. For I haue béene with my Mistresse, and haue found hir so tractable,
that I hope to make the ould peasaunt hir husband looke broad headed by a
paire of browantlers. How déepe this stroake into Mutios heart, let them
imagine that can con­iecture what ielousie is; in so much that the ould Doctor
askt when should be the time: marry quoth Lionello, to morrow at foure of the
clock in the afternoone, and then Maister Doctor quoth hee; will I dub the
ould Squire knight of the forked order.

Thus they past on in chat till it grew late, and then Lionello went home to
his lodging, and Mutio to his house, couering all his sorrowes with a merry
coun­tenance, with full resolution to reuenge them both the next day with
extremitie. He past the night as patient­lye as he could, and the next day
after dinner away he went, watching when it should bee foure of the clocke, at
the houre iust came Lionello, and was intertained with all curtesie: but
scarce had they kist, ere the maide cryed out to hir Mistresse that hir
Maister was at the doore: for he hasted, knowing that a horne was but a little
while on grafting: Margaret at this alarum was amazed, and yet for a shift
[...]pt Lionello into a great drie fat full of feathers, and sat hir downe
close to hir worke: by that came Mutio in blowing, and as though hee came to
looke somewhat in hast, called for [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=27) the keyes of his
Chambers, and looked in euery place, searching so narrowlie in euery corner of
the house, that he left not the verie priuie vnsearcht: seeing he could not
finde him, hee said nothing, but fayning himselfe not well at ease staide at
home, so that poore Lionello was faine to staie in the drie fatte till the
ould churle was in bed with his wife; and then the maid let him out at a
backdoore, who went home with a flea in his eare to his lodging.

Well the next day he went againe to méete his Doc­tor, whome hee found in his
woonted walke; what newes quoth Mutio? how haue you sped? A pox of the
[...]uld slaue quoth Lionello, I was no sooner in, and had giuen my mistresse
one kisse, but the iealous asse was at the doore, the maide spied him, and
cryed hir Maister: so that the poore Gentlewoman for verye shift, was faine to
put me in a drie-fatte of feathers that stood in an ould Chamber, and there I
was faine to tarrie while he was in bed and a sléepe; and then the maide let
me out and I departed.

But it is no matter, twas but a chaunce, and I hope to crie quittance with him
ere it be long: as how quoth Mutio? Marry thus, quoth Lionello: she sent me
worde by hir Maide this day, that vpon thursday next the oulde Churle suppeth
with a patient of his a mile out of Pisa, and then I feare not but to quitte
him for all: It is well quoth Mutio: Fortune bee your fréend: I thanke you
quoth Lionello, and so after a lit­tle more prattle they departed.

To bee shorte, Thursdaye came, and about sixe of the Clocke foorth goes Mutio,
no further then a friends house of his, from whence hee might descrie who went
into his house, straight hee sawe Lionel­lo enter in; and after goes hee,
insomuch that hee was scarselie sitten downe, before the Maide cryed [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=28) out againe, my
maister comes: the good wife that before had prouided for afterclaps; had
found out a priuie place betweene two seelings of a plauncher, and there she
thrust Lionello; & hir husband came sweting, what news, quoth she, driues you
home againe so soone husband? Marrye swéete wife quoth he, a fearefull dreame
that I had this night which came to my remembrance, & that was this: me
thought there was a villeine that came secretly into my house with a naked
poinard in his hand, and hid him­selfe: but I could not find the place, with
that mine nose bled, and I came backe; and by the grace of God I will séeke
euery corner in the house for the quiet of my minde. Marry I pray you doo
husband, quoth she: with that he lockt in all the doores, and began to search
euery chamber, euery hole, euery chest, euery tub, the very well, he stabd
euery fetherbed through, and made hauock like a mad man, which made him thinke
all was in vaine, and he begā to blame his eies that thought they saw that
which they did not: vpon this he rest halfe lunatike, & all night he was very
wakefull, that towards the morning he fell into a dead sleepe, and then was
Lionello conueighed away.

In the morning when Mutio wakened, hee thought how by no meanes hee should be
able to take Lionello tardy; yet he laid in his head a most dangerous plot,
and that was this: Wife quoth he, I must the next munday ride to Vycensa to
visit an ould patient of mine, till my returne, which will be some tendayes, I
will haue that stay at our little graunge house in the countrey: marry very
well content husband, quoth she: with that he kist hir, and was very pleasant,
as though he had suspected nothing, and away he flings to the Church: where
hee móetes Lionello: what sir quoth he what newes, is your mistresse yours in
possession? no, a plague of the old slaue quoth he; I thinke he is either a
witch or els workes by Magick: for I can no sooner enter in the doores but he
is [[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=28) at my
batke, and  [...]o  [...] was againe yesternight: for I was not  [...]me in my
[...] before the maide cried, my maister  [...]; and then was the poore soule
saine to conueigh me between two  [...]tings of a chamber in a sit place for
the pur­pose: where I  [...]ght hartely to my self, to sée how he sought euery
corner, rans [...]t euery tub, and stabd euery  [...]eather­bed; but in vaine,
I was safe enough till the morning, and then when he was fast a sléepe, I lipt
out. Fortune frown es  [...] quoth Mutio: I but I hope quoth Lionello this is
the last time;  [...] she  [...] begin to smile: for on mon­day next  [...] to
Vicensa, and his wise lies at a graunge house a little o [...]he towne, and
there in his absence I will reuenge alfor [...] missor [...]:  [...] send it
to be so quoth Mutio, [...] so  [...] his  [...]. These two louers longd for
mon­day; & atlast it came, early in the morning Mutio horst him­selfe, and
[...], and a man, and no more, and away  [...]e  [...] to his grang [...]
house; where after he had broke his fast he tooke his leaue, & away towards
Vicensa. He rod [...] not far ere by a false way he returned into a thicket, &
there with a company of countrie peasants lay in an ambuscado to take the
[...] Gentleman: in the afternoone comes Li­onello galloying, and assoone as
he came within sight of the house, he sent backe his horse by his boy, & went
easily a foot, & there at the  [...]ry entry was enterteind by Margaret, who
led him vp the  [...], and conuaid him into hir bedchamber saying be was
welcome into so meane a c [...]ttage: but quoth  [...], now I hope fortune
shal not enuie ye purity of our loues. Alas alas mistresse cried the maid,
héer is my maister, & 100\. men with him, with bils & staues: we are betraid
quoth Lio­nello, & I am but a dead man: feare not quoth she, but follow me,
and straight she carried him downe into a low parlor; where  [...] an ould
rottenchest full of writings, she put him into that, and couered him with ould
papers and euy­  [...]ntes, and went to the gate to m [...]te hir husband: why
sig­nor Mutio, what meanes this hurly burly quoth she? vile & shamelesse
strumyet as thou art, thou shalt know by and by  [...]th he. Where is thy
loue: all we haue watch him & séene [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=29) he enter in: now
quoth he, shall neither thy tub of feathers, nor thy séeling serue, for perish
he shall with fire, or els fall into my hands. Doe thy worst iealous foole
quoth shée, I aske thée no fauour: with that in a rage he beset the house
round, and then set fire on it. Oh in what a perplexitie was poore Lionello
that was shut in a Chest, and the fire about his eares? and how was Margaret
passionate that knew hir lo­uer in such danger? yet shée made light of the
matter, and as one in a rage called hir maide to hir, & said; Come on wench,
seeing thy Master mad with iealousie hath set the house & al my liuing on
[...]re, I wil be reuengd vpon him, helpe me here to lift this olde Chest
where all his writings & deeds are, let that burne first, and assoone as I see
that on fire I wil walke towards my friends: for the olde foole will be
beggard and I will refuse him. Mutio that knew al his obligations and
sta­tutes lay there puld hir backe, and bad two of his men car­ry the Chest
into the field, and see it were safe, himselfe stan­ding by and seeing his
house burnd downe sticke and stone. Then quieted in his minde he went home
with his wife, & began to flatter hir, thinking assuredly that he had burnd
hir Paramour; causing his Chest to be carried in a Cart to his house at Pisa.
Margaret impatient went to hir mothers, and complainde to hir and to hir
brethren of the iealousie of hir husband: who maintained it to bee true, and
desired but a daies respite to prooue it: well hee was bidden to supper the
next night at hir mothers, shee thinking to make hir daugh­ter and him friends
againe. In the meane time he to his woonted walke in the Church, & there
praeter expectationē he found Lionello walking: woondring at this, hee
straight enquires what newes? What newes Maister Doctor quoth he, & he fell in
a great laughing; in faith yesterday I scapt a  [...]owring: For syrrha I went
to the grang [...] house, where I was appointed to come, and I was no sooner
gotten vp the Chamber, but the magicall  [...] hir husband beset the house
with bils and staues, and that he might be sure no see­ling nor corner should
shrawde me, hee set the house on fire: [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=29) and so  [...] it
[...] to the ground, Why quoth Mutio [...] how did you escape? alas quoth I,
well fare a womans wit, she conueighed me into an ould chest ful of writings,
which she knew hir husband durst not burne, and so was I saued and brought to
Pysa, and yesternight by hir maide let home to my lodging. This quoth he, is
the pleasantest iest that e­uer I heard: and vpon this I haue a sute to you, I
am this night bidden foorth to supper, you shall be my guest, onely I will
craue so much fauour, as after supper for a pleasant sporte, to make relation
what successe you haue had in your loues: for that I will not sticke quoth he,
and so he ca­ried Lionello to his mother in lawes house with him, and
discouered to his wiues brethren  [...] be was, & how at sup­per he would
disclose the whole matter: for quoth he, he knowes not that I am Margarets
husband: at this all the brethren  [...] him welcome,  [...] so did the mother
to, & Marga­ret she was kept out of sight. Supper time being come, they fell
to their vict [...], & Lionello was carrowst vnto by Mu­tio, who was very
pleasant to draw him to a merry humor, that he, might to the full discourse
the effect & fortunes of his  [...] ended, Mutio requested him to tell to the
Gentlemen, what had hapned betweene him & his mistresse. Lionello with a
smiling countenance, began to describe his Mistresse, the house, and stréete
where she dwelt, how he fel in loue with hir, & how he vsed the counsell of
this Doctor, who in all his affaires was his secretarie. Margaret heard all
this with great feare, & when he came at the last point, she caused  [...]
[...]p of wine to be giuēhim by one of hir sisters; wherein was a ring that
he had giuen Margaret; as he had tould how he es [...]t burning, and was ready
to con [...]e all for a troath, the Gentlewoman drunke to him: who taking the
cup and séeing the ring  [...]hauing  [...] reaching head, spide the fetch,
and perceiued that all this while this was his louers husband; to whom he
[...] reuealed these es­capes: at this drinking the wine, and swallowing the
ring into his mouth, he went forward. Gentlemē quoth he, how [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=30) like you of my
[...] and my  [...] ▪ well  [...] the  [...] ▪ tiemē, I pray you is it true▪
as true quoth he, as if I  [...] be so simple as to reueale what I did to
Margarets husband; for know you Gentlemen, that I knew this Mutio to be hir
husbād whom I noti [...]ed to be my louer, and for that he was generally
known through Pisa to be a iealious foole: therfore with these tales I brought
him into this paradize, which indéed are follies of mine owne braine: for
trust me by the faith of a gentleman, I neuer spake to the woman, was  [...]
ner in hir company, neither  [...] I  [...] hir  [...] I see her. At this they
all fell in a laughing at Mutio, who was  [...] that Lionello had in  [...]
him: but all  [...] well, they were made friends, but the  [...] went so to
his heart, that he short­lie after died, and Lionello enioyed she Ladie, and
for that they two were the death of the  [...] man, now are they pla­gued in
purgatorie,  [...] he  [...] them  [...] Nettles.

Assoone as I had pa [...]d ouer these two of Pisa, I looked a­bout and saw
many more, as mad and pleasaunt as the  [...]: but my time was come that I
must to the  [...]ge to be censu­red, what  [...] haue my  [...] for all the
ma [...] wanton  [...],  [...] I  [...] when I was aliue, faith at last
because they  [...] I was abooue companion, they appoin­ted that I should sit
and play Iigs all  [...]y on my Taber to the ghosts without cea [...]g, which
hath brought me into such  [...], that I now play far better then when I was
aliue: for proofe thou  [...] heare a hornepipe: with that putting his pipe to
his  [...], the  [...] he str [...]cks I started, and with that I wak [...],
[...] such concourse of people through the  [...], that I  [...] play was
[...]ne, whervpon rising vp, and  [...] at my dreame, and after supper tooke
my  [...],  [...] I could set it downe, but not halfe so pleasantly  [...] he
s [...]oake it, but howsoeuer, take it in good part, and so farewell.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2591&page=30)

[Home](/)

Date: 1590  

