---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# A sermon preach'd at the Castle of York to the condemned prisoners on Monday
the 30th of March 1691 being the day before their execution : with an appendix
which gives some account of them all, but more particularly of Mr. Edmund
Robinson Clerk who was condemned and executed for high treason in
counterfeiting the King's coyn / by George Halley.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=1)

A SERMON Preach'd at the CASTLE of YORK, TO THE CONDEMNED PRISONERS On Monday
the 30th of March, 1691.

Being the Day before their Execution.

With an APPENDIX, which gives ſome Account of them All; but more particularly
of Mr. Edmund Robinſon Clerk, who was Condemned and Executed for High Treaſon
in counterfeiting the King's Coyn.

By GEORGE HALLEY, M. A. Succentor of the Vicars Choral of the Cathedral, and
Rector of St. Cuthbert's in York.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Church-yard:
And are to be ſold by Christopher Welburn, Bookſeller in York, MDCXCI.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=2)

Licenſed,

April 11\. 1691.

Z. Iſham.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Deuteronomy XXXII.xxix. Oh that they were Wiſe, that they underſtood this, that they would conſider their Later End!
  * 2\. A Short ACCOUNT of Mr. Edmund Robinſon, who was Condemn'd for High-Treaſon, in Counterfeiting the KING's Coin, on Monday the 23. of March, 1690/1. and Executed on Tueſday the 31ſt. of March, 1691.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=2)

## 1\. Deuteronomy XXXII.xxix. Oh that they were Wiſe, that they underſtood
this, that they would conſider their Later End!

THIS Chapter the Hebrews call the Summary, or an Abridgment of the whole Law;
it is the Song of Moſes, which he compoſed for, and ſung to the Children of
Iſrael before his Death: He was highly ſenſible what a rebellious and ſtiff-
necked People he had had the Conduct and Go­vernment of, and by Divine
Inſtinct or Inſpiration foreſaw their greater Rebellion after his Departure
from them, and the Dreadful Judgments that would fall down upon them; plainly
foretold, that after his Death God would pour down upon them the fierceſt
Inſtances of his Anger and heavy Diſpleaſure, for their Violation of his
Commandments, for their Nonconformity to his Di­vine Laws and Preſcriptions:
We find him therefore, in the Cloſe of the foregoing Chapter, ſummoning the
El­ders of their Tribes, and their Officers, to whom he communicated his
Preſcience or Fore-knowledge of their utterly corrupting themſelves after his
Death, and of the Evil which would befall them in the latter days for their
doing Evil in the ſight of the Lord, for their provoking him to Anger through
the work of their hands, verſ. 27, 28, 29.

And indeed, what Moſes thus foretold, exactly came to paſs; for when they were
come into the Promiſed [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=3) Land, and had
received particular Command utterly to deſtroy all the Idolatrous Inhabitants
thereof, for fear they ſhould be inveigled by them, and drawn away to their
Idol-Worſhip, and thoſe Abominable Pollutions they were infamouſly guilty of;
yet, contrary to the expreſs Command of God, they executed not this Se­verity,
they deſtroyed not the Nations, but mingled a­mong the Heathen, and learned
their Works; they went a whoring with their own inventions, they ſerved their
Idols, and ſacrificed their Sons and Daughters unto Devils. Thus to their
Idolatry they added Blood-guiltineſs, of the higheſt degree, the deepeſt Dye,
even the moſt barbarous and unnatural, the Blood of their deareſt and innocent
Children. Theſe, Moſes told them, would be ſuch Provocations, as would moſt
juſtly inflame the ve­hement Anger and Diſpleaſure of God, as would enforce
the Almighty to withdraw his Favour and Protection from them; ſo to abhor
them, tho his own peculiar People, that he would give them over into the hands
of the Heathen, and ſuffer ſuch as hated them, to Rule and Lord it over them.
All this Moſes faithfully repreſented to the Elders of their Tribes, and to
their Officers, but withal preſcribed them an effectual way to Peace and
Reconciliation with their God, to render him propi­tious and favourable to
them, and that was, a turning unto him with true and faithful Repentance:
This, he told them, would be the only way to oblige the Lord to Pity and
Commiſeration: If they ſincerely re­pented, their ſins then, tho of ſo high
and provoking a Nature, would be blotted out, and the times of refreſhing
would come; God then would hear their Complaint, God then would make his
Arrows drunk with their Enemies Blood, verſ. 42. and Crown them, his People,
with Victory and good Succeſs. But alaſs! Moſes had fear­ful [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=3) Apprehenſions of
their Obdurateneſs and Impeni­tency, of their Blindneſs and Stupidity, that
they would loſe all their true Judgment, that for want of under­ſtanding, they
would deſpiſe his wholſom Counſels and Inſtruction; therefore he very
pathetically and Af­fectionately prays for them in the Words of my Text, Oh
that they were wiſe, that they underſtood this, that they would conſider their
latter end!

From which Words I will endeavour to ſhew you,

  * I. What it is to conſider.
  * II. The Benefit of Conſideration.
  * III. What is meant by the latter End, the Object of Conſideration.
  * IV. The great Advantage of conſidering the latter End.
  * V. That to conſider our latter End is an Argument of our Wiſdom and Underſtanding.
  * VI. I ſhall make a particular Application, and then a'done.

Oh that they were wiſe, &c.

But Firſt, In the firſt place, What it is to conſider.

And here, to conſider, is to make a proper Uſe of the rational Faculty which
God hath implanted in every one of us, to exerciſe the ſeveral Capacities of
the Soul, to reflect upon our ſelves, to meaſure our Motions, our Actions, by
the Standard of Reaſon. Whoever, through a manly and ſerious Application of
his Mind, takes a juſt and an impartial View of himſelf, of all ſuch things as
relate to and concern him, and accord­ingly governs his Will and Affections,
determins his Be­haviour and Deportment; ſuch an one is a conſidera­tive Man.
When a Man ſuffers not his Paſſions to tu­multuate and ferment into a Storm,
nor himſelf to be carried away with Exorbitant Luſts, but embraces in his
[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=4) Mind the
whole Nature, Tendency, and all the Circum­ſtances of things; when he weighs
them in the Scale of Reaſon, and diligently examins, carefully obſerves which
way the Scale turns, and proportions his Courſe, his Actions to ſuch a
diligent Obſervance and careful Examination; ſuch a Man is a wiſe and ſerious,
a think­ing and conſiderative Perſon: And this it is, in ſhort, to conſider;
which brings me to the ſecond obſervable, namely,

The Benefit of conſideration.

It is a great Art and an Excellence in Man to know how to think, how to
conſider; it is a thing that re­quires ſome time for its Accompliſhment and
Perfecti­on, ſome Pains, ſome Induſtry for its Acquiſition; and whoever would
but take the Pains, will but be at the expence of ſome Labour to ſeek it, will
certainly find it; and when he hath found it, nothing will be more uſe­ful and
neceſſary, more beneficial and Advantagious to him; nothing will more avail to
the good Conduct and well-government of his Life and Converſation: For then he
will be able to look into the Nature of Humane Actions, to weigh well the
Cauſes, and com­pare the Conſequence of things, and to exerciſe that Senſe and
Reaſon which God hath plentifully enrich'd and endow'd him with: And what can
better contri­bute to his Peace and Happineſs, to his Security and
Pre­ſervation? If he communeth but with his own Heart, and acts according to
the Illumination of his Under­ſtanding, to the Dictates of Reaſon and
Convictions of Conſcience, if he ſeriouſly revolves in his Mind the Re­ward of
Vertue and the Danger of Vice; in all pro­bability he will ſtand in Awe, and
not ſin; he will have a care of affronting his God by wickedneſs and impiety;
and this is the Benefit, this is the Advantage of Con­ſideration. [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=4) Alas! if we ſail
without Chart, without Compaſs, without a Pilot, what can we expect but a
fatal Shipwrack? If Men will not endeavour to diſpoſe themſelves to a ſerious
Conſideration and Reflection upon what they are a going to do; but, as the
Horſe into the Battle, ruſh upon things with Indiſcretion and Precipitancy;
what can be the conſe­quence of ſuch their Folly, but Ruin and Deſtruction? It
is the worthy Obſervation of Philo, That the firſt rea­ſon of all the dangers
and miſcarriages of Men lies in their running on with the boiſtrous Tide of
Paſſion; and that the firſt hopes of ſafety flow from a ſober reaſoning of the
matter. But behold a greater than Philo is here: God himſelf lays the blame of
all Men's Miſery upon Inconſideration. Thus God complains of his People, Iſa.
1.4. Ah ſinful Nation, a people laden with Iniquity! And why were they ſo? Why
forſook they the Lord, and provoked him to Anger? It was becauſe of their
heedleſneſs and Inadvertency: Iſrael doth not know, my People doth not
conſider, verſ 3. Thus Ezekiel 18.27, 28. Who is he that turneth away from his
Wickedneſs, and doth that which is lawful and right? The Conſiderative
Per­ſon, He repents becauſe he conſidereth: So that Inconſi­deration is the
chief Impediment, the principal Obſtru­ction of Repentance, which is the
Reaſon why God, according to Solomon's Aſſertion, will ſeverely puniſh Men for
it at the Day of Judgment, Eccleſ. 12.14. God will bring every Work into
Judgment, with every ſecret thing, i. e. ſay the generality of Latiniſts, Pro
omni Er­rato, with every Error or Miſcarriage; i. e. He will bring into
Judgment the inconſiderateneſs of Men: And this Tranſlation the Seventy ſeem
to approve of, Every ſecret thing, i. e.  [...], now  [...], eſt iucurioſe
aſpicere, vel per incuriam mentis minus [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=5) attentis oculis &
praeterire, To behold or look upon a thing with a negligent or careleſs Eye.
This Heedleſ­neſs and Neglect, this Remiſsneſs and Inconſideration in our
Actions God will puniſh at the Day of Judgment; and there is all the Reaſon
and Juſtice imaginable in ſo doing, becauſe from Inconſideration flow all
Vicious and Immmoral Actions.

But this by the By.

Thus Pſalm 4.4. What curbs and reſtrains a Man from the Commiſſion of any
wicked Act? A withdraw­ing into his Chamber, and there communing with his own
Heart; ſuch a Solitude, ſuch a private Retirement and Communing, darts the
moſt powerful and auſpicious Influence upon the Hearts of Men: Stand in awe
and ſin not; commune with your own Hearts upon your Beds, and be ſtill. Thus
in the Goſpel; Who were they that heard the Word of God, and were no better
for it? Such as heard it ſlightly and ſuperficially, ſuch as ſuf­fered it not
to enter into their Mind and Conſideration: Without Conſideration it was
impoſſible for it to take root and grow, or to digeſt into Principles of
Action; ſome Seed, indeed, there was, which arriv'd to ma­turity and
perfection, which was proſperous and fruit­ful; but the reaſon was, becauſe it
was ſown in an ho­neſt and a good Heart; ſuch heard the Word and kept it, i.
e. Retain'd it in their Thoughts and Conſiderati­on, and ſo brought forth
Fruit with patience, Luke 8.12, 13, 14, 15.

But thus much of the Benefit of Conſideration: I come now to the third
Obſervable, Namely, To ſhew you what is meant by the Latter End, which is the
Ob­ject of the Conſideration here in the Text: Oh that they were wiſe, that
they underſtood this, that they would con­ſider their latter end! That is, as
if he ſhould have ſaid, [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=5) Oh that they would
ſee the things which belong unto their Peace! Oh that the Evil I forewarn them
of, may deter them from avowed Wickedneſs and Impiety, may oblige them to a
conſtant Living up to the Pre­cepts and Obligations of the Divine Laws! If
not, Oh that the Judgments of God may convince them of their Errors, and
reclaim their Sins, that they would ſtimulate and excite them to Repentance,
to a due ſenſe▪ and conſideration what it is to ſin againſt God, to an
underſtanding what will be the Event of perſiſt­ing in Wickedneſs, what will
be the Reward of their Impenitence, both in this Life and the Life to come; ſo
that by the Latter End is to be underſtood not on­ly Death, but, what follows
after Death, the Judgment, an Appearance before the dreadful Tribunal of
Al­mighty God, there to receive a Reward or a Puniſh­ment proportionable to
what we have tranſacted upon the Stage of this World. Oh that all you, who
hear me this day, would underſtand and con­ſider this great and certain Truth!
That it is not only appointed unto all men once to die, but after this the
Judg­ment. This is the import, this is the ſignification of the Latter End;
Death is our Latter End, but the Reſurrection, the future Judgment is a Latter
End beyond it. The Soul is of an immortal Nature, inca­pable of any Ceſſation,
can never ceaſe to be; the Bo­dy muſt naturally die, it's noble Frame and
admirable Contexture muſt be diſſolved and taken in Pieces, it muſt return to
its original Duſt and Corruption; tho this is but a tranſitory and temporal
Death, this is re­parable by a Reſurrection; it muſt certainly be rai­ſed
again, and be re-united to the Soul, and ſhare with it in whatever ſtate or
Condition it ſhall be ſen­tenced unto; if it hath not ſerved God, but the
De­vil, [[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=6) it
ſhall then ſuffer a ſecond Death, after its re­unition to the Soul, they ſhall
both be depreſs'd into a ſtate of Miſery, a State where are endleſs and
eaſeleſs Torments; a Miſery, which is not Temporal or Tranſitory, but durable
and permanent to all E­ternity, and who can dwell with everlaſting burnings?
Whoſoever is wiſe will conſider this.

Men and Brethren, let me uſe the Strain of the Holy Apoſtle to King Agrippa,
Acts 26.27. Do you believe the Scriptures? Do you believe a Reſurrecti­on, a
Judgment to come? I know you believe it: May I ſay, I know you remember it?
This I dare ſay, that if you do not, I know you have no cauſe not to remember
it: A thing of the higheſt Impor­tance, a thing of the greateſt Concernment
that ever will befall you, a thing that is moſt ſure and certain, a thing that
you can as little avoid, as you can avoid Death, and a thing that muſt
determin of your Eternal State, and do you not remember it? I am ſure we have
all cauſe to remember it, we have all the reaſon imaginable to underſtand and
conſider our Latter End.

If there be any here of a Sadducean Temper, that deny the Reſurrection; or,
with the Corinthian Na­turalist, queſtion How are the Dead raiſed up? And with
what Body do they come? Such are fooliſh and inconſiderate; ſuch Queſtions
flow from Incogi­tancy and Indiſcretion, ſuch are horribly deceived; and they
will find themſelves groſly miſtaken, for there will be a Reſurrection from
the Dead: God hath certainly appointed a day in the which he will judge the
World in righteouſneſs, by that Man whom he he hath ordain'd, whereof he hath
given aſſurance unto [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=6) all men, in that
he hath raiſed him from the Dead Acts 17.31. How ſtrangely then will ſuch
Sadducees, or any, who are mindleſs of a future ſtate, be ſur­priz'd at the
Reſurrection of the Dead? Oh! that we had been wiſe and conſider'd this. Oh!
let us lie ſtill in the Duſt, will they then cry, let the Earth cover us, Let
the Mountains and the Rocks fall upon us. Alas! the Trumpet will ſound, and
they ſhall be rais'd from the Dead, they ſhall hear this terrible Voice, Ariſe
you Wretches and come to Judgment; they will then find that, which Solomon
hath aſſerted, to be infallibly true, Eccleſ. 11.9. Know that for all theſe
things God will bring thee into Judgment.

And this leads me to the fourth Obſervable, namely,

The great Advantage of conſidering the latter End. Oh that they were wiſe,
that they underſtood this, that they would conſider their latter End!

It is the Saying of the Wiſe Man, Eccluſ. 7.36. Whatſoever thou takeſt in
hand, remember the end, and thou ſhalt never do amiſs. The Latiniſt reads it,
In om­nibus Operibus vel Sermonibus tuis memorare Noviſſima & in aeternum non
peccabis, In all thy Works or Words remember the laſt things, and thou wilt
ne­ver commit a Sin unto Death; ſuch a Remembrance would make it morally
impoſſible for thee to com­mit a preſumptuous Sin, a wilful and deliberate
Tranſ­greſſion. Now the Four last things to be continually remembred, are,
Death, a Judgment to come, Hell, and Celestial Glory. And what more horrible
than Death? What more terrible than ſuch a Judgment? What more intolerable
than Eternal Fire? And what worthier Object can there be for us to exert our
Fa­culties [[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=7)
upon, than God and the Manſions of ever­laſting Felicity? How many Sins might
we have a­voided in the courſe of our Lives, if we had had the ſerious
remembrance and apprehenſion of theſe things? And how many Sins might we yet
avoid, if we would but endeavour to have theſe things, as Belſhazzar's Hand-
writing upon the Wall, conſtantly in our Eye? Theſe things, as the Pilot the
Ship, would direct and influence our whole Life and Converſa­tion, would help
us to ſteer our Courſe, and ſafely bring us to the Haven of Bliſs and
Happineſs. Such would be the great Advantage of conſidering our latter End: If
Men would but thus conſider, no Temptation would then take hold of them,
nothing would ruffle and diſcompoſe their Conſcience, it would be void of
Offence both towards God and towards Men. But alas! In this lapſed and
degenerate Age, in this miſerable and naughty World, how many are there that
have languid, luke-warm and feeble Opinions of Religion? If Judgment may be
formed according to their Vicious and immoral Converſation, what a Deluge of
Prophaneneſs and Impiety, Atheiſm and Infidelity overflows this Sinful Land,
this poor Nation? How many live, as tho they believed that Vertue and Vice,
that God and the Devil were Words ſignifying nothing, as if they were the
Ex­tract of ſome melancholy and pregnant Brain, as if they were invented
meerly for Mens Terror and Affrightment? The Halter, the Gibbet, and the moſt
terrible of Temporal Puniſhments too, have as little Influence upon Mens
Lives, makes as ſmall an Impreſſion upon the Minds of Men, as thoſe which are
Eternal: How many have ſuffer'd as Murde­rers, as Thieves, as Evil-doers? And
yet Men will [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=7) not take Warning
and Example; Men will not be deterr'd from committing the like abominable,
Vile and Enormous Offences. Every Aſſize gives us too many freſh and ſad
Inſtances of this Truth. Oh that Men would become wiſe, and conſider not only
Temporal, but Eternal Puniſhments! Such a Conſide­ration would, if any thing,
oblige them to follow the important buſineſs of Religion, To hurt no body by
Word or Deed, to keep their hands from picking and ſtealing: Such a
Conſideration would enforce them to labour truly to get their own living, and
to do their Duty in that Station which Divine Providence hath allotted to
them.

There is not certainly a more effectual way to re­vive the drooping Spirit of
Chriſtian Religion in the World, than ſeriouſly to contemplate upon, and
conſider our Latter End, That we muſt ſhortly die, and come to Judgment, and
there receive a Reward ac­cording to our Deeds. If we were but poſſeſs'd with
a warm and conſtant Senſe of theſe things, we ſhould, in all probability,
endeavour to walk, circumſpectly, not as Foools, but as wiſe, to be holy in
all manner of Converſation.

Such is the advantage of a Religious Conſiderati­on. Alas! were there but
mature Thoughts, would but Men be wrought upon to act as reaſonable
Crea­tures; would they but judiciouſly and ſoberly weigh things in the Balance
of their Underſtanding, they would ſeldom or never be found wanting in their
Duty and Obligation: If Men would once enter­tain ſerious Thoughts of
Religion, they would ſoon ſet open their Ears to its ſweet and charming
Lan­guage; if they would but fix their Eyes upon it, they would ſoon be
captivated with its incomparable [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=8) Beauty, it would
preſently attract their love and ad­miration, and enforce them to embrace it
with all profound reſpect and affection: A conſideration of our latter end, a
ſerious reflection upon Eternity, this would put the Soul into ſuch a frame
and po­ſture, as would make it reſtleſs and uneaſy, wrack'd and impatient,
till it had made its Peace with an incens'd Judge, by Repentance not to be
repented of; till it had prepar'd it ſelf for a comfortable Ap­pearance at his
Bar, for a glorious advancement into an endleſs ſtate of Bliſs and
Immortality: Such is the great advantage of conſidering our latter end. Oh
that they were wiſe, that they underſtood this, that they would conſider their
latter end!

And this leads me to the fifth and laſt Obſervable, Namely, That to conſider
our latter end, is an Argu­ment of our Wiſdom and Underſtanding.

And here, if we conſider our latter end as we ought, it we ſeriouſly meditate
upon Death and a Judgment to come, then we ſhall prepare our ſelves, and make
ready for it by purity of Life, and holineſs of Converſation; ſuch a
Conſidera­tion will create in our Minds an abhorrency and de­teſtation of Sin,
and plant in us Vertue and Good­neſs, a perfect and ſincere love of God and
Religion; and this, I am ſure, is the greateſt Wiſdom, the nobleſt
Underſtanding.

The fear of the Lord, ſaith the Royal Pſalmiſt, is the beginning of Wiſdom: a
good Ʋnderſtanding have all they that do thereafter, Pſalm 110.10. i. e. There
is no ſuch excellent and prudential courſe, as the pre­ſerving in our Breaſts
a juſt and due reverence of God, an awe to his Laws, and a dread to his
Judg­ments; [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=8) and all this is
the happy effect of conſidering our latter end. So teach us to number our
Days, is the fervent Prayer of Moſes, Pſal. 90.12. So teach us to conſider our
latter end, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wiſdom, i. e. to the important
buſineſs of Re­ligion; thus ſhall we lay up in ſtore for our ſelves a good
foundation againſt the time to come; thus ſhall we lay hold on Eternal Life:
And this if we do, it will be a demonſtrative argument of our Wiſdom and
Underſtanding. And that you may be perſwaded to incline your Ear unto Wiſdom,
and apply your Hearts to Ʋnderſtanding, I ſhall ſet before you the happineſs
of a Religious, and the folly of a vicious and an Immoral Converſation; and
this I cannot better do, than by referring you to the third Chapter of the
Proverbs: You will ſee there, how the Wiſe Man ſets off Religion in the moſt
beautiful and glorious Dreſs, enumerates there its peculiar excellencies, and
particular advantages; ver. 16\. He repreſents her as a great and generous
Princeſs, diſtributing Gifts to her Subjects, length of Days is in her right
hand, and in her left hand Riches and Honour: and ver. 17\. Her ways are ways
of pleaſantneſs, and all her paths are peace; i. e. They procure a bleſſed
Tranquility in a Mans Mind and Conſcience, Proſperity in all his en­terprizes,
and Eternal Reſt with God in Glory. The Religious Man hath Peace and an Heaven
in his Bo­ſom; the greateſt tranſports of Joy poſſeſs and ſur­round his
Breaſt, and his laſt end is ſweet and com­fortable, he dies the Death of the
Righteous; his Con­ſcience then, as a Glaſs, repreſents to his ſight the
Beatific Viſion and the Joys of Eternity. And this it is to conſider our
latter end, this is the bleſſed effect of a righteous Life; whoſoever then
thus conſiders [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=9) his latter end,
it is certainly an Argument of his Wiſ­dom and Underſtanding.

But Secondly, Conſider we the folly of a Vicious Life, and an Immoral
Converſation; Alas! what is Vice and Immorality, but a ſort of practice that
de­baſeth and diſparageth a Man? Such a ſad courſe of Life generally plunges a
Man into the moſt grievous and intolerable Evils, as a diſtemper both of Body
and Soul, the greateſt diſtreſs of Fortune, Poverty and Diſgrace, a low and
contemptible condition, re­proach and the loſs of Reputation, Affliction and
Diſcompoſure of Mind, the torments of a troubled Conſcience, (for there is no
Peace, ſaith my God, to the Wicked,) the danger of a Death-bed Repentance, and
frequently brings him to a violent and an unnatural Death: Add to this Miſery,
the loſs of Gods favour and loving kindneſs; ſuch treaſure up unto them­ſelves
wrath againſt the day of wrath. Oh the per­plexity and conſternation ſuch are
in when they come to dye! when their Conſcience preſents to their ſight the
dreadful Scenes of a Judgment to come; their evil Conſcience then flaſhes in
their Face, caſts abroad its Thunder, and ſtrikes them with the greateſt
Terrour and Affrightment. All theſe are the lamentable effects of a vicious
Life, and an immoral Converſation; which ſufficiently demonſtrates the folly
of ſuch as prefer Wickedneſs above Religion; ſuch do truly wander out of the
way of Ʋnderſtanding: But this is not all, the Man that wandereth out of the
way of Ʋnderſtanding, ſhall remain in the Congregation of the Dead, [...],
according to the verſion of the LXX, Prov. 21.16. i. e. The Man that leaves
the beautiful Paths of Vertue, which directly lead to Happineſs, and takes the
By-Paths, the rough [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=9) and unpleaſant
Road of Iniquity, which conducts him to Eternal Death, ſuch a Man doth not
only de­throne his Reaſon, is not only void of Underſtand­ing, but he ſhall
remain in the Company of the Giants, of whom we read, Gen. 6.4. They were Men
of a monſtrous Stature, and whoſe wickedneſs too was proportionable to their
large Size; theſe Men, as they were ſingularly eminent for their height and
bigneſs, ſo were they horribly infamous for Acts of Injuſtice, for Wrong and
Robbery, for Tyranny and Oppreſſion; theſe were the Men, for whom it repented
the Lord that he had made Man on the Earth; theſe were the Men, whoſe Sins
opened the Cataracts, the Windows of Heaven, and brought down a deluge of
Wrath and Indignation; and the Man, who works Wickedneſs, is not only without
Ʋnderſtanding, but ſhall be incorporated into the wretched Society and
Con­verſe of thoſe Giants and Rebels againſt God, ſhall be condemned to keep
them company, ſhall be ſen­tenced to that accurſed place, which they had
aſſign'd them, when the Flood came and deſtroyed them all; a Place where the
Worm dieth not, and the Fire is not quenched.

Thus I have ſhewn you,

  * I. What it is to conſider.
  * II. The benefit of Conſideration.
  * III. What is meant by the latter end, the object of Conſideration.
  * IV. The great advantage of conſidering the latter end.
  * V. That to conſider our latter end, is an argument of our Wiſdom and Underſtanding.

I come now in the Sixth and laſt place to make an Application, and then I
a'done.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=10)And here,
ſuffer a Word of Exhortation, you, who worthily deſerve to be puniſhed; you,
who for your Evil Deeds are condemned to die; let me be­ſeech you and prevail
with you to conſider your Latter End; it behoves you conſider it: Eternal
Bliſs and Happineſs ſure, is a thing of the greateſt and moſt weighty
Conſideration, a thing of ſuch vaſt moment, that for you to put off the
Thoughts of it, and neglect the Proviſion for it, is certainly the moſt
unaccountable Indiſcretion, the greateſt Folly and Madneſs.

You have but this, and part of the Day following, to make your Peace with an
Offended God, to make Proviſion for your Future Happineſs. To day then hear
the Voice of God, who calleth upon you to conſider your latter End. I do not
doubt your Con­ſideration of it in one Senſe, i. e. That you have ter­rible
Apprehenſions of your Temporal Puniſhment, of the violent and unnatural End
you have brought your ſelves unto; but this ought to be the leaſt of your
Conſideration; nothing ought to diſturb you now, but the apprehenſion of your
having offended God: And if you now do truly▪ fear God, (as you have all
imaginable reaſon to fear him, who is able to caſt both Body and Soul into
Hell) that will raiſe you above all other Depreſſions, that will exalt you
a­bove all baſe and diſpiriting Fears. You are to con­ſider, that after your
departure hence there will be a Judgment; and to make ready and prepare your
ſelves for a comfortable appearance at that tremen­dous Tribunal, you have
received Sentence of Death from an Earthly Judge, which Death is only
Tem­poral and Tranſitory; and it was paſs'd upon you with all poſſible Regret
and Reluctancy, with the greateſt [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=10) unwillingneſs;
but if you repent not of the Evils you have done, a more terrible Sentence
will be pro­nounced upon you by the Righteous Judge of the World, Go you
Curſed into everlaſting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Will you
not then con­ſider your latter end, ſo as to prepare for it by true and
faithful Repentance? Surely if you be wiſe, you will ſo conſider it, and let
not your puniſhment here, but the conſideration, that you have offended a good
and gracious God by your Wickedneſs, be the mo­tive to ſuch a Repentance.

And here, let me a little touch upon, let me re­prove the Wickedneſs, and ſet
before you the evil things that you have done.

Two of you are Condemned for Murder, and that of a moſt cruel and barbarous
ſort; the one, for the Wife of his own Boſom, the other, of her harmleſs and
in­nocent Babe; Murders, monſtrous and unnatural: How Diametrically oppoſite
are ſuch horrid Acts to the Laws of the Chriſtian Religion? They command the
Husband to dwell with his Wife according to Knowledg, i. e. with all Conjugal
Love and Affection, to give ho­nour to the Wife, as unto the weaker Veſſel;
How then doth he violate this Command, who breaks the Bone of his Bone, who
wounds the Fleſh of his Fleſh? Chriſtianity obliges Husbands to love their
Wives as their own Bodies, charges every Man to love his Wife even as himſelf,
Epheſ. 5.28.33. Husbands love your Wives, and be not bitter againſt them, Col.
3.19.

Secondly, We have before us a Woman who hath Murder'd her own Child, an Infant
born of Fornica­tion; Fornication of it ſelf is an hainous Sin, a Sin, that
without Repentance excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9.
Fornicators ſhall not inherit the [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=11) Kingdom of God:
And it is a Sin much more hainous, when it is productive of a greater, when
Murder is the ſad effect and lamentable conſequence of it; to deſtroy the
Fruit of one's own Womb, to ſend it out of the World too unbaptized, before it
was waſh'd in the Laver of Regeneration; to give it a Bloody Bap­tiſm! I want
Words to expreſs the unnaturalneſs and barbarity of ſuch an Action. Alas! How
doth the Commiſſion of one Sin make way for another? How doth one Wickedneſs
tread upon the heels of another? The Devil tempted to Fornication, and then to
hide the Shame, tempted to murder the Infant; though that was the moſt
effectual way to be expos'd to the greater Ignominy and Diſgrace. Thus the
De­vil did with David, as ſoon as ever he ſucceeded in his Temptation to
commit Adultery with the Wife of Ʋriah, he preſently took the advantage, and
temp­ted him to add to his Adultery, the crying Sin of Murder.

Blood-guiltineſs! A Sin which defiles the Land, a Sin which cries to Heaven
for Vengeance, which im­portunes the Juſtice, and wearies the Ears of the
Al­mighty, till it be avenged; a Sin for which God hath not only ordained a
Temporal, but an Eternal Death to be the puniſhment of it, unleſs his Wrath be
atton'd with an hearty and an unfeigned Repentance: Par­don for Sins of ſuch
an horrid nature, muſt be ſought carefully with Tears.

Others of you are to be cut off with the Sword of Juſtice for Theft, for Wrong
and Robbery, Acts altogether repugnant to the Laws of the Land, and
contradictory to the Laws of God, who hath commanded us not to Steal, Thou
ſhalt not Steal; had you ſought the Kingdom of God, and his [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=11) Righteouſneſs,
had you not neglected his Divine Service and Worſhip, had you wrought honeſtly
with your hands, and been induſtrious in your reſpective Vocations, God would
never have ſuffer'd you to have wanted the Comforts and Neceſſaries of this
Life, but Idleneſs is the grand Snare of the DEVIL; had you truſted upon your
Heavenly Father, who Cloathes the Graſs and Lillies of the Field, He would
have provided for you, He would have much more cloath'd you, O ye of little
Faith.

It is Excellent Advice which the Royal Pſalmiſt gives, 62.10. O truſt not in
Wrong and Robbery: He, that thinks to ſupport himſelf by ſuch Means, truſteth
to a broken Reed, he will be ſure to be diſappointed, to find his Folly, when
he expects the Fruit of his Contrivances; Riches innocent­ly gotten are not to
be rely'd on, much leſs ſuch Gain as is got by Injury and Oppreſſion; Acts of
Injuſtice make Men odious to God, render them unfit for humane Socie­ty: There
are few that follow this wicked Employment, but at the laſt reap up the Wages
which are appointed by the Law to be the Reward of it; and whoſoever of them
eſcapes Vengeance in this World, ſhall not, without Repen­tance, eſcape
Vengeance in the World to come: Nothing but the Execution of ſuch Men can give
Check to their Wickedneſs, nothing can put a Stop to them, and prevent the
Miſchief that ſuch Men do in the World, but a cutting them off, this is the
Reaſon of Capital Puniſhments among Men; it is all imaginable Juſtice and
Equity, to remove ſuch Men out of the World, as will be a Plague to Man­kind,
while they live in it.

Another of you ſuffers Death for Burning a Barn, for conſuming with Fire the
Fruits of the Earth, which had been with Labour and Charge ſown and reap'd by
one, who had formerly been to him a kind and an indulgent Maſter; An Act of
Ingratitude as well as Impiety, and an Argument of a moſt Malicious and
Diabolical Spirit, an Act that is [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=12) contrary to the
Golden Rule of the Chriſtian Religion, which commands all its Profeſſors, not
to do that to others, which they would not have others to do unto them; to put
away all Hatred and Strife, all Envy, Malice and Revenge, ſuch being the
Suggeſtions of the Devil.

Others of you are Condemn'd for Coyning, for Counterfeit­ing the King's Coyn,
which, with Clipping of it, is one of the moſt growing Miſchiefs in the
Kingdom; How Excellent is the Coin of this Nation, both for intrinſick Value
and Come­lineſs? and never was Mony ſo ſpoyl'd and abus'd as ours: If the ſame
Queſtion were to be put in this Age, as of old, Whoſe is this Image and
Superſcription? Part we might, but we could not anſwer the whole; we may
indeed gueſs at the Image upon a piece of Money, but we cannot tell whoſe it
is by the Superſcription, for that is all gone; but mark the End of ſuch Men.

Such Criminals rob the King of his Due, invade his Right and Propriety, and
intrench upon his Royal Prerogative, for it is the KING alone who hath Power
to Coin, it is He alone who hath an indiſputable Right to ſet the Value upon
Money, and to make it currant within his Sovereignty and Dominion; and our
Religion obliges us to give unto Caeſar the things that are Caeſar's; ſuch
therefore as Counterfeit or Clip the King's Coin, the ſame are Thieves and
Robbers, and it is an Iniquity to be puniſh'd by the Judge.

From thoſe Baſe and Vitious Practices, What a Loſs flows to the Subject? What
a Scandal to the Nation? A Tradeſ­man, that takes up theſe diſhoneſt ways of
living, what In­jury may he bring upon ſuch as are of the ſame Trade with
himſelf? By under-ſelling them, by affording his Commo­dities at a Cheaper
Rate than he bought them, becauſe of the unlawful Profit and Advantage he can
make of the large or broad Money, that he ſees laid down upon the Nail for
them: But, Profit and Advantage did I ſay? Alas! This is not a way for a Man
to enrich himſelf, there is a ſecret Curſe [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=12) goes along with
ſuch Gains, whereas a Penny honeſtly got wears like Iron, but Eſtates acquir'd
by Coining and Clipping are never of any long Duration, there is a ſtrange
Improſpe­rouſneſs that attends them; Riches ſo attain'd have Wings and fly
away, turn to the Owners Hurt, bring them at the laſt to an Ignominious and a
Shameful End.

I am heartily ſorry that one who had taken Holy Orders upon him, (though it is
a conſiderable time ſince he pre­tended to an Eccleſiaſtical Office or
Adminiſtration) ſhould prove a Malefactor in this kind, and that ſome ſhould
dare to improve this Crime to a general Reflection, ſuch as do ſo, are baſe
and ill-natur'd, cenſorious and unthinking People: Alas! Offences will come,
there will be ſome bad in all So­cieties and Communities of Men, there was a
Judas among the very Apoſtles, the beſt Body hath ſome bad Blood in it, the
fineſt Silver hath ſome Allay, the brighteſt Days have ſome Clouds.

The Clergy, I muſt confeſs, are under the greateſt Obli­gation to follow that
which is good, to abſtain from all Ap­pearance of Evil; they are oblig'd to
live with eſpecial Re­gularity and ſtrictneſs of Converſation, with all
imaginable Care and Circumſpection: The Miniſters of God! They are the Lights
of the World, they, above all others, ought to let their Light ſo ſhine before
Men, that they ſeeing their good Works, may Glorifie their Father which is in
Heaven; they are particularly oblig'd to enlighten the Glorious Spheres,
wherein they move, with the bright Luſtre of an exact and an Exemplary
Converſation; for let Wit and Learning, let the braveſt Parts and the beſt
Accompliſhments ſtand in the Front, yet if ill Morals, if an ungodly Life
brings up the Rear, the Satyr ſoon devours the Panegyrick, their Vice will be
re­flected upon, it will be ſuch an Interpoſition as will Eclipſe the Beauty
and Glory of the reſt; it is true, Learning and Excellent Parts may ſtrike the
Tympane, may make the Drum of the Ear to ſound, but, if there be not an honeſt
[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=13) and a
ſober converſation, they will never Touch the Fibres of the heart; if the
light, that is in them, be darkneſs, how great is that darkneſs! they are
plac'd as Stars in the Fir­mament, and if they Dart nothing but malignant, and
im­proſperous influences, what can follow but an Univerſal Plague, and
Epidemical Diſtemper?

But, Alas! They are Fleſh and Blood as well as other men are, they are not
Exempted from Temptation; it is not Abſolutely impoſſible for them to fall
into the Snare of the Devil; though it is matter of ſad conſideration, that
he, who Taught others not to Steal, ſhould Steal Himſelf; that he, who
Preach'd to others, ſhould himſelf be a Caſt-away; that he, who was obliged to
teach, and exhort Parents too to train up their Children in the fear of the
Lord, to dye them with vertue and goodneſs in the very wool of their infancy,
that they might the better keep the colour as long as they live; that ſuch an
one ſhould Teach his only Son a Trea­ſonable Trade, ſhould Chalk him out ſuch
Wicked, and un­lawful ways of living, as have brought upon him ſhame and
confuſion, as have thrown him into the moſt Deplo­rable Circumſtances; that
he, who, at his initiation into the Chriſtian Church by Baptiſm, call'd him
Benjamin, i. e. the Son of his Right Hand, a Son as dear and Precious to him
as his Right Hand, ſhould bring him up to be a Ben­oni, i. e. a Son of Sorrow;
this is matter of the ſaddeſt conſideration.

But let him, that thinketh he ſtandeth, take heed leſt he fall.

We have inſtances in Holy Scripture of ſuch as have not anſwered their
Character, as have Preach'd to others, and themſelves been Reprobate, as have
Corrupted their Mo­rals and Religion, as have by Covetouſneſs fall'n into the
ſnare of the Devil:

Covetouſneſs is the Root of all Evil, and indeed ſuch an Evil as the Crime of
this Condemned perſon had it's Riſe from; [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=13) they that will
be rich, that ſet their minds on the getting of riches, fall into a Temptation
and a ſnare, into many fooliſh and hurtful luſts, which ingulph or drown them
in Deſtruction and Perdition; the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, which
while ſome have coveted after, they have Erred from the Faith, and pierced
themſelves through with many ſorrows, have brought themſelves to a ſad and
moſt Wretched Con­dition; And the Man of God ſhould flee theſe things; this
was the Charge, which St. Paul gave to his Scholar, and Spiritu­al Son
Timothy, at his Embarquement into the Epiſcopal Of­fice; 1 Tim. 6.9, 10, 11.

We have, I ſay, inſtances in Holy Scripture of ſuch as have not anſwer'd their
Sacred Character, as have Preach'd to others, and themſelves been Reprobate,
as have by Co­vetouſneſs fall'n into the ſnare of the Devil; thus Judas was
poſſeſs'd with a baſe and unworthy Spirit of Covetouſneſs, he ſold the very
Son of God for Money; when he ſaw in­deed, the matter was to End in the death
of his Lord, he Re­pented, but Alas! He acted his own Tragedy with a ſad, and
and ignoble death, he hanged himſelf, a Crime which there could be no
Repentance for.

Thus Balaam for Money ſold to Deſtruction, 24000 Men of Iſrael, Numbers,
Twenty Fifth, he loved the Re­wards of Divination; and though he was
Reſtrain'd by the Divine prohibition to go at the firſt, yet a ſecond Meſſage
carried by more Honourable Perſons, and enforc'd with a Charming promiſe of
promotion, and Advancement to Ho­nor; This Lull'd the Prophet Aſleep, this was
a bait, which he could not but ſwallow, the ſilver and gold, the Honors, that
Balak promis'd, run ſo in his mind, that he could not but hanker after them;
though at the laſt this prov'd his deſtruction, for he Aſſociated with the
Midianites, was found with them; and was Slain in the Battel, Numb. 31.8. God
particularly turn'd the courſe of his wrath upon him, as he will do upon all
ſuch as forſake the right way, as go Aſtray [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=14) by following the
way of Balaam the Son of Boſor, who loved the wages of unrighteouſneſs.

Thus have I ſet before you the evil things that you have done, and for which
you are appointed to dye.

What remains, but that, as an Ambaſſador of God, I pray you in Chriſt's ſtead
to be Reconcil'd to God, to conſider your latter end, to ſeek the Lord your
God with an hearty, and Sincere Repentance; Repentance is a Turning of the
whole Heart from Sin and the Devil, to ſerve God in Newneſs of Life, a purging
of the Conſcience from Dead Works to ſerve the living God, a dying unto ſin;
ſuch a Compunction of the Heart for ſin, as is joyn'd with a full purpoſe, and
a ſteady Reſolution to leave, and forſake it; God hath promiſed to pardon, and
hath Actually pardoned the greateſt Sin upon ſuch a Repentance; Even Murder it
ſelf, that Execrable and Crying Sin; though the innocent blood, you have ſhed,
Crys to Heaven for Vengeance, yet the blood of the ever Bleſſed Jeſus crys as
loud for your pardon and forgiveneſs, if you be but deeply touch'd, and
affected with a ſenſe of your abominable wickedneſs.

Your Repentance, 'Tis True, is late, you have been exceed­ing ſinful, you have
put off your Duty towards God and your Neighbour; till the very laſt Minute of
your Life; and the Holy Goſpel requires not only Sorrow and Re­morſe for Sin;
but an Holy Life to demonſtrate the Sinceri­ty of Repentance; But Alas! You
have little or no time to amend your Life in, your glaſs is well nigh run, you
have not many hours for the Conſideration of your latter End; Well! but there
is mercy with God, his Nature and Proper­ty is ever to have mercy and to
forgive, his mercy is as infinite as himſelf; and therefore none muſt pretend
to Li­mit or Confine it; though you have hitherto liv'd in Pro­phaneneſs, in
the contempt of God and Religion; yet if you make a True and Ample Confeſſion
of all your Wick­edneſſes; if you humbly beg pardon, and, with the Publi­can
[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=14) in the
Goſpel, ſmite upon your breaſt, and ſay, God be Merciful to me a Sinner, if
you promiſe and reſolve A­mendment, and if God foreſee that ſuch your
reſolution would be inviolable, that you would Pay your Vows, if more time
were given you; I hope, He will accept your Re­pentance.

I Leave you therefore to the goodneſs and pity, to the Gracious compaſſion of
a merciful God; I pray you to conſider your Latter End, that after Death,
there will be a Judgment; I beg of you to Employ the ſmall Moment, you have to
live, to your Eternal intereſt and Advantage, to work out your Salvation with
fear and Trembling, to be doubly diligent and induſtrious, to redeem the time,
ſeeing you are but come into the Vineyard at the Eleventh hour.

May you receive Equal Wages with thoſe, that came in at the firſt, with thoſe
that have born the burden and heat of the day; may you be ſav'd with the Thief
upon the Croſs; tho' his Caſe, as well as the Labourers, is vaſtly different
from yours, yet you have a general refuge in the Merits of Chriſt, and in the
Mercys of God.

And here, may all you, who have eſcap'd the Sentence of Death, who have been
but ſlightly puniſh'd for your offences, follow the ſalutary advice of our
Bleſſed Saviour, which He gave to the Adulterous Woman, and the impotent Man
in the Goſpel, Go and Sin no more, Jo. 5.14. Jo. 8.11. Leſt a worſe thing come
unto you.

Laſtly, May all you, who hear me this day, be perſwaded, by the Exemplary
puniſhment of theſe Perſons, to the Excellent and rewardable ſervice of God,
to keep your veſſels in Sanctification and Honor, to the practice of
Temperance and Chaſtity, to do always that which is juſt and honeſt, Lawful
and Right, to a conſtant performance of your du­ty both towards God and Men,
to an early and ſincere [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=15) Repentance, to
bring up your Children in the fear of the Lord, to ſeaſon them betimes with
the ſalt of piety and Holy Religion.

I Pray for you all in the Pathetick and Affectionate words of my Text.

Oh that you may be Wiſe, Oh that you may underſtand this, O that you would
conſider your Latter End!

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and to God the Ho­ly Ghoſt be Aſcrib'd, as
is moſt due, all Honor, Glory, Power, Might, Majeſty, Dominion and Faithful
ſervice from Hence­forth and for Evermore, Amen.

## 2\. A Short ACCOUNT of Mr. Edmund Robinſon, who was Condemn'd for High-
Treaſon, in Counterfeiting the KING's Coin, on Monday the 23. of March,
1690/1. and Executed on Tueſday the 31ſt. of March, 1691.

THe place of this Unhappy Man's birth was Colne Pa­riſh in the County of
Lancaſter; His Father was a Conſiderable Husband-Man, who ſent him to School,
as ſoon as he was Capable of Inſtitution; where he made a great proficiency in
ſomething elſe as well as his Book; for (as I am credibly inform'd by an
honeſt Gentleman who was his School-Fellow) thoſe baſe practices, which have
ſince brought him to the Gallows, began then to appear, and ſhew themſelves in
him; he had there con­tracted an intimate friendſhip, and acquaintance with a
[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=15) Young
Man, whoſe name was Greggson, with whom, a­mongſt many other Roguiſh Pranks,
he frequently impos'd upon, and cheated the ignorant, and unskilful with
Pewter Shillings; and of whom it is probable, he learn'd his Art; for this
Greggson's Father had the Scandalous Character, & Reputation of a Coyner; &
Greggson himſelf, who had like­wiſe taken Holy Orders upon him, was, about 10.
or 12. Years ago, for Coyning, Executed at Lancaſter; thus as they had both
equally abus'd, and Scandaliz'd their ſacred function, as they were Brethren
together in iniquity, ſo in the ſhame­ful manner of their deaths they were not
divided.

From this School, I ſuppoſe, he went to the Ʋniverſity, where, according to
his own information, he was admitted, though he made but a very ſhort ſtay
there, not reſiding in the College above ſix weeks, when he return'd into the
Countrey, but whether or no he ever viſited the Ʋniverſity again to take a
degree, he wou'd not give me any ſatisfaction as to that particular.

However, he got into orders, being ordain'd both Deacon and Priest, as he told
me, by the Right Reverend Father in God Dr. Hacket late Biſhop of Lichfield
and Coventry, which qualify'd him for a Benefice; a place call'd Holmforth,
under the Vicaridge of Kirk-Burton in York-Shire, which Curacy, in value about
25, or 30 l. per Annum, he ſerv'd about Eleaven years, and then pretended to
leave it through ſome Bo­dily indiſpoſition; he preach'd likewiſe for the
ſpace of a year at a place call'd Haworth in the Pariſh of Bradford; this was
all the promotion he had in the Church, and from which, if he had been honeſt
and induſtrious, he might have had a comfortable ſubſiſtence; having the
Addition of 12 l. per Annum of a Temporal Eſtate, which he got by the marriage
of one Anthony Armitage's daughter, a conſiderable Yeoman of Thick Hollins, in
the pariſh of Almon-bury; His Life, when a Curate, was by no means ſuitable to
his profeſſion; for he wou'd Forge Licenſes, and Clandeſtinely Marry, and was
guilty of many other immoralities, which, to mention, [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=16) wou'd ſwell this
Narrative too much; By theſe Vicious pra­ctices he made himſelf Obnoxious to
the Eccleſiaſtical Laws, being Suſpended and Excommunicated, and at the laſt
impri­ſon'd upon a writ de Excommunicato Capiendo: Such was his Deportment,
ſuch was his behaviour, when concern'd in the Church: But the Devil had put,
into the heart of this Judas Iſcariot, another-gueſs, and as he Tempted him to
Be­lieve, a more Profitable and advantagious way of living in the world, which
was by imparing and Counterfeiting the King's Coyn, this was the Employ he
Cloſely follow'd, when at Bank End, in the aforeſaid Pariſh of Kirk-Burton, as
he himſelf inform'd me, telling me all the Tricks of his Black Art, and what
difference there was, as to advantage, in Clip­ping and Coyning, and how the
one was eaſier, and leſs trou­bleſome than the other; that he melted down his
Clippings, and what ſav'd of them in Coyning, he Tranſmitted to the Gold-
Smiths, of whom he received frequently very conſidera­ble Sums of Money; I
ſhall ſpare their Names now through hopes of their Reformation and Amendment,
that they will for the future (as it is very much in their power to do) put a
ſtop to ſuch miſchiefs by an honeſt and an ingenuous diſ­covery of the Bullion
Bringers; but Alas! What won't men do when blinded by intereſt; when Mammon is
their God?

This was the way Mr. Robinſon took to Raiſe his Fortunes in the world, though
at the laſt it brought upon him a Fatal Cataſtrophe; He was ſeveral times
Apprehended, and Try'd for his Life; for at the Aſſizes holden at York the 4th
of March, and in the 30th year, of King Charles the 2d, 1678. He was Try'd for
Clipping, but Acquitted, though at the ſame time Convicted for uttering falſe
Money, and Fined 20 l. At the Aſſizes alſo holden at York the 17. of March,
1679\. and in the 31\. Year of King Charles the 2d. he was again Con­victed
for Uttering Falſe Money, and Fined 500 l. At the Aſſizes holden likewiſe at
York the firſt of Auguſt in the firſt year of King James the 2d 1685, he was
Try'd for Coyning, and acquitted; ſuch was the Risk he Run, ſuch was the
danger [[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=16) he
frequently and narrowly eſcap'd; but all this wou'd not deter him from, wou'd
not oblige and enforce him to give o­ver ſuch a dangerous employment, as ſo
often brought him to the very brink of deſtruction, as ſo often gave him a
diſmal proſpect of an infamous death.

But though the Pitcher goes oft to the water, it comes home broken at laſt.

For at the Aſſizes holden at York the 14\. of March 1691, he was Try'd for his
old Treaſon in Coyning, found guilty, & deſervedly Executed for the ſame; he
was very unwilling to come to his Tryal, having Peremptorily Challeng'd 35
which were all the Law allow'd him to Except againſt, without ſhewing cauſe;
never Man had a fairer Tryal, never Man of his Quality, had a more ſubſtantial
and intelligent Jury, and never Man had the Happineſs to come before a more
Patient and Merciful, a more learned and impartial Judge.

He did indeed, Voluntarily Surrender himſelf, but if he had not done ſo, he
muſt a Fled his Countrey, for warrants were iſſued out for his Apprehenſion:
His only Son Benjamin, and his wife, were brought to the Caſtle ſome Months
before; his bowells, I fancy, yearn'd upon them, and the Scheme he had drawn,
the projects he had, as he thought, Cunningly form'd and Contriv'd for his own
and their deliverance, this might oblige him to a Voluntary ſurrender of
himſelf into the Hands of Juſtice; and indeed never Man produc'd more
Wit­neſſes to invalidate a ſingle Teſtimony, and ſome of them did very
wonderfully agree together, for a Man and a Woman, told a long Story
Ipſiſſimis Verbis, their words were the very ſelf ſame, there was not one
tittle Difference or Variation, by which and ſome Croſs queſtions it plainly
appear'd they had conn'd their Leſſon Together; beſides, all the Evidence,
they gave in his behalf, was built upon a Rotten Foundation, namely a bond,
which was in a manner demonſtrated to be forg'd, by very clear Circumſtances,
and particularly by an Oath of a Gentleman, then accidentally in Court, who
de­pos'd, that he was very well acquainted with the Hand-Writing [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=17) of Mr. Anthony
Preſton Late Miniſter at Barns­ley, and that the Hand in the Bond was nothing
like it; and indeed for mine own Satisfaction, and that I might the better
preſs him to a Confeſſion of the Forgery, I procured a Letter, which Mr.
Anthony Preston had writ to one, who's concern'd in the management of the
Prerogative Office in York, which I ſhewed to Mr. Robinſon after his
Con­demnation, and deſir'd to compare the Hands, but the Bond, he pretended,
was not in his poſſeſſion; though upon ſight of the Letter he acknowledged to
me, That the Hands did not very well agree together; and yet at his Death
declar'd, the Bond was legally obtained.

Another thing that might oblige him to a Voluntary Sur­render, was the Belief
that Two poſitive Witneſſes were neceſſa­rily requir'd by the Law, to the
taking away his Life; and he was morally certain, that only One would Swear
againſt him; but alas! he was groſly miſtaken; for the Judge (Mr. Baron
Tur­ton) told him, That Counterfeiting Money was High-Treaſon at Common Law,
but Clipping was not; and by Common Law one Witneſs in Treaſon, as well as
other Offences, was deem'd Suf­ficient. By the Statutes indeed (primo Edw. 6\.
cap. 12\. & 5, & 6\. of Edward 6\. cap. 11.) Two Witneſſes are required in all
ſorts of Treaſons: But afterwards the Statute, in 1. & 2\. of Philip and Mary,
cap. 11\. reduces the Way of Tryal for Impair­ing and Counterfeiting the
King's Coin, to the form accuſtomed before 1 of Edward the 6th. So that now
the difference be­tween Evidence for Counterfeiting, and Evidence for
Impairing, is this: The firſt being High Treaſon by Conmon Law, no more One
Witneſs is required: The latter being made High-Treaſon by Act of Parliament,
that Act requires Two Witneſſes. I ſhall not trouble you with any Tranſcript,
it is but having Re­courſe to the Statute-Book, and there you may receive
further ſatisfaction.

That one Witneſs therefore will do for Counterfeiting, be­cauſe it is High-
Treaſon by Common Law, the Judge was pleaſed to declare it not only to be his
own, but his Learned Brethren's [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=17) conſiderative
Opinion; and likewiſe produced Judge Hales's Pleas of the Crown to the Jury,
which ſhew'd, That that Incom­parable Judge gave the ſame Sence and Opinion in
the Caſe, who was a moſt Eminent Lawyer, as well as a Great Divine.

This voluntary Surrender of himſelf he often urg'd to me, as a plain
Indication, as an undeniable Argument of his In­nocency; but having confeſs'd
to me (and which Confeſſi­on he, when interrupted by me, confirmed at the
Gallows) his guiltineſs in Clipping and Coining, both before and after his
frequent Deliverances, I told him, that the ill uſe he made of them had
provoked the Lord, that the Sins of this and of another nature, being
impenitently perſiſted in, had made them ripe for Puniſhment in this World,
and that it was the Divine Juſtice which would not permit him to live any
longer upon Earth, and which had blinded and infatuated his Underſtanding; and
that God would certainly overtake him with infinitely more fearful Storms of
Ven­geance in the World to come, if he laboured not earneſtly to reconcile
himſelf unto Him before his departure, by a free and an entire confeſſion of
his Sins, and a true and faithful Repentance for them. I deſir'd him, that (as
he had been concern'd in an Honorary and Publick Office, but had in no wiſe
anſwer'd the Character of it, his Life having all along been a contradiction
to the Sacred Deſign and Holy End of its Inſtitution) he would leave ſomething
in Writing behind him as a Monument of his hearty Sorrow and Repentance for
the ſame; and that others might by him take an Example, and flee ſuch Vices as
had brought him to ſuch a ſhameful End. This, I told him, was a very
reaſonable requeſt, and nothing but what became a ſincere Penitent to do; but
I could not perſwade him to any thing of this nature; he only deſir'd me,
that, if I thought it expedient, I might diſcloſe to the World (and which is
the reaſon of this Re­lation) what he had confeſſed to me, and ſeem'd to wiſh
heartily, that what he had done, and the Puniſhment he was like to undergo,
might be of ſuch uſe to thoſe of the ſame [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=18) Function with
himſelf, and to all others, as might influence them to the conſtant
conſervation of Innocency, to be holy and righteous in all manner of
Converſation. I duly atten­ded upon him, from his Condemnation to his Death,
and always, both before and after Divine Service, exhorted him (for alas! I
could not extort one) to a thorow Confeſſion of all his Sins, and particularly
of the Fact which he was to dye for, but he denied it then, and perſiſted in
his Denial to the very laſt moment, That ever Roger Preſton coin'd for him
1300 l. in half a Years time (as he had ſworn) or that ever he was Privy
either to his Clipping or Coining.

Alas! he was horribly abus'd and impos'd upon by ſome, who for filthy Lucre's
ſake, promis'd him, and gave him the greateſt Aſſurances of procuring him a
Reprieve, ſo ſtrangely and unreaſonably, to the very moment of his go­ing to
Execution; did he buoy up himſelf with hopes of Life, upon the conſideration
of ſuch Vain Promiſes, and the Diſcovery he himſelf had made, that the Powers
of Re­ligion did, I'm afraid, very little operate upon him. When he came
indeed to the place of Execution, and ſaw a Terri­ble Death ſtare him in the
Face, he was, I believe, under the greateſt Trouble and Confuſion, and ſpoke
to me more paſ­ſionately than ever he had done before, to pray for and with
him. I told him nothing would make the Sacrifice of Prayer acceptable to God,
but a confeſſion of all his Sins, and par­ticularly of the Fact he dy'd for;
an abhorrency and de­teſtation of them; an hearty acknowledgment of the
Di­vine Juſtice; a cheerful reſignation of himſelf to God, and a being in Love
and Charity with all the World. But, alas! after he had taken a ſolemn Leave
of his Son, (the Sheriff having immediately before his Execution acquainted
him with his Reprieve) and given him a Charge to be du­tiful to his Mother,
and the like, when he aſcended the Lad­der, inſtead of performing the
Religious Duty I preſs'd him to, inſtead of imploring the Mercy and
Forgiveneſs of God for his great and manifold Tranſgreſſions of the Laws, both
[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=18) Humane
and Divine, and particularly for the Scandalous Life he had led, when being
under the higheſt Obligations to the contrary, as having taken Holy Orders
upon him; inſtead of expreſſing an Univerſal Love and a Catholick Charity, he
did nothing but bitterly inveigh againſt the Law, the Judge, the Jury, the
Witneſs, and againſt the Clerk of Aſſize, for pro­ducing the Records of his
former Trials againſt him. Thus he died in the Pett; thus he expir'd rather in
a Tramport of Rage and Fury, than with a Chriſtian Temper and Diſpoſiti­on:
But as he liv'd, ſo he was reſolv'd to dye; which ſhew'd a ſear'd and an
inſenſate Conſcience, that through the long and cuſtomary practice of
Wickedneſs and Vice, he was grown numb'd, or paſt feeling, that Darkneſs had
vail'd his Underſtan­ding, and that God had juſtly given him the Spirit of
Slumber.

I'm heartily ſorry I can give no better an account, nor a more comfortable
relation of him, though Charity commands to think the beſt, obliges to the
moſt candid and favourable conſtruction.

I pray GOD, that every one by his exemplary Puniſhment may be influenc'd and
perſwaded to follow always that which is Good, ſo to exerciſe themſelves, as
to have always a Conſcience void of Offence both towards God and men; and
particularly all ſuch as are called to any Eccleſiaſtical Office or
Adminiſtration, that they may take heed to do the thing which is Right, that
they may do all to the Glory of God, to the Honour of the Chriſtian Religion,
and to the Reputation of their Holy Fun­ction, by conſtantly living a Life of
Holineſs and Purity: In doing this, they will ſave themſelves and them that
hear them. Amen.

There were Ten Perſons more executed with him, Two for the ſame Treaſon, who
were both convicted by one and the ſame Witneſs R. P. They were Mr. Nicholas
Battersby of the City of York, and Robert Cokeſon of Wakefield Woodſide in the
Pariſh of Wakefield in the County of York, who both de­ny'd the Fact they were
condemn'd for. Cokeſon indeed ſeem­ed [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=19) to have ſome
ſence of God and Religion, and I am confi­dent, if he were to have liv'd,
would have become a new man: And though he abſolutely, to the laſt moment of
his Life, denied the Fact which Preſton laid to his Charge, yet he did not
deny, that he had been a great Clipper; but who accom­modated or furniſhed him
with Money, that he would never in the leaſt declare.

The other Malefactors were;

  * Joanna Moat, for the Murder of her Child.
  * Tho. Langhorn, for the Murder of his Wife.
  * Edward Smith, for Burglary.
  * Ottowell Bocking, for Burglary.
  * Chriſtopher Geldart, for Cloth off the Tenters, and Horſe-ſtealing.
  * Robert Spark, for Horſe-ſtealing.
  * Chr. Jewitt, for Horſe-ſtealing.
  * John Croſland, for burning a Barn.

All of whom, except Two, namely, Langhorn and Bocking, confeſſed themſelves
guilty of the reſpective Crimes they dy'd for, and I hope they were penitent:
They particularly re­commended to the numerous Spectators the ſtrict and holy
Obſervation of the Lord's Day, for they attributed all the Miſchief and Miſery
that befel them to the breaking of the Sab­bath, and told the People, That
when they ſhou'd have been at Church, offering up to God the Sacrifice of
Prayer and Thankſgiving; when they ſhould have been hearing the Do­ctrines of
Religion explained, and the Sins againſt the Laws of it reprehended, they then
were ſpending their precious Time in Rioting and Drunkenneſs, in Chambering
and Wantonneſs, and therefore God had very juſtly ſuffer'd them to fall into
the Temptation of the Devil, and to come to ſuch a ſhameful and ignominious
End. I pray God that the Great Execution at this laſt Aſſizes, that their
Sufferings may excite and oblige all People to the conſtant Practice of
Juſtice and Honeſty, to a religious and ſtrict Obſervance of the Lord's Day,
to reſort to the Temple of the Lord at the Canonical hours of Prayer, there to
preſent their Bodies, a Living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
their reaſonable Service. Amen.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43422&page=19)

[Home](/)

Halley, George, 1655 or 6-1708.. Date: 1691  

