---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Poor Robins character of a Dutch-man as also his predictions on the affairs
of the United Provinces of Holland, together with a brief epitomy of the
ingratitude of the Dutch, and the English at Amboyna, Polaroon and other
islands in the East Indies.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=47098&page=1)

Poor Robins Character of a DUTCH-MAN, As alſo his PREDICTIONS On the affairs
of the ƲNITED PROVINCES OF HOLLAND.

TOGETHER With a brief Epitomy of the Ingratitude of the Dutch, and their
barbarous cruelties committed on the Engliſh at Amboyna, Polaroon, and other
Iſlands in the EAST INDIES.

Tho Savages to Scythian Rocks confin'd,

That know no God nor vertue of the mind,

But only ſence purſue, who hunger tame,

With ſlaughter'd lives they and their food, the ſame

Are not ſo cruel as theſe Men ſo rude

Who do requite Love with Ingratitude.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Harris at the Sign of the Stationers Arms in
Bell-Alley in Cole-man-ſtreet. 1672.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=47098&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=47098&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=47098&page=3)

READER,

THou art deſired to take notice that, that idle Pamphlet Entituled, POOR
ROBINS Collection of Anti­ent Propheſies, was none of his doing nor concern,
but done for profit by ſome other Perſon, and not POOR ROBIN.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. POOR ROBINS Predictions on the affairs of the UNITED PROVINCES. OF HOLLAND.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=47098&page=3)

## 1\. POOR ROBINS Predictions on the affairs of the UNITED PROVINCES. OF
HOLLAND.

EUROPE now being the Stage of Action, whereon Mars ſeems to keep his Court,
and Engliſh men like the Athenians having i [...]ching Ears after News, being
more deſirous to know what is to come, then to rectifie what has been done
amiſs former­ly; and I coming under the Notion of an Aſtrologer or Star-gazer,
and foretelli [...]g as many tru [...]hs in my Predictions as any of my
Brethren A [...]manack-Makers; being th [...]reto perſwaded by many of my
acquain­tance, and yet (to confeſs truth) not without ſome reliſh of profit to
my ſelf; have alſo (amongſt others) adventured to ſhow you my Ju [...]gement
of affairs, knowing, that (with the mouſe) I can eat as far into a Holland
cheeſe as another.

But ſome cavilling Spiri [...]s will be apt enough to ſay, that theſe kind of
Predictions are but meer cheats, that now a dayes, the ſureſt way of
Prophecying is after the thing is come to paſ [...]; that the Stars are not ſo
legib [...]e to an Aſtrologers underſtanding, that out of them he can read
what future events will enſue. This is the opinion of a great many, but to
ſuch Nullifidians, hear what the Divine Du-bartas ſayes,

Senc [...]less is he who (wi [...]hout bluſh) denies

What to ſ [...]u [...]d  [...]c [...] moſt app [...]re [...]lies:

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=47098&page=4)And 'gainſt
experience he that ſpits Fallations,

Is to be hiſt from learned diſputations,

And ſuch is he who doth affirm the Stars

To have no force on theſe Inferiours.

Though Heavens effects we moſt apparent ſee

In number more then Heavenly torches be,

But to come more cloſe to our matter, to ſpeak ſomething of theſe people who
are of late tranſmografied from The Poor diſtreſſed States, to the High and
Mighty Hogen Mogens, that ſcorn to eat Fat Bacon with out Bread and Butter; In
whoſe Bellies (like Barrels) lie many pickled Herrings ſtewed therein with
Brandy; that ſcorn to drink by Retail, but by whole-Sale; whoſe cups are not
in Decimo Sexto but in Folio, whoſe Noſes in the cup in Winter ſaves the
labour of a Toaſt, and is enough to give their drink a ſecond brewing; blind
men with eyes, and Cripples with Legs on,

Who will for fourteen hours together ſit,

Emptying the Bouls of Wine, the Brains of Wit.

Thoſe who have ſeen my Obſervations and Predictions which I made upon the
Blazing Star or Comet that appeared in December, 1662\. may there find what
direful effects I prefaged would enſue thereupon, eſpecially to Zealand,
Holland, and the reſt of the United Provinces, whoſe Tayl tended directly
towards them, for ſuch warnings queſti­onleſs come not in vain; and though we
cannot excuſe our ſelves from many and grievous ſins, yet ſuch monſtrous
ingratitude as the Hol­landers have ſhown to the Engliſh, ſuch bloody and
inhumane butche­ries committed by them againſt us at Amboyna, Polaroon, and
other places in the Eaſt Indies, ſuch inſolencies at Sea, and ingratitude by
Land, muſt needs cry aloud for vengeance.

Ingratitude is a vice ſo accurſt

That of all vices we account it worſt.

I alſo by the Eclipſes which happened in the next Year, told ſome of my
Friends who are now living to juſtifie it, what ſad  [...]ffects they did
portend to that Low-Country, but High-minded people.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=47098&page=4)

For when pale faced Cynthia at Noon dayes

Doth intercept Sol [...] moſt refulgent Rayes,

But ſome great Sta [...]e Eclipſeth and from Hell

Alecto looſes all theſe Furies fell,

Grim lean fac'd Famine, fou [...] infectious Plague,

Blood thirſty War and Treaſon hateful Hag:

Here pouring down Woes Univerſal Flood

To drown the World in Seas of tears and blood.

We read in Aeſop of a Man who found a Snake nigh dead with cold, which he
kindly took home, warm'd and nouriſhed, when growing luſty, inſtead of thanks
it would have devour'd the man. Such are theſe Dutch Low Landers, who near
expiring in the time of Queen E­lizabeth, being ready to give up the Ghoſt,
and turn under Scullars to Charon the Ferry-man, were by the Engliſh kindly
aided and aſſiſted, by whoſe valour they retained their Country, and now being
warm­ed without with good cloaths, and within with Brandy, they ſpurn, kick
and moleſt that Nation, without whoſe aid they had been at this day no Nation
themſelves.

Call me ungrateful Man (ſays the Poet) and call me any thing▪ I was a vice
deteſted even amongſt the Heathens themſelves. The Lyon out of whoſe Foot
Androgeus pulled the Thorn, even that dumb beaſt could have taught them better
manners, for he in requital ſav'd his preſer­ver [...] life; but for man who
ſhould be endued with reaſon above beaſts, to come ſo far behind beaſts in
gratitude, what thing can be more un­reaſonable? Well may we therefore cry out
with Rombus the School­maſter in Sir Philip Sidneys Arcadia.

O Temporibus, O Manoribus.

But to perſwade a Dutch man to thankfulneſs, is almoſt as hard a task as to
diſſwade him from his deareſt delight Brandy, that Liquor which he accounts of
more then the Poets do of Helicon, or the Theſ­pian Spring, and of which if
you refuſe to pledge him, he will preſently be at Snick-a-ſnee, where though
he kill you, they will be ſo far from ſtopping him, that with one voice they
will cry, Lope ſceilum, Lope, which is in Engliſh, Run thief, run, a very fit
appellation for them; for hear how the Poet doth enſtile drunkenneſs▪

Audacious thief, that oft before ones fact,

Steals Man away, and leaves a beaſt in place.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=47098&page=5)And ſo much
are they adicted to that ſwiniſh vice of drunken [...]eſs, that not only whole
nights are conſumed by them; but in their Cups they will alſo conſult of
matters of State▪ a cuſtome which the o [...]d Grecians uſed; but more
temperately, for thus in Homers Il [...]a [...] we find Neſtor adviſing Again
[...]mn [...]n.

Phoebe convivium ſenibus, deret te, nec inderens eſt:

Plena tibi vimo tentoria, quod names achivorum.

Quotidianae ex Thracia per latum po [...]tum advehunt.

Omnis tibi eſt comm [...]ditas excipiendi, multiſque impe [...]as,

Multis autem congregatis, illi obdies qui op [...]mum.

Conſilium conſulerit. Lib. 1.

Feaſt thou the antient, it befits thy place,

With Wine by Greek Ships daily brought from Thrace.

Thy Tents abound, Proviſ [...]on at hand,

Of all ſorts haſt thou, and Men at c [...]mmand.

Many aſſembled ſo, am [...]ngſt the  [...]eſt,

His cou [...]ſel follow that a viſeth beſt.

This their ſo great inebriation cauſed as I co [...]ceive our Eng [...]iſh
Proverb when they ſee a Man fudled, to ſay he is as drunk as a Dutch-man; well
may we therefore conclude of theſe Men who are ſo given to ſtagger, that they
are near falling; and then th [...]ſe Water Rats who in adverſity creep and
fawn like Spaniels, and in proſperity ſcorn and  [...]lifie their ſuperiors,
may be reduced from la [...]di [...]g fat b [...]con when they feed on it with
butter, to be fair and mannerly, and eat Bread with their Pudding,

It is ſaid of an Engliſh Man, that by two things he may be known whereſoever
he comes; The one is, that let the weather be never ſo hot, he will endeavor
to get towards the Chimney at co [...]ner; and hi [...] ſ [...] ­cond
Character tells us, that when he hears the Cl [...]ck ſtrike, upon the firſt
ſtroke, he asks him that is next him▪ what is it a Clock? He has not the
patience to tell it himſelf, whereby he might know, but by his inquiſitiveneſs
hinders the other alſo from telling it, by which means they both remain
ignorant; Theſe are two harmleſs things which often in Jeſt I have heard
ſpoken of our Nation. Now there is alſo two things whereby a D [...]tch Man
may be known, The firſt is, that tell him of any benefi [...] received, and he
hath the art of forgetfulneſs [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=47098&page=5) at his Fingers
ends; and for the ſecond, that when he riſes in a mor­ning, the firſt word
that comes out of his mouth is to ask for brandy; and I have alſo heard it (I
ſuppoſe Jeſtingly) ſpoken, that when the Women wean their Children, they only
take a Sucking bottle and fill it full of brandy, of which when the Child hath
once taſted, he never regards his Mothers milk afterwards.

A Dutch Man is like an O [...]er, that lives partly on the Water, partly on
the Land, and gets Preys upon both, all is Fiſh that comes to Net; and as when
living he commonly feeds upon Fiſhes, ſo when dead the Fiſ [...]e [...]
commonly feed upon him; for though  [...]e may eſcape St.  [...]homas a
Waterings, yet for the moſt part he makes his exit at Sea, when for to ſave
the charges of a Grave he is thrown into the Water, where one Shark devours
another.

Stra [...]ge thing in Nature ' [...]is if you i [...] heed

That one Shark ſhould upon another feed,

Hogs will not feed on Hog [...], neither yet will

The Wolves eat Wolves, nor ſeek their blood to ſpill;

But O a Dutch Man he is dainty Mea [...],

And dreſs in pickle fit for Sharks to eat.

A Dutch Man in his great breeches is like to the picture I have ſeen of Some
body, and ſuch he would feign accounted to be. He keeps a buſt [...]e in the
world, drinks, ſlavers, and when he is a hungry offers up his devotions to a
pickled Herring, which he will maintain by nine [...]een ſeverall arguments,
to be the rareſt diſh in the world, and his chiefeſt argument is, becauſe it
is a Shooing horn to draw down drink. He is very curious to keep his ſhoes
clean, yet had rather foul a Room by vomiting, then to be bated one ace of his
beloved Liquor. In ſum, when ſleep had a little revived him of the Staggers,
he looks like a toaſt drown'd in ale, which is only fit to be thrown away.

He is Judged to be very chaſt, and the reaſon is, ſhe muſt be very mercinary
indeed that will admit him to her imbraces, yet ſuch trading may be, becauſe
thoſe people deal for ready money, and ſhould ſhe do a courteſie for a Dutch
Man he would not thank her for it, though perhaps he might have cauſe to
remember her in his bones.

But to draw towards a concluſion of the Character of a Dutch Man, leaſt we
beſtow more coſt of the ſauce then the Meat is worth. I ſhall only add a word
or two of exhortation to thoſe Sons of Neptune and [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=47098&page=6) Bellena, our
Gallant Sea-men, and ſo finiſh at this tim [...].

Brave Martial Spirits, whoſe valour the world admires and dreads; you are now
entring on the Theatre of honour and renown, fighting for your King and
Country, then which no cauſe whatſoever more juſt and glorious, victorious
fame attend [...] your undertakings, in ſo juſt, ſo laudable, ſo honourable an
enterprize. Dread not thoſe Men whoſe high ingratitude hath juſtly made them
odious to all ſorts of People who have but the leaſt pretenſions to honeſty.
Go on brave­ly, fight valiantly, and never fear but to come off victoriouſly.

Then ſhall the Chronicles record your Names,

With laſting Honour and your ſplendid Fames,

Shall ever live, who for your Countries good,

So bravely and undauntedly have ſtood.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=47098&page=6)

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1672  

