---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# A second manuduction, for Mr. Robinson. Or a confirmation of the former, in
an ansvver to his manumission

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=1)

A SECOND MANVDVCTION, For Mr. ROBINSON.

Or a confirmation of the former, in an ansvver to his manumission.

ANNO DOMINI. M. D C. XV.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. A Second Manuduction For Mr. ROBINSON, Or a confirmation of the former, in an ansvver to his manumission.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=2)

## 1\. A Second Manuduction For Mr. ROBINSON, Or a confirmation of the former,
in an ansvver to his manumission.

IT is not much to bee merveiled at,Sec. 1. if one assay praevaileth not with
him for publick communion, whoe was so hardly drawen unto pri­vat, by many &
long strivings. Wee may rather ho­pe, that in time, he wil bee brought, to see
reasō for that as wel as for this. The successe beeing left unto God: I
thinck it a Christian part, to stretch out a litle & strengthen that hand
which before was lent him for a manuduction. First then must bee marked, how
farr M. R. is come already: and then the points that hee stayeth at, with the
grounds of that his stay. He gran­teth;Manumis p. 3. If a man (remayning a
member in some parish of England) intending the ministerie, & competently
qualified therto, having approbation of godly & learned men, shall, vvithout
any further calling, for a time, performe the actions of prayer &
prophefijing, by leave in a publick assembly there, that it is lavvfull to
communicate vvith him in that vvork. And moreover, that if the same man shall
continue in that course for some yeares, not having any further vvarant, but
the seal vvhich God setteth to his labour in the fruight [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=3) of it, & the
consent of those people vvhich repaire unto him for instruction; it is
lavvfull, still to have communion vvith him. All this he acknowledgeth (though
not in so plaine a māner as ingenuous dealing requireth) in calling of it
privat.

This grant of M. R. is of no small moment in the consequence of it. For by
vertue therof, those of his minde, may bee present at ma­ny sermons in England
upon occasion, not onely to the spiritual comfort & aedification of their
soules, but also to the avoyding of much danger & damage in their outward
estate. For of this kinde are a multitude of religious exercises ordinarilie
performed by stu­dents in the colledges of both the universities, whoe are
wonte in their colledge chappels to make trial of their giftes though they be
not ordeyned ministers; & not onely there, but in such assemblies of the
countrie as they haue oportunitie. Some also haue been knowen to continue
long, even for 20 yeeres together, in preaching by no other warrant then this:
as by name, M. Flood of Northampton, & M. Marburie. By the same reason it will
follow also (as by & by wee shall see) that communion may bee had in the like
actions of those which have further authoritie: for this communion is of
publick nature & a church action, & so for substance, of one reason with the
other.

That this doeth follow upon the former grant, if so bee that such exercises of
religion bee publick actions, M. R. doeth well under­stand: & therfore to
avoyd that which he is loth to acknowledge, he denieth such actions to bee of
publick nature. To this purpose he in­sinuateth 2 reasons. 1. Becaus a privat
action may bee performed in a pu­blick place, as a publick may in a privat:
and 2 because no action is publick, that is not performed by publick calling
or authoritie. The former of which I willingly grant: and therfore made no
such mention of the place, as if it were of it self sufficient to make these
exercises publick. The second I doe flatly denie until I see that reason which
(as he sayth without any further proofe) doeth of it self teach it. For this
purpose he willeth the reader to see Mr. Perkins in treatise of christian
equity; where nothing is to be found that perteyneth unto this purpose. For
there Mr. P. speaketh onely of such publick actiōs, as are usually cal­led
actions of lavv, wherin publick justice is quaestioned, the mitigation [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=3) wherof perteyneth
unto that christian equitie which there is hand­led: such as execution of
penall statutes, suing of bondes, taking for­feitures & fines are. If he would
know Mr. Perkins his judgement about this point, let him see to the purpose
his treatise of divine or religious worship (the thing that now is in hand)
where he shall find this description, church service is that vvhich is
performed publickly in the congregation of the people of God. But leaving his
testimonie, let us search a litle after that reason which Maister Robinson
telleth us will teach us what actions are publick. Publick is as much as
peoplelick because that which is not restreined unto one or a few,Publicus
quasi po­pulicus. but extended as commune to a people eyther civill or
ecclesia­sticall, that is peoplelick or publick. Thus some actions doen first
in privat, and after extending to the knowledge of the people, become therby
publick scandals, though the actors of them haue no publick calling or
authoritie for doeing of them. Much more, are those actions to bee esteemed
publick, which are performed in a pu­blick place, extending to the praesent
knowledge or use of the peo­ple, & so intēded, whether they bee good or evil
in which respect no mā cā denie the prophecies of Zedekiach & other his
fellowes 2 Crō. 18. to have beē as publick as that of Michaia, though hee
onely & not they had lawfull calling or authoritie for that action. Those
exercises of religion which are ordinarily used in the seperat assemblies,
called prophecijngs, wherein prayers are offered up in the name of all the
people, & the word interpreted unto all, they are I think esteemed publick by
them selves: sure I am they are so, however they bee estee­med: yet the actors
in those businesses have no special set calling or authoritie for that they
doe. In the time of VVickliffe, when many that receyved light of truth from
him did upon al occasions publish the same unto others eyther in churches or
churchyards, or else in markets, faires, & such like open assemblies, though
they did it with­out licence of the ordinaries, or other sufficient authoritie
of that kinde, yet they are sayd to preach publikely. It is the phraze of king
Richards letters against them, as is to bee seene in M. foxe, p. 406. Like
phraze is used in like case, by all that write or speake therof. So that both
by reason & custome, & all good rule of speech, it is manifest, that these
exercises of religion which M. R. granteth lawfull are pu­blick [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=4) actions: and so,
that not onely privat, but also publick com­munion is by his owne confession,
lawfull in the parish assemblies of England.

S. 2.THus farr then wee haue Mr. R. consenting. Now at the third de­mād, hee
maketh a stād: but with such oppositiō as will not stand. The demand was of
the same mā, whoe formerly did lawfully preach in a publick assemblie, if hee
should obteyne a licence from the L. By­shop of the diocesse, without any
unlawfull condition for to conti­nue in that his course, whether that leave or
licence given doeth pol­lute the actions, seeing a man may ask leave of the
great Turk, to preach the gospell within his dominions? His answer is, that
the very obteyning & receyving of such a licence is unlavvfull: because it is
a reall ac­knovvledgement, that such a Byshop hath a lavvfull povver to grant
it. Which is neyther so nor so: for. 1. The asking & receyving of leave or
licence (which are both one) doeth not allways implie an acknow­ledgement of
his lawful authoritie from whome it is sought. If any man of violence shall
usurpe a power to him self, of permitting or hindering the lawful & good
offices that pertaine unto honest men, so that without his licence a man could
not buy or sell, or teach any science or trade of life; if an honest man whome
these duties concer­ne, should in that case take a licence from that usurper
(though hee were no better then a strong theif) no reasonable man will say,
that in so doeing he did acknowledge such usurped power lawful. The ru­lers of
Iewish synagoges had no lawfull power over the Apostles of Christ in any part
of their ministerie, neyther would Paul ever ac­knowledge so much: yet hee &
Barnabas accepted of such licence or leave from them sometime as they did
usually grant unto those that acknowledged them selves lawfully subject to
their authoritie. See an example act. 13.15. Mr. R. him self hath granted in
the first demand that a man may preach by leave in a parochiall assemblie:
which leave must bee given by the parochiall minister & church­wardens, whose
authoritie hee holdeth one with the Bishops. If ther­fore leave or licence
(whether in word or writing, that is all one) may be lawfully taken from them,
without acknowledging any au­thoritie lawfull which is unlawfull, why not from
the Byshop? 2. There is some authoritie in the Bishops derived from the king
which [[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=4) may
bee acknowledged lawfull. Such is this of giving licence, liber­tie & civill
authoritie for men to doe good. The civill magistrat may doe it him self; or
appoint others to doe it 2 chro. 17.7. The abuse of this authoritie doeth not
make it unlawfull.

But Iohn Claydon (sayth Mr. R.) a martyr of Christ vvas othervvise minded,
vvhen he vvitnessed, that the Byshops licence to preach the vvord of God vvas
the true character of the beast. Which testimonie is found in deed in the book
of martyrs, p. 588. But 1. It is not Iohn Cley­dons, but found in a book
wherof hee was the owner but not the author: for hee could neyther write nor
read. 2. Whosoever was the author, the meaning was, that in regard of the
conditions required by those Byshops, & the persons that usually obteyned
their appro­bation, licences might be helde as a note of one that followed the
beast of Rome: though those conditions beeing removed, ther was no such
wickednesse in the bare licence. This meaning may bee ga­thered out of the
answer of William Thorp, whoe may probablie be judged the author of that
treatise wherin this testimonie was found. For concerning the Byshops licence,
hee rendereth a iust reason why the godly preachers in those days did not
seeke them p. 492. In this his speach to the archbyshop. Sir, as touching your
letters of licence, or other Byshops, vvhich yee say vvee should have to
vvitnesse that vvee vvere able to bee sent for to preach: vvee knovv vvel,
that neyther yovv sir, nor any other Byshop of this land, vvill grant to us
any such letters of licence, but if vvee should oblige us to yovv, & to other
Byshops by unlavvfull othes, not to passe the bounds & termes vvhich yee sir
vvith other Byshops vvil limit to us. And since in this matter your termes bee
some too large & some too strait: vvee dare not oblige us thus to bee bounde
to you for to keepe the termes vvhich yovv vvill limit, as yovv doe to friers
& such other preachers.

3\. If one good martyr out of zeal had given that testimonie in such a sense
as Mr. R. wil haue it understood in, yet the generall con­sent of almost (if
not absolutely) al the other martyrs beeing otherwi­se, as is wel knowen to
such as have read their stories, this one of it self could work no great
praejudice.

This for the answer directly applied unto the demand. Vnto the comparative
reason annexed, that a man may ask leaue of the great Turk to preach the
gospell within his dominions, he opposeth 2 [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=5) things. 1. A
difference betwixt leave & licence, that to ask leaue is to desire one not to
hinder him: but to obteine a licence of the Byshop, is to obteine publique
authoritie of the publique officer, & according to the pu­blique lavves of the
church, to exercise a publique ministerie. 2\. That the great Turk is a
lavvfull civill magistrat vvith vvhose civill authoritie it is lavvfull to
partake: But so is not the Byshop a lavvfull ecclesiasticall officer, vvith
vvhose spirituall iurisdiction gods servants may communicate. In all which
ther is not one sound sentence. For 1. What difference soever he may imagine
betwixt leave & licence, my meaning was, that it was lawfull to obteine a
licence of the Turk for to preach the gospell in his Dominions.

2\. Leave from one that is in authoritie, so as he that hath it shalbe
hindered of none subject unto that authoritie, is a licēce with autho­ritie.
So that the difference betwixt leave & licence, insinuated by him must consist
onely in the great sound of the word publique so oftē re­peated in vaine,
publique authoritie, publique officer, publique lavves, pu­blique ministerie:
Which how idle it is, hath formerly been shewed. 3. He that hath a Byshops
licence & orders too, hath no such authori­tie actuall conferred upon him
therby, but that hee may bee hinde­red many ways, even by those that are
subiect unto the Byshop, from ever exercising that wherto he hath licence so
that in this respect, ther seemeth not so much as full & perfect leave to bee
conteyned in a Byshops licence. 4. That the Turk is a lawful magistrat, it
would trouble Mr. R. to prove. 5. The Byshop hath some jurisdiction exer­cised
about spiritual causes, which may lawfully bee communicated with. 6. And
lastly, though all this were so as Mr. R. sayth, that it were unlawfull for to
seek or take such a licence of a Byshop, yet it doeth not follow, but it might
be lawfull to communicat with him that hath taken it: especially seeing it was
lawful before, and the man doeth & hath all good that he did or had before,
onely with this dif­ference, that he doeth that with licence of the Byshop
which he did before with his connivence. So that this demand remaineth
unan­swered: which was not made of the getting of licence, but of
com­municating with him that had gotten one.

Which communion can be no more unlawfull, then that which schollers haue with
a schoolmaister, who hath takē a Bishops licēce [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=5) (according as many
are urged to doe) from the same Bishop: or that which subiects haue had with
their lawfull king sometime when he was crowned or set up by the Pope.

THe 4. Demand was concerning a man that hath taken that forme of admission
which is called orders of the diocessan,Sec. 3. not knowing any evill in it,
whether such a fault, if it bee a fault, doeth pollute that communion with him
which other­wise is lawfull? that it doeth not Mr. R. seemeth to witnesse in
his former treatise p. 15. For this he referreth the reader unto that an­swer
which he gave to the former demand: and so doe I to the refu­tatiō of it.
Wheras he addeth, that his testimonie is misaplied, because his meaning was,
that a humaine infirmitie about an externall ordi­nance doeth not hinder from
communion in actions performed meerely by personall grace; I answer, that it
is possible for a man which hath such orders, to performe the actions of
prayer & preac­hing even in a publick place, meerly by vertue of the personal
grace & gifts which God hath endued him with all. Especially this man of whom
heere we speak, who yet hath no speciall state or reference by office unto
those that communicate with him in the word & prayer. The reason therfore is
one and the same, in this case, & that which Mr. R. speaketh of.

THe fift quaestion was of a man that being desired, & so cho­sen by some
assembly wherin there are many fearing God apparently, he taketh a pastoral
charge of them,Sec. 4. hauing the Byshops & patrons admission, but cheifly
grounding his cal­ling upon the peoples choyse, and that he doe nothing but
the same he did before, besides the administration of the sacraments to such
as are in charitie & discretion to bee esteemed worthy, what hinde­reth from
communion heer? To this a four fould answer is given in shew, though none in
deed. 1. Hee denieth an assembly gathered & con­sisting of many fearing God, &
many vvithout the fear of God, to bee a lavvfull church assemblie, hauing
right in communion to call & enjoy a Pa­stor. But the question was made of an
assembly wherin are many fea­ring God apparently, without his supplie of many
not fearing God, [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=6) though with them
ther may be mingled some which give not such apparent evidence of Gods grace
to be in them, but rather praesump­tions of the contrarie. Will Mr. R, denie
the title of a true church un­to all assemblies that haue some such amongest
them? then must hee condemne most rashly not onely a multitude of praesent
churches (Dutch & Frēch) but those of Corinth, Galatia, Pergamus, Thyatira,
Sardis, & Laodicea also, of which the Apostles & Christ him self ga­ve other
judgement. 2. He telleth us, that none can truely take a pastoral charge in
the Parish assemblies: because he cannot governe or rule the flock. But first,
a man may truely take upon him that which he cannot fully & in every part
performe or fullfill, desiring & endeavoring so farr as his knowledge &
abilitie extendeth. Otherwise, no high Preist in Israel from the time of
Salomon unto the time of Hezekia did truely take upon them the charge of a
high preist: because none did cele­brat the passouer which was a principall
sacrament, in such sort as was writtē. 2. Cron. 30.5.26. Nor keepe the feast
of tabernacles in a far lōger time. Nehem. 8.17. Nor did any king al that
time truly take upon him the charge or office of a king: because none did
reforme things as he ought. If any difference bee, their sinne was greater,
that might haue doē their duty & would not, then theirs that would & cannot.
Secondly, the meere want of performing one part of the charge, doeth not
hinder but that a man may well communicat in the other parts, which are well
undertaken & discharged also. 3. He addeth, that the church of Englād
acknovvledgeth no such calling as is chei­fly grounded on the peoples choyce.
Such private intendimēts & underhand professions of particular persons in
secret, are cloaks of shame & craftines­se, like unto disguised familisme. And
if any ministerie bee so grovnded, it is not the ministerie of the church of
England. But what that church of England alloweth which he understandeth by
this title, it maketh no­thing to the quaestion. It is enough if such a
calling bee in some as­semblies of England. Yet for a minister to lay the
cheif ground of his calling upon the peoples choice, so that he haue withall
those for­mallities required, I know no law in England that doeth forbid or
disallow it. Ther is therfore no necessitie for him that doeth so, to speak of
it in secret onely: hee may professe it in the pulpit, as many haue been
knowen to doe, & yet bee a minister of a church establi­shed [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=6) by the law of
England. Neyther is that after consent by accep­tance & submission which Mr.
R. speaketh of so slight a matter for this purpose as he would make it. For as
in wedlock, the after con­sent of parents or parties doeth often make that a
lawfull state of mariage which before & without that was none: & in
governement, acceptance & submission doeth make him a king which before was a
tyrant, though in their nature these actions bee rather consequen­ces then
causes of that calling, so is it betwixt minister & people. All the wind that
he spendeth therfore in this answer, is but a venting of his praejudiciall
passions. The quaestion it self he secretly granteth, in making a ministerie
grounded on the peoples choyce to bee no mi­nisterie of the church of England:
insinuating therby, that with such a ministerie he cannot say but communion is
lawfull. Now that ther is such a ministerie to be found in England, as it is
manifest in diver­se places, so he him self doeth as much as witnesse it in
the next page, where he affirmeth that in sundry places the people are ready
to suf­fer persecution with their ministers.Pag. 7. For if the lifting up of a
hand in tokē of consent be a choosing, a cōsent declared by such fruights
must needes implie no lesse.

4\. He excepteth against baptizing of all infants borne in the Pa­rish. But
(to absteine from by controversies) it shall suffice for that, that other
churches doe extend the use of that sacrament to as great largenes as England
doeth, with whome not withstanding Mr. R. wil not denie all communion publick.

The 6 quaestion was of a deprived & silenced minister, why a man should not
hear him when he preacheth? Mr. R. after a censorious note or two passed upon
such ministers, giveth for answer, that such a man remayning still a minister
of the church of England, & preaching by that calling, cannot bee communicated
vvith, vvithout submission unto and upholding of the prelats antichristian
authoritie, vvhich in that vvork hee exerciseth. Which is a conceyt past
commune apprehension. That hee which by the prelat, the prelats cannons, & all
that his authoritie can make, is forbidden to preach, often times
excommunicated also by him, and all this for witnessing against his usurped
authoritie, should in performing that duty, which also he did law fully before
he recey­ved any commission from any prelat, not onely exercise the prelats
[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=7)
authoritie, but so exercise it, that no christian man may bee present therat,
without actuall submission to antichristian power. I can say no more, but let
him that readeth give judgement.

To the 7 & last demand, which was of one that thorough infirmi­tie admitteth
of some corruptions in the exercise of his ministerie, he answereth nothing of
momēt, but what was examined before, & therfore need not a several triall.

Sec. 5.THus much for maintenance of the arguments implied in the foresayd
quaeres. Wherin also those barrs are now removed which were by Mr. R. opposed
before in generall, & now as wee haue seen, particularly applied. Yet further
some what to pursue the matter, it may bee a defense of that which is sayd
allready. The principall & in deed the onely ground of opposition was layd by
him in this, that such a Parishionall minister is a branch of the prelacie, as
receyving povver from it, by vvhich it doeth administer. My answer was by
deniall, with this distinction, that a parishionall minister as I formerly
described had power of right unto his mini­stery before ever he had to doe
with the prelat, though a power of externall legall abilitie, he may bee sayd
to receyve from the prelat in part. When I sayd he had nothing to doe with the
prelat before he had gotten right, my meaning was, that he had not to do about
that pastorall charge.

Yet wee may suppose him also not to haue proceeded by such de­grees as were
formerly for argumēt sake set in ranke, but first to have dealt with the
people or been dealt with by them, having never seen any prelat in all his
life, or as good as not seen him. To come then to the poynt, his answer is,
that no parish assemblies haue povver of right to choose their ministers.
Wheras on the contrarie it is most evident that every congregatiō of
christians hath right unto this thing from Christ him self so inseparablie
annexed unto it, that no externall op­pression by others, or abuse of their
owne cā possiblie deprive them of this right, so long as they remaine a
christian assemblie or congre­gation. Suppose they bee in externall bondage, &
that in some sense spirituall, yet no matter of fact can take away right,
while they abide such as Christ hath given that right unto.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=7)The whol
case may be cleared in this example, two single persons agree on mariage
betwixt themselves, with allowance of parents, & haue by vertue of that
cōtract, mutual right one in other, yet the lawes of the place where they
live hauing ordered that none shall be held for married persons without
certain formes which they appoint, they haue not externall legall povver or
libertie one in the other, before such rites be performed. Even so standes the
matter betwixt minister & people in Englād, they agreeing or cōtracting
betwixt them selves have right one in other: but externall legall power or
libertie they must receyve from others. Another example also I would haue
con­sidered, the emperor sometime was so subiect unto the pope that he had not
liberty of emperiall rule untill he receyved his crowne from Rome: yet was the
emperor then no proper part of the papacie, nor did he take his right from the
pope, neyther did those that submitted unto him, therin communicat with the
popes authoritie. So is this in hand. If Mr. R. will shutt his eyes against
the light I cannot make him see the difference that is betwixt these two
powers.

OVt of Mr. R. his owne grounds there were certain assertions observed,Sec. 6.
which shew that the power of preaching which ministers in England doe exercise
professing that to be their main office, is not properly a part of the prelats
po­wer. The first was, that the office of the prelats is founded on their
usurpation of the churches rights in calling of officers & censuring of
offenders: power therfore of preaching can bee no part of it. To which first
he answereth, that that vvhich I admitt in his affirmation hath enough in it
to ouerthrovv my consequence: for if it belong to the pre­lats to cal
ministers & that in calling them they giue thē povver & authori­tie to
preach, then it follovveth undeniablie, that those ministers thus preac­hing,
doe therein exercise the prelats povver. And if unto this bee added such an
aestimation of all the ecclesiasticall state in England as he cō ­ceyteth, &
would haue others to take for granted, then he sayth all wil follow that he
desires. Onely he disliketh, that diligent preaching should be accounted the
ministers mayn office: because that in abstract­ed notions, it is rather a
work then an office, & such a work as may bee performed by Apostles, or others
that are no pastors, & therfore [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=8) as he full wisely
concludeth, it cannot bee the pastors office maine or mean. Secondly he
descants upon the word founded, affirming that men may haue povver to doe more
then they very thinges upon vvhich their office is founded &c. But 1. A man
may take an argument from that which he doeth not with consent admit. And so
did I in using his assertion concerning the Byshops authoritie in calling of
ministers: never granting (as former passages doe sufficiently witnesse) that
all autho­ritie of calling them resteth in the prelat. 2. A man may bee in
some sort called by another to exercise some power which is not his that so
called him. As when a physitian is called by the civil magistrat or by a
Bishop to exercise such art as he hath, amōg the people that are ruled by
him. For no man I think will say that such a phxsitian in gi­ving of a potion
doeth exercise a kingly or an episcopall power. So likewise is the case of a
schoolmaister set in place by a Bishops licen­ce & authoritie: in teaching of
grammar, he doeth not exercise the power of a Byshop. 3. Though in strictnes
of distinction, an office dissereth, from the vvork of it, yet Mr. R. I hope
will give us leave to follow in phraze of speach the custome of speakers &
writers, whoe doe usually call that work mens office wherto by office they are
se­perated, Especially seeing the Apostle Paul himself doeth call the offi­ce
of a Byshop a vvorke. 1\. tim. 3.1. And the work of ministrie, a ministerie.
Rom. 12.7. But it seemeth he doeth not esteeme preaching any proper work of a
pastors office, because Apostles & others may doe it. As if the apostles &
ordinarie pastors had not one generall office, because they haue not the same
in speciall; or that one man may not be tied by office unto a work which
another also hath li­bertie by oceasion to doe without such a speciall office.
As if it were not a deacons office to distribute unto the poore, becaus others
may doe so.

4\. His strict acception of the work founded cā neyther stād with his other
interpretation of the word office nor with that sentence wher­to it belongeth.
For a prelats office or state is in nature before that u­surpation he speaketh
of, & not founded upon it. Neyther is the quae­stion, whether prelats haue
power to preach or no, nor yet whether that be in the strictest sense a
foundation of their office, but whether their office, doeth so conteyne that
as a part of it, as that, whosoever [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=8) preacheth with in
their diocesse, must needes execute a part of their office or power?

A Second assertion wherof use was made in the manuduction was,Sec. 7.
preaching is no naturall or necessarie part of the parochiall ministers
office. Concerning this sentence, Mr. R. complay­neth first that it was by me
unjustly reproched, & secondly, that my inference upon it is of no force.
Reproch it I did not, but so reprove it as it was worthy: wondering much at
the shamelessnesse of it. Now I doe much lesse merveyl at it then I did
before: seeing that which he heere affirmeth of the parochiall minister, he
doeth as boldly affirme of all ministers & true pastors, viz: preaching is not
the pastors office, eyther main or mean. I doe rather merveyl, that he should
cast that upon parochiall ministers for a crime, which he maketh to be the
case of all true pastors. Yet for the reproof I used, it was deser­ved. I
saye, it was an intemperat speech, proceeding from an impo­tent sicknesse of
mind: that is, an unreasodable assertion arising out of passion or
perturbation. My reason annexed was, because he can find marijng, churching,
burijng among the naturall or necessarie parts of this ministrie, things not
mentioned in the ordination: but cannot find preaching any part, though it be
expressely mētioned, & that as a mayn part. Whoe doeth not see, that such
partiall dealing doeth proceed from passion? the force of this argument thus
couc­hed in that comparison, Mr. R. observing wil take no knowledge of, but
frameth another, which he thought he could answer: and simply proproundeth my
reason to bee, that preaching the word is expresly mentioned in the
ordination: & therfore a naturall & necessarie part of the parochiall
ministers office. Though this I neyther sayd nor meant, yet if it bee rightly
understood, viz: that preaching of the word is mentioned as the principall
work to which he is ordeyned, the argument is good & sound: & the objections
which Mr. R. hath brought against it, are but as the raising of a litle dust
unto the clea­renes of a shining light. It is mentioned also in the ordination
of a mas­preist: But is not mentioned as the cheif work wherunto he is
conce­crated: sacrifizing for quick & dead is the maine. Yet according to the
intention of those which first framed that forme of ordination, [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=9) it is manifestly
the office of him that is so ordeyned, to preach the word of God. So also is
ministring the discipline of Christ as the Lord hath commanded, expresly
mentioned. So is it also a part of his office, though he be not now permitted
to performe it, according as he should. The Bishop also expressely bids his
ordeyned one, receive the H. Ghost: doeth he therfore so receyve it? most
trifling. Is this the quaestion now, whether the ordeyned one receyveth every
thing that he is bidden receyve? or doe those words any ways import an office
of such receyving? The greatest part of the ministers vvant abilitie of
preaching, therfore it cannot be a naturall or necessarie part of their
office. So did the greatest part of the preists & levites in the days of
Ieremie, & the other prophets: was it therfor no naturall or necessarie part
of their office? But the publique lavves doe approve of their inabilitie to
preach, by appointing ho­milies to be read by them. It is a publick slander to
say so, when as in the very preface to those homilies, the appointers of them
doe de­clare, that their intent was not to approve such unsufficiencie, but to
make some kind of supplie for that which was wanting in such men toward the
performance of their office, and that for a time onely, while better provision
might be made. Wherby also it is manifest, that it is not law, but pretense &
abuse of law that continnueth such blots in so many assemblies.

This of the speach reproved: now for the inference deduced out of it. Which
was, that if preaching be no naturall part of such a mini­sters office, then
he in preaching doeth not exercise any power re­ceyved from the prelat:
neyther doeth he that cōmunicates with him in that action of preaching,
therby communicat with him in any cor­rupt office of prelacie, or preisthood
receyved from it. Wherunto Mr. R. answereth, that though it bee not a naturall
& necessarie part or vvork of his office, yet is it a casuall & arbitrary part
or vvork, vvhich vvhen it is doen, proceedeth from the same povver vvith those
that are naturall, that is, from the authoritie of the prelate. But whoe doeth
not see how casuall & arbitrarie the answers of this man are? Sometime
preac­hing is no office of the ministers, neither main nor mean, as we heard
before: sometime it is a part, but not naturall or necessarie. And whe­re did
he learn (I wonder) to distinguish the parts of any thing into naturall &
preternaturall, necessarie & casuall? that which is preter-naturall [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=9) to a wholl is no
part of it, neyther is ther any part which is not in some degree necessarie.
The duety of preaching may bee a na­turall & necessarie part of the ministers
office: though the work of it be not so necessarily urged, as the office doeth
require. That the work also is made no more necessarie, it ariseth not from
the nature of the office, but from the corruption of the officers.

A Third assertion of Mr. R. applied unto the former purpose, was that the root
beeing plucked up, the branch cannot survive:Sec. 8. for the prelacie being
plucked up, the parochiall ministerie might stand stil, in al the substantiall
parts of it: as reason wil teach any man that considereth without passion, and
experience also sheweth in many parts of Germanie. Therfor the parochial
ministerie can bee no proper branch of the prelacie. For answer heerunto,
first, he denieth & merveyleth that I vvould affirme, the same parochiall
office & povver of ministerie to remaine in any churches of Germanie that vvas
in use vvhen prelats vvere there in time of poperie, vvhich vvas mas-
preisthood. But 1. It was not affirmed, that the ministerie there doeth
remaine the same with that which was there before: but the same for sub­stance
with that which is Englād though we haue prelats & they ha­ue none. The truth
of which is evident unto all that haue any know­ledge of the state of those
churches.

2\. If the removing of the masse & the reference of preisthood unto it, doeth
necessarily inferr a change of the ministeriall function, (as this answer
importeth) why then doth Mr. R. so much forget himself, in affirming that the
office of a masse preist & of a parochial mi­nister is one & the same?

And for the poynt: the reasons by Mr. R. alledged (to prove that the parochial
ministerie cannot stand in all the substantiall parts of it if the prelacie be
taken away) are so frivolous & voyd of substance, that if passion & praejudice
be taken away, they cannot possibly stād. 1. All the ministers are made &
appoynted by the Bishops: if therfore the Bishops be taken avvay, hovv can the
ministers remayne the same? take avvay the correlative & relation ceaseth.

Trew, the relation ceaseth, But is that externall relation unto an efficient
cause any part of the substance or essence of [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=10) the ministerie?
I had thought that the substance & essence of a thing had consisted in matter
& forme, & not in such externall relations. Mariages are also made (as Mr. R.
affirmeth) by Bishops authoritie: take away Bishops therfore & by this reason
the mariages shall not remayne the same for substance which they are now.
Licences for teaching school & in many places for practizing of physick are
gi­ven by the Bishops & their officers: take away the Bishops, & may not the
same schoolmasters & physitians yet stil remayn (for substāce) that were
before? Fie upon sophistrie.

2\. Take avvay the prelacie (sayth Mr. R.) and hovv can such a mini­sterie
continue, vvherof one part (viz: ruling) shall bee usurped by the prelat? As
if when once that power is taken from the minister, it now ap­perteyned to the
substance of his ministery, by whome it were usur­ped, whether he that
possessed it were a Byshop, or a high commis­sioner, or of some other place!
that which is without a thing may be changed without any substantiall change
of the thing it self: else how can Mr. R. say that eyther the function of
masspreists, or of Popish Byshops doe remaine still in England as of olde for
substance, when ther is so great an alteration in that supreme power from
whence of olde they were derived? The office of a king also, it remayneth the
same for substance now, that it was in time of poperie, for the substantiall
parts of it: yet one part therof was in those times usurped & possessed by the
pope, & is now restored to the crowne, viz: power over ecclesiasticall
persons, & in ecclesiasticall causes. It cannot ther­fore be denied, but by
the same reasō, the parochial ministery should abide the same for substance
that now it is, thovgh that part which is now usurped by Byshops should be
restored againe. So that Bishops being removed, whether that power of ruling
should be translated unto some other officers, or setled in the ministers as
it ought, Mr. R. argument hath by neyther way any waight or force at all.

3\. Take avvay (sayth he) the provinc: & diocesan churches & prelats, the
parochiall churches & ministers, as partes of them, must fall also. As partes
of them in deed they must of necessitie fall: that is, they must cease to be
partes of them: but it doeth not therfore follow, that any thing of their
internall substance should fall. The nationall church of England, & so the
provincial & diocesan did once stand members, or [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=10) partes of the
oecumenicall papall church of Rome: now that is re­moved out of England, so
farr at least, that this nationall church is not subiect unto Rome, nor
dependant on it, or conteyned in it as a part in a wholl: yet Mr. R. will say
that the same diocesan provinciall & nationall church remayneth (for
substance) that was before. Why doeth he not then see that parochiall churches
may remayn the same for substance, though diocesses and provinces did follow
the other?

4\. He reckoneth up sundry corruptions, idoll preists, crosse & sur­plice
vvith such vanities, mixture of profane vvith the godly, and asketh, if it be
possible that the prelacie beeing abolished such things should remayne as
novv? I answer 1. It is possible. Ther are more meanes of disorder &
corruption then one. Neyther can any such necessarie cōjunction be shewed
betwixt the prelacie & these abuses, but that it is possible to seperat one
from the other. Yet 2. If they should all be abolished with the prelacie, no
reasonable man wil therfor say that the substan­ce of parochial churches
should be therin chāged. If praejudice could be set apart, the shallownesse
of this & the former reasons could not be hid from the eyes of him that framed
them.

TO a mayn obiection by Mr. R. urged, viz:Sec. 9. that all parochiall ministers
are subiect unto the spirituall iurisdiction of prelats, an­swer was given,
first, that so are privat christians subiect unto the same jurisdict [...],
not onely in their church actions which they performe with others in publick,
but also for personall & pri­vate opinions & behaviours: this subiection
therfore doeth no more hinder cōmunion with the one then with the other, in
things that are good. To which answer Mr. R. replieth nothing: but referreth
unto his former book: where as good as nothing is to be found. If there had
bene a fit answer to be given, wee should certainly eyther haue had it
repeated heere (for of repetition Mr. R. is not so nice) or at least the page
quoted where wee might haue found it. But in deed it is not possible, but if
meere subiection to Bishops bee in it self a suf­ficient barr against publick
communion, it must also be held sufficiēt against such privat in & for which
a man is also subiect.

The second answer unto the forenamed obiection was that the greatest part of
the prelats iurisdiction is from the king derived [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=11) unto those that
doe exercise the same, and therfore must of necessi­tie be a civill power,
such as the king might as well performe by o­ther civill officers, as it is in
the high commission. The lawes of the land doe so esteeme it, &c. In this Mr.
R. insisteth much, as thinking no small advantage to be given him, & therfore
requireth of the rea­der wel to observe what heere is sayd on both sides. In
which request I ioigne with him: so that it be marked withall, that I doe not
under­take to justifie the Byshops wholl state, much lesse their proceedings,
but onely so far, that some subiection unto some of their authoritie is not
simply unlawfull.

Mr. R. plea (after his praeamble) ariseth unto these 3 defenses. 1. The lavves
doe no vvhere derive from the kings civill authoritie, the povver of the
Bishops spiritual administratiōs, but doe onely make the king an esta­blisher
& up holder civilly of this povver. 2. Though the lavves of the lād did
esteeme this iurisdiction civill, yet it doeth not follovv that therfore it is
such in deed: because they misesteeme diverse things. 3. That the prelats
iurisdic­tion is not civile, as appeareth playnly by 5 reasons of him
alledged. For the first of these, I appeal 1. To the oth of the clergie to the
king, established by a statut law in the reign of king Henry 8. exstāt in Mr.
Fox p. 961. Where the Byshop sweareth, that he knovvledgeth himself to hold
his Bishoprick of the king onely.

2\. To the act that was then made for the supremacie, wherin all iurisdictions
belonging to the title of head of the church in Englād are givē to the king,
as it is in the same book p. 963.3. I appeal to the 5. Book of Sr Edward Cooks
reportes, where he sheweth out of the law that Bishops are the kings
spirituall judges, their lawes his ecclesiasticall lawes, their iurisdiction
so dependāt on him, that he may exempt any man from it, & grant the same also
to whome he will. For the which purpose, he that desireth may finde plētiful
proofs in a book intitled, an assertion for church policie. Now wheras M. R.
aledgeth, that the same iurisdiction ecclesiasticall vvhich had been in use in
popery, & a great part of the popish hierarchy vvas confirmed primo
Elizabethae, he hath put an­other weapon in our hands for to wound his cause
withall. For the very title of that statute is, an act restoring to the
crovvne the ancient ju­risdiction over the state ecclesiastical. And the whol
house of commons haue so interpreted the meaning of that restauration which is
therin [[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=11)
made, that by vertue therof the king is inabled to give povver & jurisdic­tion
ecclesiasticall to any subiect borne, so if it please him all causes may bee
taken from Byshops & their officers, & given unto other men in every parish of
England. This interpretation is found in the bill of greivances pre­sented to
the king by those of the lower house an. 1610. Printed in a book called a
recorde of some vvorthy proceedings &c.

That this or any other judgemēt of the law is not infallible, I easily admit,
especially touching the quaestion of lawfull or unlawfull, good or evill, of
which kind those instances are which Mr. R. chooseth in this place to appose.
But 1. Seeing that when we alledge the parishes to be severall churches, & to
be considered as they subsist in their se­verall conditions, and the calling
of ministers in many assemblies to be grounded on the peoples choice &c. wee
hear it still opposed with loud voyce, the lavves of the land allovv no such
things, they acknovv­ledge no such matter &c. Was it not both fit & necessarie
then to de­clare the judgement of lawe? or can he with honestie reject the
sen­tence of lawe so ligtly now, whoe a litle before built all upon it. 2. The
quaestion is heere of a matter of fact, and the positive not mor­all nature of
it, whether this authoritie commeth from the king or no, not whether it bee
every way good & laudable (as is the contro­versie about crosse, syrplice &
such like abuses which he mentioneth) and in such a case if the the lawes say
yea, and those that submit to them say also yea, Mr. R. must pardon us, if his
no be reiected, except his reasons be passing strong.

His first reason why this power is not civil is because it is not coactive or
bodily enforcing, but the Bishop after excomunication can goe no further
except he procure a civill coactive processe by vvritt out of another court. I
answer 1. Though it had no bodily enforcing at all annexed unto it yet it
might be a civill power. Bodily enforcing is but a penall sanc­tion which
commeth after the authoritie or power civil, & may bee seperated from it 2. It
is therfore coactive or bodily enforcing, be­cause it may directly require as
due & by law belonging unto it such coactive assistance by other officers as
Mr. R. himself speaketh of. So many civill commissions & letters patent are
granted to men which haue no authoritie seated in themselves for forcing of
mē unto obe­dience, but haue authoritie to charge the constable or justice
that [[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=12) next
is to ayd them in their affayres, which authoritie of theirs not­withstanding
is civil, & in that respect coactive.

A second reason is taken from the works of prelats iurisdiction, vvhich are
for substance (sayth he) the making of ministers, & excommu­nicating of
offenders, vvith their contraries & appurtenances: vvhich are not civil
vvorkes, neyther can be performed by any civil magistrat. Where, if by can or
may he understandeth such right as men haue for their deedes by the law or
word of God, then I willingly grant that no ci­vil magistrate may by his
civill office performe those workes of or­dination excommunication &c. Neyther
can the Byshop so perfor­me them: heerin consisteth that presumptuous
usurpatiō wherof they are guilty before God & man. But if he understandeth
such right or power as men haue for their deedes by mans law, then I avouch
out of the former grounds & testimonies of law, that any other civil magistrat
may receyve authoritie of iurisdiction in those causes as well as prelats.
Which experience confirmeth de facto in the high commissiō, & some other
courts. Wherby it is manifest, that though these workes in their nature be
spirituall, yet (thorough great abuse) they are performed by civill
authoritie. Secondly I answer, that these workes of ordination &
excommunication vvith their contraries & ap­purtenances are not the substance
or in effect the vvholl iurisdiction vvhich Bishops doe exercise in their
provinces & dioces, though Mr. R. affirme it againe & againe. For 1. The
principall iurisdiction which prelats haue is under the king to make certain
rules canons or lawes for or­dering of certain causes cōmitted unto them 2.
Those causes are for a great part of them meerely civil, such as by Gods law
the civil ma­gistrat hath power to order. Of which kind are the causes of
matri­monie, of wills or testaments & many circumstances pertayning to the
severall churches within their precincts. 3. In the very businesse of
ordination & excommunication, it is of substance to see that worthy men be
admitted & unworthy excluded. The formes of or­dination & excommunication
usurped by them, are corrupt appur­tenances to those lawfull actions, & not
the substance wherto all the rest apperteyne.

Neyther doeth Mr. R. agree with himself in making all the sub­stance of
spirituall government to consist in calling of ministers and [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=12) exercising of
censures, or ordination & excommunication: seeing his opinion is that all this
may be doen by the people, & yet in his for­mer book (p. 26.) affirmeth
government not to belong to them, vvherin (sayth he) doeth the people govern
as many please to reproach us?

The third argument is taken from the forme used in consecration of Byshops,
vvherin no mention is made of civil authoritie, but onely of spiri­tuall.
Wherunto I answer. 1. That their episcopall jurisdiction over a special
diocesse or province is not expressed in that consecration: nor any thing of
substance which is not conteyned in a parochiall mini­sters ordination. Which
is an argument that the Byshop receyveth not that iurisdiction from him by
whose hands he is consecrated, but from some other power, & that is from the
king. 2. It is not necessa­rie that words & formes of consecration should
agree in all pointes with the state of a Byshop. For a Byshop in that state &
proceeding which now is in use, is partly fish & partly flesh, or such a
compound as were the feete of Nebuchadnetsars image,Dan. 2. that were part of
yron & part of clay, which did not cleave one to the other: for so is he, part
of civill power which is of sound mettall or yron, & part of spirituall
usurpation, like myrie clay.

The. 4. Argument is vaynly built upon a supposition which for­merly was proved
false, viz: that all the civil iurisdiction which pre­lats haue, cōsisteth in
their being privy councellers, high commissio­ners, or iustices of the peace.
This therfor needeth no further answer. Onely let it be observed that Mr. R.
in defending of the separation, as well as I in opposing it, doeth iustifie
some part of the authoritie which Byshops exercise in England,Pag. 5.
professing communion vvith it and submission unto it. The onely quaestion is,
how much of their authori­tie is such. Let preiudiciall insinuations &
groundlesse imputations therfore be layd aside, and that quaestion onely
discussed.

The last argument is raised from a forme of words used by the-Byshops, in that
they proceed in the name of God, & not in the kings name as all civile
proceedings doe. Wherunto I answer. 1. That a sound & convincing argument
cannot be brought from words of forme & office. If they should change their
stile, & begin their actiōs in the king name, I doubt whether Mr. R. would
allow of that as any strong reason for their civill authoritie. 2. Many
actions are perfor­med [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=13) with the same
words of forme, as all wills or testaments &c: which yet are no spiritual but
civil deedes. So Henrie the fourth king of England began his clayme to the
crowne. In the name of God, amen. I Henrie of Lanc. &c: as it is in Mr. Foxe
p. 474. Yet was not any other then a civil claime. 3 I affirme thatit is an
abuse against lawe, that By­shops in their acts of iurisdiction doe not use
the kings name: and therfore howsoever that the formal words be wanting, yet
the thing it self is to bee understood, viz: as Sr Ed. Cooke hath written,
that howsoever the forme runneth in the Byshops name, yet the authori­tie is
no other but the kings.

This I will shew by an instance most pregnant. Byshop Farrar in king Edwards
days, being troubled & vexed by evil Willershad (amō ­gest other) these 2
articles obiected agaynst him as deserving depri­vation 1. that he appoynted
his Chancelour by his letters of commis­sion, omitting the kings maiesties
stile & authoritie &c. 5. Item he hath commonly made his collations &
iustitutions, as he did his first commission, in his ovvne name & authoritie
vvithout expressing the kings supremacie. To the first, the Byshops answer
was, that what formali­ties soever be wanting in his commission, yet the kings
maiesties sti­le & authoritie was fully set forth in the same commission.
Neyther did the sayd chancelour offer to visit but in the kings name &
authoritie, to the sayd Bishop committed. To the fifth he sayth, that the sayd
defendāt made his collations & institutions in his owne name, not by his
ovvne āuthoritie, nor by any others▪ fave onely the kings authoritie,
according as he hath declared in his first article, expressing in them the
kings su­premacie with the Byshops owne name & seale of office, as he ought to
doe according to the prouision of the kings statute in such a case. See Mr.
Foxe p. 1405.1406. In which one plea, we haue the authori­tie of statute, the
sentence of lawyers & iudges, with the confession & practise of prelats
themselves, for the kings name & authoritie to give life unto their
proceedings.

Heere it must be observed, that this accusation & answer of B. Farrar was
grounded immediatly on a statute made the first of Ed­ward 6. wherin it was
enacted, that the Byshop, should make their pro­ces & vvritinges in the kings
name, and that theyr seales should be the kings armes. Which act was but an
appendix declaring & adding for­me [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=13) to that statute
of supremacie made in Henry 8 his dayes, wherby ecclesiasticall iurisdiction
was annexed to the crowne so as all By­shops were to fech it from thence. Now
though that act of king Edward was repealed in Queere Maries time, and not
since revived, yet that doeth declare the meaning of the former statute of
Henrie 8. to be such as hath been sayd: which statute is now in force.
How­soever, the Byshops haue (undoubtedly) the same kind of state which they
had in the days of king Edw. If therfore they were thē civil offi­cers,
proceeding by the kings authoritie, they are also now such, viz: of civil
nature for their state, deriving their iurisdiction frō the king, though they
proceed not in his name so formaly as in king Edwards days they did, & now in
reason they should.

THus much for that obiection touching spiritual subiection.Sect. 10.
Con­cerning which, I found nothing further directly perteyning unto the
purpose, except one passage which I found p. 30. Where these words are, they
vvho thus disclaym in vvord the Byshops governement, con­fesse themselves
therin to be under no spirituall externall government at all, & so be lavvles
persons & inordinate vvalkers &c. This because it soun­ded as a dangerous &
deepe charge, ensuing upon that former de­fense which was made, that good
ministers are no branches of the prelacie nor necessarily dependent on them as
spiritual officers, I thought it needfull to give answer unto it.

My answer therfore did consist in these 3 branches, 1. That ther was no such
want of spirituall governement in the ministers which governe themselves well,
as could be a iust barrt against all communion with them: seeing privat men
living in the same want, may well be communicated with. 2 That they are
subiect unto some spirituall governement. And 3. That for that want of
government which they are in, they are no more lawlesse walkers or inordinate
walkers then Mr. R. himself is, whoe is not subiect to any other spirituall
government then they are except he will say that the people governe him, which
he counteth to be a reproche. Now let us hear what replie he maketh.

1\. He pleadeth, that he did not infer this exception upon the for­mer ground.
But let that passage of his book be wayed p. 29.30. And [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=14) it will be found
that against his allegation of the parochiall mini­sters being a branch of the
prelacie, this was one defense, that they are not subiect to their government,
wherupon this inference followeth, that then they are inordinate vvalkers &
lavvles persons. Which is the very same order of inference that I observed. 2.
He sayth it vvas not al­ledged to prove communion unlavvfull vvith them, but
as a reproof &c. But seeing the main reason was for unlawfulnesse of communion
becau­se of their branching out of prelacie, and the allegation nothing but an
establishing of that reason by removall of one principall defense supposed to
be brought for it, it must of necessitie tend unto the sa­me ende, of barring
from all communion. And in deed, if it were not a slander, it were none of the
weakest arguments which he hath alledged.

3\. He affirmeth the 1\. and 2\. Ansvver to be beside the purpose be­cause
they speak onely of personall, or civill, or else a more generall kind of
government then he intended, vvhoe spake onely of outvvard guidance and
ordering of the church in her publike affaires, in vvhich respect he
affir­meth all in the parrish assemblies to be lavvlesse persons, if they be
not under the prelates jurisdiction spirituall. Wherto I answer 1. That such
good governmēt as he granteth these mē personally, civilly, & generally to
be ruled lawfully & religiously by (for all this he denieth not) is mo­re then
sufficient to remove from them that imputation of lawlesse & inordinate
walkers, which he without law or limit had cast upon them. And for this
purpose were those 1 & 2 answers opposed. Ney­ther yet can it be with any
truth affirmed, that in that strict accep­tion of government the former
imputation doeth cleave unto all in all assemblies. Are there none in any
assemblies that are any way in a­ny measure guided & ordered by their
ministers in publique affaires? what not in those prayers wherin they goe
before the people and di­rect them in their supplicatiōs by a special gift of
prayer? is there no guidance & ordering by the preaching of the word? surely
this accu­satiō may in no sense be excused frō overlashing. Lastly it is
alledged that this, not beeing subiect to government is misapplied by me unto
mini­sters, vvhē he spake it of the people, as is evidēt by his reply.
Wheras indeed the cōtrarie may better be gathered out of the replie. For
therin (p. 30.) he speaketh first in general termes excluding none: & after
doeth [[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=14)
take in the ministers in special, expressely naming them no lesse thē 6 times
in that one side of a leaf. The truth is, he findeth himself touc­hed, not
with a touch of wit (as he termeth it) but with a glance of his owne toung:
and therfore hath now to help that, changed the ter­me of spirituall
government into another of the povver of Christ for the censures, and because
he doeth not acknowledge himself to be under any externall spiritual
government, yet under the power of censures he is, therfore the want of this
in ministers & people he choseth now to impute for a lawlesse & inordinate
state p. 19 As if this power of censuring were such a thing as every want
therof were a sufficient cause of so deepe a censure: and this were not rather
an audacious & abusive strayning of the apostles phraze, applijng that unto
most godly men which he spake of the scandalous. Or as if all power of
censuring in any degree, were wanting because the liberty of procee­ding is in
a great part restreyned. But thus much for this obiection: and so for the
justification of some publike communion to be lawful in England.

THese thinges hitherto discussed were all that I could or can yet find in M.
R. book,Sect. 13. directly concluding against al publick communion. Yet
because ther be 2 other obiections, which by some might be thought to perteyne
unto the same pur­pose, viz: that all are urged to communion by penall
statutes, and that a set forme of prayer is appointed, I added therfore
concerning them, this answer following. What fault soever may be found with
them, they lie not so in the way, as that they should hinder from all
communiō publick, seeing there are many exercises of religion, wherin none
are present by constraint, & where the service book doeth not so much as
appear. As by name Mr. Perkins his exercise was, where Mr. R. hath often been,
and at whose successors he hath once been since he professed seperation,
wherof I am perswaded also he doeth not yet repent. Further to reason about
them is beside the purpose of my writing: and in deed needlesse, seeing the
accuser hath answered him­self in the one, p. 9. Whē he grāteth that the
reformed churches gene­rally use a stint forme of prayer, with whō yet he wil
not refuse al pu­blick cōmunion, & make like answer to the other, out of the
lawes of [[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=15)
Geneva, where he shall find like strictnesse to be used toward all the
inhabitants of that citie, though he hath unadvisedly denied it in his so
large assertion of our assemblies difference therin from all true churches in
the world. This answer of mine I was forced to repeat, that the reader may see
how Mr. R. (being putt as it seemeth to hard shifts) hath miserablie mangled
the same without giving any answer directly to the purpose.

1\. He bringeth in my first answer thus, he neyther purposeth nor thinks it
needfull to deal about these thinges, seeing there are many exercises of
religion vvhere none are present by, constraynt &c. Was this my answer why
doeth he leave out that wherin the mayn quaestion consisteth, & wherupon all
that followeth dependeth? viz: that those things doe not hinder from al
communion publick. For this that reason was brought which he mentioneth: and
not for that wherunto he pleaseth to ap­plie it. Great distance ther was in my
writing betwixt those words which he patcheth together.

Neyther was it my saying, that I had no purpose to deal about those thinges at
all, but not further then I had answered before. this mangling & patching
confoundeth all.

2\. He chargeth me with changing the state of the question after my evill
custome, vvhich is not (sayth he) about mens being present by constreynt at
the exercises of religion, but of churches gathered by constreynt of al the
profane parishioners vvith the other handfull. But what goodnesse is in this
custome, to passe by the wholl quaestion in hand, and then to mo­ve
controversie about other matters? the state of our quaestion tho­rougout this
dispute, is, whether all publick communiō in the parish assemblies of England
be unlawfull or no? the obiection in this place was that all are urged to
communion by penall statutes. For answer of which I sayd that ther be many
exercises of religion publick, where none are present by vertue of such
constreynt, & therfore such con­streynt could not hinder from all communion,
though it might from some. Could any thing be more direct & presse to the
matter in hād? Take we in also that which he sayth our quaestion is about;
that churches are gathered by constreynt of all the profane parshioners vvith
the other handfull, what advantage hath he by it? nothing at all, but onely
that his charirie & moderation is therby made knowen. For 1. The­re [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=15) be many
parrishes in England which are but a handfull in all, & diverse of them
consisting onely of a familie two or three, having none in them that are
profane. Diverse also there are more populous which haue more then a handfull
of such in them as no holy man ha­ving bridle of his tongue can cal profane.

2\. Though lawes doe urge unto such communion, yet it cannot be reasōably
gathered that al which practise accordingly are cōstreyned unto it: except
Mr. R. will say that all men which live orderly with their wives & children &
absteyne from murder, treason, & such like offences, doe it by constreynt,
because lawes doe require & urge the same under great paynes. 3 . Though all
were gathered into chur­ches by constreynt, yet that constreynt apperteyneth
not unto those exercises of religion, where none are present but of their
voluntary mind. He should haue given a mad answer, that being desired to hear
Mr. Perkins, should haue denied upon this ground, because that pa­rish church
where he onely taught (for a member of it a long time he was not) was gathered
by constreynt, when none came to hear him by any constreynt, & of that parrish
few or none to speak of were present. By all which we see, that this argument
though framed thus as Mr. R. would haue it, concludeth nothing against al
publick com­munion in England.

3\. For that which I by the way onely remembred, that he himself was once at a
sermon in that assembly since he professed separation, as he had bene at many
of Mr. Perkinses before, he answereth▪ it vvas neyther pertinently nor truly
obiected: because at that time he disputed one­ly for seperation, but had not
professed it.

Practised it in deed he had not in that setled manner which since he hath: but
by report of some that had speach with him, he declared then to one of his
acquaintāce, that he had been amōgest some com­pany of the seperation before
his comming to Camb: & exercising amongest them had renounced his former
ministery. That is enough for the truth of what was affirmed. The pertinencie
of it consisteth in this, that he having so often & so lately been at that
exercise of Mr. Perkins & his successors cannot but know that there was no cō
­streynt nor service-book that had any place or part in it. It is pertinent
also by the way to know whether Mr. R. doeth repent him [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=16) for hearing Mr.
Perkins? or whether he doeth reckon it among his offences against God? The
historicall narration which upon this occasion he interposeth, I passe over as
remote from the argument in hand.

4\. He acknowledgeth that for the very use of a set forme of pra­yer he will
not seperate from a true church in things lawfull▪ But many differences he
findeth betwixt the set formes of other churches & that which is used in
England, even so many as make the service-book a hatefull Idol advanced above
all that is called God. The temper of which speach I leaue to be considered of
himself & others. My argument is granted; viz: that a set forme of prayer in
it self is not a sufficient cause of denijng all publick communion. Let the
manner of imposing be as hatefull as Mr. R. would make it: yet in those
acti­ons where it is not used, nor yet imposed, as in that exercise of Mr.
Perkins with other like, that infection is conveyed by it I cannot pos­sibly
conceyve. I desire a freind to hear with me a sermon preached by a godly man,
where he shall neyther see nor hear any thing else beside the sermon, & such
prayers as belong unto it; wil any sense al­low him to answer, no I dare not,
ther is an idol imposed under the name of service? Surely I should think he
wanted sleep that would speak so idly.

5\. For the state of Geneva, whose lawes doe require church communion of all
the inhabitants of that citie, he seeketh as before to find some differences
betwixt that & England: but granteth in the mean time, that if a state for
politick respects expell out of their ter­ritories such as will not ioign in
church communion, that kind of compulsion doeth not make their communion
unlawfull. Meer in­junction of law therfore though it be generall for all
doeth not ma­ke all publick communiō unlawfull. Especially in such actions
where it is manifest that none doe communicate but voluntarily. This is all
that I mainteyned. Which beeing granted by Mr. R. with some o­ther of my
demands, and the rest opposed with so slender defences as we haue now shewed;
I doe not find fault with the title of his wri­ting as he doeth with mine, but
acknowledge it to be a true manumis­sion that is a setting free or a free
grant of what was by me propoun­ded: for other usuall meaning of that title I
doe not understand.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=16)NOw though
I haue not undertaken to give answer unto eve­ry thing that Mr. R. may obiect
against the state of our as­semblies,Sec. 12. and therfore might without
praeiudice neglect that addition which he hath annexed unto his answer, yet
least any should think some unanswerable reasons to be conteyned in the same
maintenance of his separation, I will breifly & plainly declare what I think
in all the particulars of it. He undertakes to set downe, what thinges are of
absolute necessitie for a true ordinary church-officer & minister of Christ,
reducing the same unto 4 heads, a true visible church, a fit person, a lawfull
office, and a right calling.

About the formost of these, he moveth 4 quaestions, 1. Hovv the ministers of
England can be true ministers, not being made & ordeyned such in & to any
particular church? I ans: making & ordeyning are two thinges, he may be a
minister that is not formally ordeyned in the church. There is a making of
ministers in & to particular churches in England, when they are called in & to
such churches.

2\. Hovv many & vvhich of the parrish churches consist of a people se­parated
out from the vvorld? How many such ther are in England, I cannot tell, because
I haue no sufficient intelligence, wherby to in­forme my self therin. But
divers assemblies ther are, well knowen to such as are not willfully ignorant,
which are so far at the least sepe­rated from the world as is of absolute
necessitie to the being of a true church. Perfect seperation is not of that
nature. As for the mix­ture in dioces &c. It is (as formerly hath been shewed)
a civil com­bination.

3\. Hovv the true forme of a church can be found in any parrish church of the
land, vvhich is not any particular act, disposition or relation, but (as he
conceaveth) a publick orderly covenant & union of a particular assembly, by
vvhich it hath in it self entire right to Christ & to all the meanes of
en­joying him?

Wherin. 1. It is to be observed, that it is not a very easy thing to discerne
of this forme of a church: for this man that hath labored so long about the
search of it, & that with more abilities & helpes then ordinary christians can
atteyne unto, yet speaketh something doubtfully or fearfully concerning the
matter, as I conceave it can be no other [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=17) then this. Me
thinke then that charitie should teach him & others more sparingly to censure
& condemne those assemblies which doe not practise this forme so orderly as
they should: seeing difficultie of discerning a duty doeth alway lessen the
fault of him that omitteth it.

2\. That which now he giveth for his opinion concerning this form hath a
manifest contradiction in it, & therfore cannot be right. He sayth that this
forme is no particular act, disposition, or relation: & yet it is a publick
orderly covenant & union. A covenant & union must be taken eyther for the act
of covenanting & uniting, & then it is an act; or for the state arising from
that act of obligation, which is no­thing else but the relation those persons
obliged haue one to another & so it is a relation, or else for the thing to
which they are obliged, or the signe therof, & so it may be eyther an act, or
a disposition, or some other good. All these significations of the word
covenant I find in scripture & use of speach: any other beside these, I doe
not un­derstand. If Mr. R. had another meaning, he should haue doen well to
haue expressed it better: the poynt especially being of such momēt. The
things covenanted or the signe he cannot meane: for these are not constantly
resydeing in the vvhole & all the parts therof, which is a condition of this
forme by him required: some act or relation therfo­re he must needs
understand, gainsaying one part of the sentence by the other. 3. The truth is,
this forme in strict & accurate meaning must needs be some relation by Mr. R.
his owne reason. For nothing beside a relation can possiblie resyde actually
one & the same and at all times in a whole companie of men, and in all the
parts of that companie.

4\. Wheras he calleth this forme an orderly covenant, his words are doubtfull
at the least. For there be many degrees of orderly pro­ceeding in businesses
publick as wel as private: and every circumstan­ce of order doeth not
apperteyne (as absolutely necessary) to the con­stituting forme of a true
church.

Now for the declaring of the trueth concerning this matter, I propound to be
considered this breif demonstration. A visible church must not be considered
as a simple effect, arising of meer matter & forme, as Mr. R doeth speak of
it: But as a whole or compound con­sisting [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=17) of partes or
members: so that the members must conteyne in themselves all the essentiall
both matter & forme also, which make the wholle by compacting or uniting
themselves in one. Christian men being the called of God, haue in them both
matter & forme es­sentiall for making of a visible church, else could they not
giue essen­ce or being to the church, for nothing can give that which it hath
not. Now these members combining themselves into one body as they are such,
doe make or rather are actually a true visible church, one integrall body not
continued, but by aggregation: which inte­gral church as it is such, hath for
the constituting forme that relation which ariseth out of the combination of
all the members: and so dif­fereth not essentially from all the members
compacted, but onely in reasō. Further, this integral body for the wel being
of it in exercising those operations which belong unto it & wherunto it
serveth, must become as we say organicall, having members of diverse rankes,
so­me as head, mouth & eyes, the pastor, teachers, & elders, some as hāds,
the deacons & helpers: wherupon ariseth another relation & forme of accidental
perfection, in state of government: which is cōplete or incomplete, freely
exercising the power granted by Christ to his church, or else restreyned or
defective therin. Out of all this my an­swer is, that the essentiall forme of
a visible church is the covenant of God, or true fayth made visible by
profession; the notes & markes wherof are the word & sacraments rightly
administred & recey­ved, with fruights of obedience. The integral constituting
forme is that state, relation or reference which a congregation of such
pro­fessors haue one to another by vertue of their setled combination, the
note or mark wherof is their usuall assembling into one place & watching one
over another.

The organicall active forme is that state of order wherin officers & people
stand one to the other, the note of which is direction & submission. Now to
the poynt, so many parrish assemblies of Eng­land as haue any competent number
of good christians in them, uni­ted together for to worship God ordinarily in
one societie, so many have essentiall & integrall forme of a visible church:
and all they ha­ve entyre right to Christ & to all the meanes of enioying him:
how­soever they are defective in the puritie of their combinatiō, & in the
[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=18) complete
free exercising of their power.

The 4 and last quaestion propounded by Mr. R. concerning the church is, hovv
parrish assemblies being partes of diocesan false churches, can any more be
reputed true churches, then could a particular Ievvish syna­gogue be so
reputed, vvhich should haue made it self an entyre & independēt body in
respect of the nationall church & temple? To which I answer, that ther is not
the like reason. For parrish assemblies are not spirituall parts of a diocesan
spirituall church: but entyre spirituall bodies though civilly combined into a
diocesan government. Neyther is the principall worship performed at the
cathedrall church as it was in the temple, but in the parrish assemblies
themselves.

In the second head, ther is but one quaestiō moved; that is, vvhether a mā
fitted & invvardly called to the ministery being persvvaded in his heart that
a lavvfvll outvvard calling, & vvithout sin in the enterance & continuā ­ce
can not be had in the church of England, vvhether such a man be not bound in
conscience to seek out & procure another church &c. I ans. 1. That inward
calling is not ordinarily to be built upon, without some outward approbation
doeth confirme it. 2. A lawfull outward cal­ling is had & enioyed in many
churches of England. 3. He that cannot enter in one place without sin, & yet
hath his heart so fully set unto the ministery that he cannot haue peace
without that function ought as I think to take any good occasion of removing
into some other place of more freedome.

To the demands in the 3 & 4 head, I haue answered before, that preaching is
necessarily required by the natur of a ministers office in England; some
ruling is exercised by those that make conscience of their duty; and unto this
function men are not called meerely by the prelat.

These 4 conditions therfore so farr as they are of absolute necessi­tie for a
true ordinary minister of Christ, are manifestly to be found in many
assemblies of England. Which also Mr. R. in a manner gran­teth, in confessing
that there are to be found in the parochiall ministery men apt to teach,
unreproveable in conversation, having an invvard calling from God, that is, a
holy disposition & desire to administer the gospell of Christ to the glory of
God & furtherance of mās salvation. For this is the 2. condition which he
acknowledgeth to be found in the parochial [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=15699&page=18) ministery. And
can any charitable & aequall minde receyve into it self this thought, that so
many mē of so good knowledg, & syncere con­science should be so far forsaken
of God, all the time of their life, and that one generatiō after another, as
not onely to cōtinue in Babilon as members of Antichrist but to bow downe
ordinarily & give spiritual honour to so many hatefull idols exalted above all
that is called God, as these men doe telus of in the English assemblies? or if
Mr. R. did in­wardly beleeve that they lived in such continuall practise of
idolatrie as he doeth in words accuse them of, would he account them
unreproveable men in their conversation, without any exception annexed? I say
no more, but God grant me that comfort which many of them haue had in their
unreproveablenes, and more to Mr. R. then he can possiblie finde in such kind
of reproving or rather slandering of them. Amen.

[Home](/)

Ames, William, 1576-1633.. Date: 1615  

