---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The fanatique powder-plot, or the design of the Rumpers and their adherents,
to destroy both Parliament and people. VVith a caution against forged
intelligence.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. THE FANATIQUE POWDER - PLOT, OR THE Deſign of the RUMPERS and their Adherents, to deſtroy both Parliament and People. VVith a Caution againſt forged Intelligence.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=163769&page=1)

## 1\. THE FANATIQUE POWDER - PLOT, OR THE Deſign of the RUMPERS and their
Adherents, to deſtroy both Parliament and People. VVith a Caution againſt
forged Intelligence.

THat this Nation hath been long miſerable, under the power of a violent and
Reſtleſſe Faction, is clear to all ſuch as are endued with Memory, and Reaſon:
nor is it more ſuperfluous, to reflect upon their paſs'd Miſcariages, than
Neceſſary to take ſome notice of their Later cheats, and Inſolencies. Their
Deſign was, to fix themſelves in a Perpetual Counſel; contrary to Oath, and
Law; and to cut off ſucceſsive Parliaments. To carry on the Project, they had
Armed all ſorts of Libertines, throughout the Nation, particularly, threatning
London with fire, and ſword, if they ſhould not comply. Their bar­barous
purpoſes were Diſappointed, by the General's Re-introduction of the Secluded
Members: Together, with the united rage of the people againſt them. In this
hopeleſs and Deſerted condition, what they could not effect by open Force,
they attempted by Trea­chery, and Corruption. They uſed all Art, and
Diligence, during the seſsion, both to gain Opportunities, and to Emprove
them; but being over-voted in the Main, They fell upon a more direct, and
ſhameleſſe method of Villany.—They falſified the Liſts of the
Militia:—ſollicited Petitions from the City, for their continuance:—Juggled
the Army-Officers into a Tumult:—Employed their Inſtruments to Deſtroy the
General;—Mutinyed the Army, and the City; and Finally, they engaged a great
part of the Souldjery to Re­monstrate againſt the reſt of the Nation. But all
too little, to prevent their Diſſolution; or to Diſturb our Hopes of
Settlement.

The General hath approved himſelf, in the calm, ſteady menage of this wild
Affair, a Perſon worthy of all the Honour we can give him. Theſe Brutiſh
Libertines,—finding all their Plots Bubbled,—their Mines vented▪—their Party,
weak and heartleſs,—themſelves Friendleſſe abroad, and comfortleſſe at
home,—as Guilty, and as Deſperate as Cain; after the ſad deſpair of any the
leaſt Benefit to themſelves, they are yet pleaſed in the Contrivance of our
Miſchief; They're not diſſolved, they tell us,—and attempt to meet again:
That's in vain; and now they come to their laſt ſhifts. Theſe Senſe leſſe Cox-
combs offer the Honeſt General the Inſtrument of Government; as if, that
Noble, Generous Soul, were to be wrought upon, to proſtitute his Honour, and
his ſafety; and all this, to preſerve a Kennel of ſuch Reprobated, and
Ridiculous Puppies. I wonder, ſeriouſly, how theſe Pimps, and Knights o'th'
Poſt,—Scot, and his Fellows, ſcape the fury of the People: That Rabbit-ſucking
Raſcall, with his Fellow Cheats, and Pandars; theſe are the Youths, Gentlemen,
that offer you like Doggs, to any Maſter, that will beſtow the Haltering of
you. For ſhame, bethink your ſelves.

To be as ſhort as poſſible, thus far you're ſafe: but yet theſe Tumblers have
not ſhew'd all their Tricks: their laſt Recourſe, is to the Forgery of
Letters; (but ſo ridiculouſly framed, they are rather argument of Sport, than
Anger: for the Brewer is much better at a Cheat, than at a Stratagem) There
are diverſe Scandalous Papers diſperſed, in the Name of the King; and as the
ſenſe of the Royal Party. You ſhall do well, to take notice, that nothing of
that Quality, proceeds either from Himſelf, or his Friends. The Project is
Phanatique, and tends only to hinder our Expected, and Approaching Settlement.
To mention One, for All; there is a Pamphlet of yeſterday, Entituled——News
from Bruſſels, in a Letter from a near attendant on his Majeſtyes Perſon, to a
Perſon of Honour Here—which caſually became thus Publique.

Do but obſerve this Formal Noddy, how he Boggles upon the very Title-page.—How
Caſually, Good-man Senſe-leſſe? Did it Drop into a Printing Houſe, and Publiſh
it ſelf?—his Title is followed, with a ſuitable Text; of ſo Pityfull an Ayre,
and Fa­ſhion, I am aſhamed to confeſſe the reading of it. Indeed, I would
adviſe the Secretary, rather to return to his Placket-Poli­tiques, for he is
not half ſo good at State, as Bawdery. To deliver his aim in other terms, for
fear of giving the Reader a Vomit. The principal drift of his Diſcourſe is, to
Perſonate a Royaliſt, Charging the Presbyterians with the murther of the King,
and profeſsing an Implacable Animoſity againſt the whole party—Not to employ
more ſubtilty than needs upon ſo Frivolous a Subject. Let this ſuffice.

Who Murthered the King, the Nation knows; and who Interpoſed to ſave him;—who
they are, that at this Inſtant, oppoſe a Settlement, and who Deſire it;—Nay
more, we know, who cannot Live under a Peaceable Government, and who cannot
Live without it: And it is fit to ſhew all honeſt people to diſtinguiſh.

Thoſe, that have deſigned us for Slavery, it is but reaſon to marque them out
for Justice: yet I ſhould adviſe tenderneſs; where by ſaving a Few, Infamous
Malefactours, we doe not hazzard a more Conſiderable Loſſe. He that forgives
them, extends his Charity, but he that Truſts a man of them, Betrayes his
Country.

> March 24. 1659.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Date: 1660  

