---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# A iust and necessarie apologie of certain Christians, no lesse
contumeliously then commonly called Brownists or Barrowists. By Mr. Iohn
Robinson, pastor of the English Church at Leyden, first published in Latin in
his and the churches name over which he was set, after translated into English
by himself, and now republished for the speciall and common good of our own
countrimen — Apologia justa et necessaria quorundum Christianorum, aeque
contumeliose ac communiter, dictorum Brownistarum sive Barrowistarum. English

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=1)

A IVST AND NECESSARIE APOLOGIE OF CERTAIN CHRISTIANS, no lesse contumeliously
then commonly called Brownists or Barrowists.

By Mr. IOHN ROBINSON, Pastor of the Eng­lish Church at Leyden, first published
in Latin in his and the Churches name over which he was set, after translated
into English by himself, and now republished for the speciall and common good
of our own Countrimen.

Psal. 41. 2.

O Blessed is he that prudently attendeth to the poore-weakling.

Printed in the yeere of our Lord M.DC.XXV.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. A Iust and Necessarie APOLOGIE.
    * 1.1. CHAP. I. Of the largenes of Churches.
    * 1.2. CHAP. II. Of the administration of Baptism.
    * 1.3. CHAP. III. Of written Leyturgies.
    * 1.4. CHAP. IIII. Of the Ecclesiasticall Presbyterie.
    * 1.5. CHAP. V. Of Holy-dayes.
    * 1.6. CHAP. VI. Of the celebration of Mariage by the Pastours of the Church.
    * 1.7. CHAP. VII. Of the sanctification of the Lords day.
    * 1.8. CHAP. VIII. Of the exercise of Prophecie.
    * 1.9. CHAP. IX. Of Temples.
    * 1.10. CHAP. X. Of things indifferent.
    * 1.11. CHAP. XI. Of civill Magistrates.
    * 1.12. CHAP. XII. Of the Church of England.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=2)

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=2)

## 1\. A Iust and Necessarie APOLOGIE.

THE cryme of Heresy none ought patiently to indure, Ierom to P [...] mach.
sayd Ierom of ould; and that not with­out cause: For whereas in other
accusations, ey­ther a mans goods, or good name, or bodily life, at the most,
is indaungered; in this, the life of the soul (which fayth is) commeth in
question.

But well it is for the servants of Iesus Christ, that they have him (their
gratious Lord, and Saviour) for their Iudg: by whose alone judgment
(notwithstanding all mens pre­judices) they shall stand, or fall for ever.
And, if any others any where, surely I, and they with me, have need to get
this divine comfort deeplie printed in our hearts; whose profession giues
oc­casion to many, as doth our condition liberty unto all, to spare no
severitie of censure upon us.

Four sorts of heavie freinds we have found, and felt in sorrow­full experience
wheresoever we have become. The first whereof is the unhallowed multitude, who
living without God in the world;Ioh. 3. and walking themselvs perversly, and
in the workes of darknes, cannot but hate, as the light it self, so all those,
who haue receaved grace of God, to walke therein with good consci­ence. And as
the Apostles in their dayes were everie where most vexed with the hatred of
the unbeleeving Iewes, their own coun­trymen; so are we by the like of ours
like mynded. Of whom whilst the most do want their countrie for causes so
unlike unto [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=3)
ours, no marvayl though there be no better concurrance of eyther affection, or
action between us.

The second is of them, who are enamoured on that Romish Hierarchie, as on a
stately, and potent Ladie. Against which, and for the holy presbyteriall
government, as Christs institution by his Apostles, whilst we doe in word and
deed, give a free, & full testi­monie; alasse, with how many, and how great
waves of affliction are we overwhelmed by their  [...]atred, and power? Dem
[...]trius of Ephesus, with his Silver-smiths, was of all other men, to the
Apo­stle Paul (opposing himself to the Majestie of Diana, and the [...]
pro­fit withall) the most infestuous. And who will marvayl, if we no­thing
obsequio [...]s to the Hierarchicall Diana (in her self, magnifi­cent enough,
& enough advantageable unto hers) be abhominable unto this kinde of people,
aboue all others, even Atheists, Papists and most flagitious persons not
excepted, whom they haue devout enough, and over, unto that Goddesse.

A third kinde is of those, who so servily inbondage themselues, and their
consciences, either to the edicts of Princes, or to the de­terminations of
certaine doctors, or to both these jointly, as that they think nothing well
done in case of R [...]ligion, which eyther these teach not, or they commaund
not: and on the other side, almost any thing warrantable, which is commended
by the one of them, or commaunded by the other. And as of these some are so
transported with wa [...]pish zeale, as they can scarcely without a fit of an
ague, eyther speak to, or think of him, who a litle steps out of their troad;
so others of them are so cunning, and wote so well how to make their market,
that though they be indeed almost like mynded with us in all things, yet do
they vehemently affect unchri­stian emnitie with us: not because they
themselues judge us so de­serving; but others, whom therein they think it a
poynt of their wisdom to gratify.

The fourth, and last sorte are they, who through credulitie, and lightnes of
beleif haue their ears open to the false, and feigned sug­gestions of
slaunderous tongues. These men whilst they are over good, and easie towards
the evill, and injurious, unto whom they give credence; become injurious
themselus to the good, and in­nocent: though in truth it be hard to say, unto
which of three they [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=3) doe the greatest
wrong▪ whether to their brethren, of whom they causelesly conceaue amisse,
whilst either they greedily devour, or easily receave such false reports, &
vituperies, as venemous tongues spit out against them: or to their own souls,
which they thereby make accessorie to others mallice: or to the calumniators
them­selus, whom they put in heart to go bouldly on in reproaching the
innocent, whilst they know, where to finde receavers for their slaunders, as
do theeues for their stoln goods.

Now, alasse, what sufficient bulwark of defence haue we (poore people) to
oppose unto the violence of so many, and mightie ad­versaries? First, and most
(as a brazen wall)  [...] cons [...]ence be­fore God, and men (so farre as
humain frailtie will permit) pure, and unsteyned. Next, thine equanimitie
joyned with wisdom (god­ly, and christian Reader): for whose cause we haue pe
[...]ed, and published this our just, and necessarie defence: lest being
circum­vented by prejudice, thou mayst happen to hate that whereof thou art
ignorant: then which nothing in Tertullians judgment, is more uniust, no not
though the thing in it self iustly deserue hatred. Tertullian  [...] the
[...]. By this we do earnestly crave, that (as thou safely mayst, so) thou
wilst inge­nuously passe sentence upon us, and our profession and not by the
unsavourie reportes eyther in word, or writing, of our adversaries whomsoever:
who do most commonly take libertie to suggest a­gainst us (underlings,) not
what in truth & conscience they should; but what eyther fame reporteth, or
ignorance suspecteth, or mal­lice inventeth, or proud contempt deems suiteing
with our mean­nes and simplicitie.

Two opprobries (amongst others infinite) haue beene of late by our adversaries
cast upon us; by which we are not onely occasio­ned, but after a sorte
necessitated to the publishing of this our Apo­logie: lest by not resuting
such criminations (so great,Cypr. tr [...]ct.  [...] and greivous) we should
seeme to acknowledg a cryme, as Cyprian speaketh. The former, by some of
those, who in our owne countrie, are reputed the cheif Masters and Patrons
both of Religion & truth: by whom there hath been, not a flying bruit spread
amongst the multitude; but a solemn accusation to them in speciall authoritie,
framed a­gainst us: First, that we (lewd Brownists) do refuse, and reject one
of the Sacraments: secondly, that we haue amongst us no ecclesi­asticall
[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=4) ministrie,
but doe giue libertie to everie mechanicall person to preach publiquely in the
church. Thirdly, that we are in errour about the verie Trinitie. Fourthly, and
lastly, that being become so odious to the magistrates here, as that we are by
violence to be driven the countrie, we are now constreyned to seek some other,
and farr parte of the world to settle in.

The other contumelie is in a Duch Rhime without name, fra­med it may be, (and
as commonly it comes to passe) between the cup and the wall, as sayth the
proverb. This balad-maker compa­ring the receaved religion in the Dutch
churches to a tree: the Sec­taries in the countrie (of which he nameth not a
few) to certayn beasts endeavouring this trees ruine, and overthrow, likens
the Brownists to a litle worme, gnawing at the root thereof; and not having
lesse will, but lesse power to hurte, then the residue. Wee are indeed wormes
and not men, Psal. 22, 9. the reproach of men, and despised of the people,
whom high and low, and all that will, may without daun­ger, tread, and trample
under foot.

But to giue thee satisfaction (Christian and indifferent Reader) whosoever
thou art, that chusest rather to take knowledg of mens innocencie, then to
condemn the same unknown; and that it may appear unto thee, how alike unhonest
our adversaries are in their accusations, though of unlike condition in
themselus, We do pro­fesse before God and men, that such is our accord in the
case of re­ligion, with the Duch reformed churches, as that we are ready to
subscribe to all, and everie article of faith in the same church, as they are
layd down in the Harmonie of Confessions of fayth, published in their name:
one onely particle (and the same not of the greatest weight) in the sixth
Article, touching the Scriptures, being conveni­ently interpreted, and
conformably to it self, & the generall judg­ment of the learned amongst them.

The scope of the Article is, (as appears in the margent) to di­stinguish
between the books Canonicall, and Apocriphall, as they are called. Touching
which Apocryphall notwithstanding it is judg­ed, and affirmed, that they may
be read in the Church. Which if it be meant of their private reading by the
members of the church, we willingly assent: if of publique, pastorall, and
ecclesiasticall read­ing, we are indeed otherwise mynded: neither admit we any
other [[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=4) books
to that dignitie in the church, then such as were penned by the Holy men of
God, moved by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1, 21. And as the Apostle Iames testified
of the Iewes,Act. 15. 21. that they had Moses read in the Synagogue everie
Sabbath day: so we think it sufficient for the Christian assemblyes, that with
Moses Christ, that is, the books of the new testament be joyned with the old,
and they alone be read.

Neither need we seek further, or for other Arguments to con­firme our opinion,
then the Article it self affoardeth us. The words thereof are these:

Moreover, we put a difference between the Holy writings,Harmonie of Confess.
Of the script. Art. 6, Conf. Belg. and those which they call Apocryphal, to
wit, so as the Apocryphall may indeed  [...] read in the church, & that it may
be lawfull to take instructions from  [...]hem, so far sorth, as they agree
with the canonicall books: but such  [...] hand is their authoritie, or
firmnes, that upon their testimonie any doctrine of faith, and Christian
Religion may be founded, much lesse that they haue force to infringe, or
weaken the others authoritie.

And first, if the Apocriphall books be publiquely read in the Church, as well
as the Canonicall, the difference which in word is professed, seems indeed by
this so reading them, to be taken away: since the selfe same religious act
(viz. publique reading) is perfor­med about the one and other, although not
altogether to the same end. And if publique reading of the Canonicall
Scriptures be commanded of God in his worship, either the reading of these
Apocripha books is a parte of Gods worship also, (which the Bel­gick Churches
do not beleiv) or els they must be unlawfull to be read publiquely in the
Church, especially comming together for that onely end of worshipping God.
Publiquely, I say; for the pri­vate reading of them, as of other books, comes
not under the re­spect of worship properly, but of an act, and exercise
preparati [...] unto worship, as both Law [...]ers, and Divines speak.

Secondly, in this verie Article, the Canonicall bookes, as op­posed to the
Apocriphall, are called holy writeings. The Apocri­phall then are not holy, as
not being hallowed to this end, that is not commaunded of God in the holy
writeings of the Prophets, and Apostles. Now what haue the holy assemblies to
do, especial­ly convening, and meeting together for the solemn worship of God,
and exercising themselus in the same, with books not holy, [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=5) that is, not
hallowed, or injoyned of God, for his most holy ser­vice [...]

Thirdly, seeing these books are Apocriphall, that is, hidden, and concealed,
their verie name may put them in minde of their duetie in concealing themselvs
within the vaile of privacie. And surely no small immodestie it is in them,
which ought to conteyn themselus in private use, and interteynment, thus
bouldly to presse into pub­lique assemblie. They must therefore change either
their names, or their manners; as women by their sex, so they by their name,
well expressing their nature, are inhibited all libertie of speaking in the
church.

I [...]d, and conclude out of our countrie-man M. Broughton, that those
Apocriphall books are so stuffed with trifles, fables, lyes and superstitions
of all sorts; that the midle place between the ould and new Testament, as ill
becomes them, as it would do a Turkish slaue, and leaper, between two the
noblest Princes of all Europe.

But to return whence I dig [...]essed. Seing that (as appears in the preface)
the intention of the Belgick Churches was, as in divulg­ing their
Confession,Preface to the  [...]arm of Confess. to render a reason of the
hope, which is in them, and plainly to make known their perswasion in the
matter of fayth; so al­so in publishing the Harmony of Confessions, to giue
all men to under­stand, and take knowledg of that most near conjunction which
they haue with the sacred, and truely Catholique church of God, and all the
holy and sound members thereof: by what tight, or rather injurie could we be
excluded from the followship of the same churches, who do  [...] better
accorde, and have greater congruitie with them in the mat­ter of fayth &
religion, then the greatest part of those, whose con­fessions they do publi
[...] to the veiw of all men, as the congnissance, and badges of their
Christian consociation? And with what con­science of a Christian, or rather
licentiousnes of a Rhymer, could that adversarie traduce us to the world, as
endeavoring the ruine of the reformed churches?

But perhaps, that which may be, is suspected to be by some, (which also the
false accuser doth insinuate in his libell against us) and that, what in word
we professe, we denye in deed; and what we would seem to build with our
tongues, we do, as it were, with our hands pull down. If so it be, and that in
deed we be found [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=5) to be such, I doe
freely confesse, that no censure upon us can be too severe, no hatred more
greivous then we do deserv.

Now the guilt of this evill must cleav unto our fingers, if at all, one of
these two wa [...]es, either in regard of our selvs, or of the re­formed
Churches. For our selvs, and our course of life, (for ne­cessitie compelleth,
as it were foolishly to bable out that, wherein modestie perswadeth silence)
and how we converse with God, and men, whether publiquely in the Church, or
privately in the fami­ly, we refuse not, by the grace of God bestowed upon
frayl crea­tures, labouring of the same humain infirmities with other men, the
search and censure of our most bitter adversaries, if not desti­tute of all,
both honestie, and wisdom.

Touching the reformed Churches, what more shall I say? We account them the
true Churches of Iesus Christ, and both professe, & practise communion with
them in the holy things of God, what in us lyeth; their sermons such of ours
frequent, as understand the Dutch tongue; the sacraments we do administer unto
their known members, if by occasion any of them be present with us; their
di­stractions, and other evils we do seriously bewayl, and do desire from the
Lord their holy, and firm peace.

But happily, it wil be objected, that we are not like-mynded with them in all
things, nor do approve of sundry practises in use a­mongst them, if not by
publique institution (which it seems they want) yet by almost universall
consent, and uniform custome. I graunt it; neither doubt I, but that there are
many godly, and pru­dent men in the same churches, who also dislike in effect
the things which we doe: and amongst other things, this mal [...]part, and
un­bridled bouldnes of unskilfull men, who make it a very May-game to passe
most rash censure upon the fayth, and so by consequence, upon the eternall
salvation of their brethren, and to impeach their credit, whom they neither
do, nor perhaps willingly would know: lest that which they lust to condemn
unknown, they should be constreyned to allow, if they once knew it: and
withall to disallow that, into which they themselvs haue been led formerly by
common errour of the times. Which maladie is also so frequent, and ordi­narie,
as that it may truely be said of many, that they then think themselus most
acceptable unto God, when they can make their [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=6) brethren
(differing from them in some smaller matters) most odi­ous unto men. This
rageing plague except the Lord God in mer­cie asswage, and bend the mindes of
godly, and modest men (the Ministers of his word) to put to their helping hand
that way, it wi [...] without all doubt, come to passe, (which God forbid)
that the mul­titude of Christians will come to judg of their estate with the
Lo [...] not so much by the christian vertues, which themselvs indeed have as
which they imagine others want.

But that it may appear unto thee (Christian Reader) wherein  [...] do dissent
from the Dutch reformed Churches, and upon wha [...] grounds: and that none
may take occasion of suspicion, that the things are either greater, or more
absurd, for which those hateful [...] Brownists are had by many in such
detestation, then indeed an [...] truth they are, I will breifly, as I can,
present unto thy christian vei [...] either all, or the most, & our greatest
differences, with the ground [...] thereof.

### 1.1. CHAP. I. Of the largenes of Churches.

AND first, it is evident, that the most, especially cittie-chur­ches, are so
great and populous, as that two or three dive [...] temples are not sufficient
for one, and the same Church to meet [...] at once. We on the contrarie, so
judg, that no particular churc [...] under the New Testament, ought to consist
of more members, the [...] can meet together in one place; because,

1\. The Holy Scriptures speaking definitely of the politicall, or
ministeriall, commonly called, visible church, instituted by Christ and his
Apostles, by his power, understand none other then on [...] congregation
convening, and comming together, ordinarie at least in one place. Math. 18,
17, 20. gathered together in my name: wi [...] 1 Corinth. 5, 4. when you are
come together. Act. 2, 44. Al [...] that beleeved were together: and chap. 5,
12. They were all with one accord in Salomons porch. Also chap. 6, 2, 5. and
chap. 13, 1, 2. with [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=6) [...]4, 27. and
14, 23. with Tit. 1, 5. Act. 15, 4, 22, 25. and 21, 22. So 1 Corinth. 11, 20.
when yee therefore come together in one, to wit place, not minde, as some
conceipt, for from that the Corinthians were to far: and lastly chap. 14, 23.
If the whole church come toge­ther into some place.

2\. There is then had the most full, and perfit communion of the body in the
holy things of God, which is the next and immedi­ate end of the visible
Church,Act. 2, 42. when all the members thereof do convene, and assemble
together in some one place. And if nature,Heb. 10, 25. as Philosophers teach,
ever intend that which is most persit, much more grace. Now that the church
(commonly called visible) is then most truely visible indeed, when it is
assembled in one place; and the communion thereof then most full, and intire,
when all its members inspired, as it were, with the same presence of the holy
ghost, do from the same Pastor, rec [...]av the same provocations of grace, at
the same time, and in the same place: when they all by the same voice,
(banding as it were together) do with one accord pour out their prayers unto
God:Te [...]tul Apol. ch. 37. when they all participate of one, and the same
holy bread; and lastly, when they all together consent unani­mously,1 Cor. 10.
17 either in the choice of the same officer, or censuring of the same
offender, no man admitting a due thought of things, can make doubt of.

3\. We have the Apostle Paul giving it in charge to the Elders of everie
particular Church (as was that of Ephesus) that they take heed unto al the
flock, whereof the holy ghost made them Bishops, Act. 20, 17, 28. or
overseers, to feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own
blood. But surely, as that flock is verie inordinate, if not monstrous, which
for the largenes thereof, neither ever doth, nor possibly can feed together;
so that sheepheard of the Lords flock seemeth not aright, and as he ought, to
fulfill his charge, which doth not at the least, everie Lords day, minister
unto the same, the wholesom food of Gods word. Ad hereunto, that in these huge
and vast flocks, the governers cannot take knowledg of the manners of the
people private, or publick; no nor so much, as of their presence at, or
ab­sence from the church assemblies: whereby what domage cometh unto true
pietie, any man may easily conjecture, and miserable ex­perience makes too too
manifest in the reformed Churches. I con­clude [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=7) therefore, since
(as Iunius sayth) it concerneth the Pastour throughly to know the church
committed unto him, the persons, their works and courses, Iunius  [...]. lib.
1, cap. 2. without the knowledg of which things, he shall profit them no more
then a tincking cymball, &c. that it were a point of good pro­vision both for
the conscience of the officers, and edification of the people, that a division
were made of the cittie-churches, which by continuall accession of members,
are thus grown out of kinde, into different, and distinct congregations, under
their certain, and distinct Pastours, and Elders.

If any object, that there is one visible, and catholick Church, comprehending
as the parts thereof,Object. all the particular Churches, and severall
congregations of divers places; as there is one Ocean, or Sea, dive [...]sly
called, according to the divers regions by whose shores it passeth; and that
therefore this matter is not worth la­bour spending about it,Answ. I answer,
First, that the Catholick church neither is, nor can be called visible: since
onely things singular are visible, and discerned by sence: whereas universals,
or things catho­lick, are either onely in the understanding,See Sadell
a­gainst Tur. in solut. 2. sy­log on Math. 1 [...]. Scalig de subul. ex [...].
[...]07. as some are of minde, or as others think better, are made such, to
wit universals, by the un­derstanding, abstracting from them all
circumstanstiall accidents, consi­dering that the kindes intelligible have
their existence in nature, that is in the Individuals.

2\. The Catholick church, with due reverence unto learned ned men be it
spoken, is verie unskilfully said to be one, as the sea is one. For, first, it
is expressedly said Gen. 1, 9, 10. that the wa­ters which were under the
heauens, were gathered into one place, or con­ceptacle, which God called Sea,
or seas. But the Catholick church, which is said to comprehend al particular
congregations in her bo­som, is not gathered together into one place, nor ever
shall be, be­fore the glorious coming of Christ. 2. The Ocean is a body so
continued, as that all, and everie part thereof is continually fluent, so as
the self same waters, which in their flux do make one sea, do in their reflux
by contrarie windes, make another, and so contrarie­wise. But thus to affirm
of particular churches, and their materiall constitutive cause, were most
absurd. 3. If some one particular sea were drawn drie, or should fail his
course, a disturbance of all the rest would necessarily follow; But and if the
sea should in di­vers [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=7) places at once
happen to be exhausted, or drawn drie, there would then be a fayling of the
Ocean: neither were the waters now gathered into one place, neither made they
one sea, and bo­dy of water, either continued, or conjoyned. But now, on the
other side, upon the defection, or dissipation of this or that parti­cular
church, no such impediment should come in the way, but that the rest might
hould their full course, as before. Yea, I adde moreover, if all, and everie
particular assembly in the world should languish, and fall away, (one onely
excepted) that (onely) one did still remain the true, & entire Church of
Christ, without any either subordination, or coordination, or dependencie
spirituall, save un­to Christ alone. The reason is plain, because this
singular, and sole assembly may under Christ the head, use, and enjoy everie
one of his institutions: the communion of Saints combyned together in solemn,
and sacred covenant, the word of God, Sacraments, Censures, and ministrations
whatsoever by Christ appointed, and therewith the same Christs most gratious
presence.

And upon this ground it is, that the Apostle Paul doth intitle the particular
congregation, which was at Corinth, and which pro­perly, and immediately he
did instruct, and admonish,1 Cor. 12, 27. 2 Cor. 6, 10 [...] & 11, 2. to the
body of Christ, the temple of God, and one virgin espoused to one housband
Christ. We may not therefore under pretence of antiquitie, unitie, humain
prudence, or any colour whatsoever, remove the auncient bounds of the visible
and ministeriall church, which our right fa­thers, to wit, the Apostles, have
set, in compar [...]son of whom, the most ancient of those, which are so
called, are but infants, [...].  [...]n Prov. and beardlesse, as one truely,
and wittily sayth.

There is indeed one church, and as the Apostle speaketh, one bodie, as one
spirit, one hope of our calling, one sayth, one baptism; Eph. 4, 4, 5. that
is, of one kinde, and nature; not one in number, as one Ocean. Neither was the
church at Rome in the Apostles dayes, more one with the Church of Corinth,
then was the baptism of Peter one with Pauls baptism, or then Peter, and Paul
were one. Neither was Peter or Paul more one, whole, intire, and perfit man
(consisting of their parts essentiall, and integrall) without relation unto
other men; then is a particular congregation (rightly instituted, and ordered)
a whole, intire, and perfit Church immediately, [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=8) and independently,
in respect of other Churches, under Christ.

To conclude, since the Pastor is not a minister of some part of a Church, but
of the whole particular Church, Act. 20, 28. At­tend to the whole Flock, or
Church, whereof the holy Ghost hath made you Bishops &c. if the ministers
office be to be confined within the circle of a particular congregation, then
also the ministeriall church it self. Now the Pastors office is either
circumscribed within these bounds, or els the Angell of the Church of Ephesus
was also the An­gell of the Church of S [...]rna; and so the Pastour of this
Church is al­so the Pastour of that; and by consequence, of all; that is,
everie Pastour is an universall Bishop, or Pope by office, if not for exe­q
[...]ution, yet for power; according to which power, we are to judg of the
office.

What then? will some man say. Is it not lawfull for a Pastour to exequute his
pastorall office but in the congregation over which he is set? I answer with
the Apostle No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that [...] is
called of God, as Aaron, Hebr. 5, 3, 4. It is not lawfull for thee (reverend
brother) to do the work of a Pastour where thou art no Pastour, lest thou
arrogate to thy self that ho­nour, which apperteyns not unto thee. Thou art
called, that is elected, and ordeyned a Pastour of some particular Church, and
not of all churches. It is not onely lawfull, but requisite, that the Pastour
of one Church (or  [...]aither he that is the Pastour) and so any other
member, imparte the gift either spirituall, or bodily, which he hath receaved,
to other churches, out of the common bond of charitie, in which he is obliged:
not so, to exequute a publique office over them by the prerogative of
authoritie, which he hath not but onely over his owne. We will illustrate this
by a si­militude. Any citizen of Leyd [...]n may enjoy certain priveledges in
the cittie of Delph, by vertue of the politick combination of the united
provinces, and cittie, under the supream heads thereof the States generall;
which he is bound also to help and assist with all his power if necessitie
require; but that the ordinarie magistrate of Leyden should presume to
exequute his publique office in the cittie of Delph, were an insolent, and
unheard of usurpation. The ve­rie same, and not otherwise, is to be said of
Pastors, and particular [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=8) Churches, in
respect of that spirituall combination mutuall under their chief, and sole
Lord Iesus Christ.

### 1.2. CHAP. II. Of the administration of Baptism.

THE Dutch Reformed Churches (as is evident by their pra­ctise compared with
then profession) are neither so true unto their own grounds,See I [...]arm. of
C [...]nfess. Belg. & French, Calvin, Be­  [...]a. &c. as they ought, neither
do they so well provide for the dignitie of the thing, whilst they administer
the Sacrament of Baptism to the infants of such, as are not within the
Covenant, nor have either parent a member of any Church, because

1\. Baptism now (as circumcision of ould) is the seal of the covenant of God
with the faythfull, and their seed,C [...]los. 2, 11, 12. I will be thy God
and the God of thy seed. Genes. 17, 9. and the seal of the righ­teousnes of
fayth. Rom. 4, 11. and is one, as there is one sayth, and one baptism. Ephes.
4, 4, 5. and therefore ought not to be admini­stred to others, then those
within the compasse of the same cove­nant: nor but upon fayth coming between,
either of the partie to be baptized, or of one parent at the least. If any
shall answer, that this gratious promise of God is not to be restreined to the
next immediate children, but is extended euen to those, who follow a fa [...]r
off, I grant it, except infidelitie, or other sin come between; by which the
parents with themselvs break off their seed externally & actually from the
cōmunion of the church, & holy things thereof. And if we be not to insist in
the next, and immediate parent, why in the grand-father, or great-grand-
father, and so for the rest, till we climbe up, as high, as to No [...]h
himself? Whereupon it should follow, that not the Infants of Iewes, nor of
Turks, no nor of Gentiles neither, should have baptism denyed them. Surely the
grace of Christ must needs be universall, and wherein all have in­terest, if
the seal thereof apperteyn unto all. Neither should the Church (amongst whose
sacred furniture Baptism is) by this rule be any more the house of God,
peculiar to his children and ser­vants; [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=9) but more like a
common In, whose doore stands wide open to all that passe by the high way.

2\. The Apostle 1 Corinth. 7, 14. upon this ground, that the one parent is a
beleever, avoweth the childe holy: which otherwise he pronounceth impure, in
respect of the Covenant, and holynes thereof (leaving unto God his secret
judgments). Now what have the impure, and unhallowed to do with the holy
things of God? And what hath the Pastour, and sheepheard in holy things to do
with them, who are no portion of the Lords flock? What have I to doe (sayth
the Apostle) to judg them that are without? Do not ye judg them that are
within? 1 Cor. 5, 12. So (reverend brethren) what have you to do, to baptize
them that are without? do you not baptize them that are within, and them
alone? In the number of whom yet you reckon not those infants (though baptized
by you) nor belonging to your charge. Whence also (God knoweth) it cometh to
passe, for the most part, that they who are thus by you baptized into the name
of the Lord, are by their godlesse parents education made the servants of
Sathan.

3\. The Baptism of Infants, in all soundnes of judgment, ser­veth, and that
immediately for the comfort of their godly parents; whose hearts it filleth
with no small joy, whilst they behould the gratious promise of God made to
them and their seed, ratified and confirmed by this seal: even as of ould the
circumcision of Isaak was granted, and injoyned by God unto Abraham his, and
our fa­ther, first and immediately, for the confirmation of his fayth. Whence
I conclude, that the seal of the righteousnes of faith (which baptism is) doth
no more belong to the seed of godlesse parents, then doth the comfort flowing
from the righteousnes of fayth un­to the parents themselvs. Whom as it would
effectually move to more serious, and sad thoughts of their own estate with
God, if they beheld their infants (so dear unto them) excluded thorough their
default from the comfortable  [...]eal of Gods Covenant; so can they not but,
by the undue administration of the same, take occasi­on of hardening themselvs
in their accustomed perversnes. I con­clude then with Tertullian speaking (as
Iunius interprets him) of the children of such,T [...]tul of  [...]ipt. ch.
18. Iu [...]us annot. in ide [...] cap. as were strangers from the covenant of
God, Let them come, when they are grown to year [...]s; let them when they
have [[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=9)
learned, and are taught wherefore they come; let them then be made Christians,
when they can know Christ.

### 1.3. CHAP. III. Of written Leyturgies.

VVE cannot but mislike that custome in use, by which the Pastour is wont to
repeat and read out of a prayer-book certayn formes, for his and the Churches
prayers, and that for these reasons,

1\. Because this externall mean and manner of worshiping God in prayer is no
where found in the written word,Psay 29, 13. Mat. 28, 10. Co [...]os. 2, 23.
(by the prescript whereof alone he is to be worshipped) whatsoever either the
Iewes fable of the Leyturgie of Ezra; or the Papists of S. Peters, or S. Iames
Leyturgies. Yea, contrariwise, I add for overplusse, that it did not seem good
to the Apostles, the last penmen of the  [...]. ghost, that any such prescript
form for such end should come in use, in the churches. And this seemeth unto
me verie clear, from the former Epistle of Paul to Timothy, chap. 2, 1, 2. The
kings of the earth in those dayes, and such as were in authoritie under them,
being, as it were, so many sworn enemies of the name of Christ, this conceipt
might easily (and it seems did) creepe into the mindes of divers Christians,
that these kindes of men were raither to be prayed a­gainst, then for, by the
servants of Christ. And now, what was the medicine prescribed by the Apostle
for this malad [...]e in that Epi­stle written to Timothy for that verie end,1
[...]. 3. 1 [...]. that he might know how to converse in the church of God?
Did he now either send Timothy to any Leyturgie formerly let forth for his own
and others da [...] ­tion? Or did he himself frame any for the purpose, whose
b [...]ten troad the Churches following afterwards should not erre? No­thing
lesse: although a more  [...]it, and full occasion for that busines scarce be
offered: which without doubt, Paul would  [...]o more have l [...]t slip, th
[...]n did the other Apostles, th [...]t which was more light, for the
introduction of Deacons, if  [...]t had seemed good to th [...] [...] 6.
[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=10) H. Ghost
(by whose singe [...] he was guided in the ordering of the Churches) that any
such book-prayer should have come into use.

Three things especially are objected, which must here be clea­red. The first
is, that David, and other Prophets penned the book of Psalmes for the mother
Church of Israell. The second, that Christ himself delivered to his disciples
a certain form of prayer, commonly called, The Lords prayer. The third, that
Moses from the Lord Numb. 6. gave direction to Aa [...]on, and his sonnes, in
what form of words they should blesse the children of Israel.

I answer first generally, that the consequence followeth not from the
authoritie of Christ, and of Moses, and of the Apostles, in or­deyning these,
and these forms of divine worship, for the like au­thoritie in ordinance
Bishops, and Pastours, to ordeyn other, and di­vers forms, for the same end.
What can be spoken more insolent­ly? Christ the Lord, Moses, the Prophets, and
Apostles being im­mediately, and infallibly guided by the spirit of Christ,
have pre­scribed certain set formes of Gods worship; therefore others though
not immediately and infallibly guided by the same spirit, may also prescribe
them. Why may they not by this argumenta­tion, as well frame us a new Canon of
holy Scriptures, considering that even th [...]se verie formes, wherewith also
they equalize their own, are parts, and portions of the same Scriptures. More
parti­cularly. And first for Psalms. I deny that there is th [...] same reason
of a prayer, and of a Psalm; or (whereupon the difference hangeth) that
singing, and praying are all one. For the question is not, which I desire the
Reader once for all to bea [...]n minde) eyther of the internall affection of
him which singeth, or prayeth, or of the subject matter of the song or prayer:
but of the externall act, and exercise of praying and singing. Now these two
exercises both the holy Scriptures, and common sence in everie man, that
pleaseth but to open his eyes, and look upon them, do plainly difference.

For first, if to sing be to pray, then whosoever singeth prayeth: but how far
from truth this is, the Psalmes of David, 1, 2, and many others in which not
the least parcell of prayer is to be found, do plainly evince.

2\. Is any man sad amongst you, Iam. 5. 17. (sayth the Apostle) let him pray:
is he merry let him sing. To pray then, and to sing, are not the same, [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=10) nor which do
agree (to wit primarily) with the same constitution of the minde.

3\. In prayer the Pastours voyce is onely heard, unto which the people,1 Cor.
14, 16 as the Apostle teacheth, are to add their Ame [...] but in sing­ing,
all the multitude have as well their part for tunable voice, as the pastour
himself. Neyther can divers possibly sing together, without confusion, but by
a certain, and set form both of words, and syllables: which yet may be done in
church prayer, and is eve­rie where.

4\. We have the same Apostle els where teaching us thus: [...] phes 5, 19.
Speak­ing to your selvs in Psalms, Hymnes and spiritual songs, &c. And a­gain,
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously, with all wisdom, Colos. 3,
16. teaching and admonishing yourselvs mutually in Psalms Hymns, &c. In
singing then we doe speak to our selvs, or one to another mu­tually: but in
praying, neither to our selvs, nor to our brethren, but unto God alone. And
the reason hereof is evident. When as we read or sing the Psalms of David (for
what other thing is it to sing out of a book,Scalig. po [...]t. li 1. c [...].
2. then to read with a loud, and harmonious voice? of which Harmonie singing
is a kinde): these self same Psalms in this verie use do still remain, and so
are read or sung, as a part of the word of God in the holy Scriptures: and in
which God speaketh unto us: whereas on the other side, we do speak unto God,
in all our prayers, whether mentall onely, or vocall withall.

5\. Even these verie Psalmes, whose matter is prayer, and thanks­giving, were
framed, and composed by the prophets into Psalms, and spirituall songs, for
this verie end, that the men of God might in them teach us, as in the written
word of God, whereof they are parts, both what petitions they in their
distresses put up to the Lord, and also what thanksgiving they returned upon
their deliverance, that so we in reading & singing them, might instruct and
admonish ourselvs both publiquely, & privatly, whether by way of doctrine, or
admonition, or consolation, for the promoteing of the glorie of God in our
hearts.

Lastly, that I may discend unto them, who are onely taught by experience; If
any going out of the temple, wh [...]lst the Church were singing a Psalm,
either before, or after sermon, being asked [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=11) of one that met
him, what the church were then doing, should an­swer that it were at prayer;
would he not be judged by all men to tell a ly? But altogether without cause,
if to sing be to pray, as ma­ny imagine.

Touching the Lords prayer. We deny it to be the meaning of Christ, teaching
his dise ples, when they pray to say, Our father, &c. to binde them, and the
Holy Ghost in them, by which they ought to pray, to a certain form of
words,Iude 21. & sillables, which they should repeat by heart, or (which is
our question,) read out of a book. Because, 1. the two Euangelists Matthew,
and Luke of whom both the one and other did aright both understand, and
expresse the mea­ning of Christ, do not precisely keep the same words. 2. By
these words, when you pray, is meant, whensoever you pray: whereup­on it
should follow, that we were tyed to this stint of words alone, and alwaies:
and so might lawfully use none other, except it be lawfull for us sometimes to
pray raither by the levell of our own dev [...]se, then of Christs prescript.
The words therefore of Cyprian are good in a good sence.Cyprian. de  [...]at.
domin. Mat. 6, 6. To pray otherwise then Christ hath taught, is not onely
ignorance, but guilt, seeing he himself hath sayd, you reject the precept of
God, that you may observ your own tradition. 3\. Amongst the manie, and
manifould prayers of the Apostles to be seen in the holy scriptures, this form
of words is not found: and yet can it not be denyed, but they alwaies prayed
as they were taught in this place by their Master Christ: whose meaning
therefore it could not be to tye them necessarily to anie such certain of
words. 4. It ap­pears by the context, that the purpose of Christ is to speak
of pri­vate, or raither secret prayer, and such as everie Christian apart from
others, and in his closet, with the doore shut unto him, should pour out unto
the Lord. Now that one alone, and by himself should say, Our father, seems not
verie congtuous. Lastly, seeing of the like there is the like consideration,
If the Apostle Iames in these words, Go to now, ye that say, to day or to
morrow we will goe into such a cittie &c.Iam. 4, 13. and vers. 15. For that ye
ought to say, if the Lord will, we shall live, and doe this or that, do
neither simplie fault with the form of words, Calv. in Iam. ch. 4. v. 15. nor
prescribe necessarily anie other, but onely (to use Calvins words) wakens them
from their dream, who without respect of the divine providence, will make
themselvs maysters of a whole yeare, [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=11) when there is not
a moment in their power: so neither are we to con­ceav that our Saviour Christ
Math. 6. and Luke 11 doth injoin unto his anie set words to pray in,Idem in
Mat 6, 9. but onely shewes whither all our prayers and vowes ought to be
referred, Vrsiu [...]s, B [...] ­can [...]s, Pisca­tor, P [...]ins, &c. as
with all other orthodox wri­ters about this matter, the said Author speaketh:
howsoever di­vers uns [...]kilfull men cease not still to sing unto us, euen
to loath­somnes, the song, when you pray say, as the Papists do theirs, This
is my bodie: as though the controversie were about the words, and not raither
about the meaning of them.

But for that we are verie odiously traduced by divers, as abhor­ring from this
form, and that we will not (as they use to speak) say the Lords prayer, I will
in few, and plain terms set down what our judgment is about it.

1\. And seeing that, as the Poet hath it, the names do commonly suit with the
things, we may see, and sorrow withall, in the phrases in common use about
this most Christian duetie of prayer, what it is with the unhallowed multitude
of Christians to pray, namely to say prayer, to read prayer, to hear prayer,
and raither any thing then in­deed to pray, that is, then to pour out the
conceptions of a godly and devout minde unto God, from faith and feeling of
our wants, by the holy Ghost.

2\. We do affirm, that this form of words is unproperly, how commonly soever,
called the Lords prayer: as neither being a prayer as it is the Lords, nor the
Lords as it is a prayer. As it is of the Lord Christ, and so the Lords
(whether by himself uttered in words, or committed to writing by his Euangel
[...]sts) it hath the con­sideration, and respect of a sermon, and of
Euangelicall doctrine, in which Christ taught his disciples; and not of a
prayer put up to his Father: as on the contrarie it neither was, nor could be
used prayer wise by Christ, in so manie words; with whose most persit
sanctimonie it did not agree for him to say, forgive us our trespasses.

3\. We do firmly beleiv, that all, and everie both Church and person is bound
alwayes to pray, as Christ hath there taught: whe­ther we respect the matter
there propounded, or the affections there injoyned, or the commodious, and
compend [...]ous simplicitie, which Christ our Saviour, and onely mayster,
there opposeth, both to the vain bablings, and oft repetitions of the
heathens: and that [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=12) in these things,
and them alone, the commandement of Christ doth consist, we both firmly
beleiv, and confidently avow.

4\. And lastly, we doubt not but that this verie form of words may be, and is
rightly used in prayer unto God, provided there be neither opinion of
necessitie, by which superstitious persons think themselvs stinted by the Lord
to words, and sillables, nor of per­fection, by which many are of minde, that
they have then at the last, and not before prayed per [...]itly, when they
have repeated this form of words. And it is well, if some spot of this myre
cleav not to the fingers of many ministers; which make it a matter of great
conscience not to conclude their, and the churches prayers apply­ed specially
to the present state of things, with this number, and measure of words. Which
custom as it is used verie commonly, so in my judgment, with no great reason,
for these two causes.

First, it seems to crosse all good order, and method, by which men should d
[...]scend from the more generall unto that which is more speciall: and not go
the clean contrarie way, as in this they do.

Secondly, Since the rule, according to Phylosophie, and good reason, is
alwaies before the thing ruled, and that this form is by Christ inst
[...]tuted, for this purpose, that it might be the rule, and squire of all our
prayers,Tertull lib. de Ora [...]. and as Tertullian saith, is premised, as
the foundation of all our accessorie d [...]s [...]es, me thinks the same
should rai­ther be used in the first place; upon which as the same author hath
it, everie one should build the circumstances of his occasioned requests.

It remayneth that in a few words I answer that, which is by some objected
touching those solemn blessings, at the first imparted by the Patriarks to
their first born, and after by the Preists to Israel the first born of
God.Exod. 4, 22.

And to let passe, 1. that the composers, and imposers of the Leyturg [...]es
now in use have not equall authoritie with Moses the man of God, not are th
[...] writings any way comparable with his: 2. That Moses did not prescribe
unto the Priests a st [...]nt of words for blessing (much lesse to be read out
of a book) but the substance of the thing;See M.  [...] son of written  [...].
which by manie Arguments, save that I studie for brevitie, might be proved. 3.
If that were Moses his minde, and the Lords by him, the minister were bound to
the same form of [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=12) blessing upon the
Israell of God now,Gal. 6, 16. which the church is: since there is nothing in
it not morall, and perpetuall, or not concerning the church now,Calvin. in
Gene [...]. c. 27 1. as then. I do answer this one thing, & the same in
Calvins words, viz. that these blessings were not ordinarie prayers, but a
lawfull author [...]tie divinely interposed to testifie the grace of election:
which  [...] also confirms by divers reasons. Neither can anie man who
considers the words of the text make question, but that the Priests in
blessing (Israel, not God) do direct their speach unto Israel by way of
promise, and not unto God by way of prayer. So blesse you (saith Moses) the
children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord blesse thee, &c. The same is to
be judged of the salutations of the Apo­stles in their Epistles, (whereof they
are a part, and so a part of the holy Scriptures): albeit yet they in them, as
the Preists in their blessings, desired to have their truly loving affection
taken know­ledg of by them to whom they wrote: and what good things they both
desired at the hands of the Lord for them, and also promised them in his name.

2\. We dislike all reading of prayer in the act of praying, as in­convenient,
yea directly contrarie unto that act? In prayer we do pour out matter, to wit
the holy conceptions of the minde, from within to without; that is, from the
heart to God: on the contra­rie, in reading, we do receav and admit matter
from without to within; that is from the book, into the heart. Let him that
pray­eth do that which he doth, not another thing, not a divers thing. Let the
whole man, and all that he is, both in soul and bodie, be b [...]nt upon God,
with whom he converseth. The eyes of the minde are lifted to God in prayer;
and why not the eyes of the bodie also? both which  [...]e that prayeth, by
intending them upon a book, both depresseth, & averteth from God. The Apostle
exhorteth, that the men pray, lifting up pure hands to God in everie place. 1
Tim. 2, 8▪ In like manner, (besides the reason of the thing, we have the
Patriarks, Prophets, Christ himself, with his Apostles, and disciples, for
insample of lifting up the eyes to heaven in prayer. Not this gesture of body
is simply necessarie but most convenient, (save in some great temp­tation, and
depression of minde, both to expresse, and further the intention of a godly
heart.

Let devout and learned men (if they please, commit to writing [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=13) their holy
meditations, and secret conferences with God, as did Austin, and others
amongst the ancients; and many of later time [...] which may be read, and that
with no small benefit both by Pastour and people; but privately, and for
better preparation unto prayer. Now the preparation unto prayer is verie
unseasonable at the self­same time of the solemn performance thereof; and
unreasonable in, and by the self same act.

3\. Seeing that publique prayer (as Bucanus saith) is a second part of the
ministrie; Bucanus cō m [...]n places of prayer. as also that amongst the
gifts of the holie Ghost, wherewith the Pastor is indued from above, that is
not small, not to be despised, by which he is able conveniently both for
matter, and form, to conceav a prayer according to the churches present
occa­sion;, and necessities; by the reading of this prescript form that (truly
excellent) gift giuen of God for this end is made void, and of none use, and
the spirit (contrarie to that which ought to be) ex­tinguished. 1 Thes. 5, 19.
The manifestation of the spirit (saith the Apostle) is given to everie one
(especially to everie Pastour) to profit withall. 1 Cor. 12, 7. But he who
reads a form of prayer conceaved, and consigned by another, doth not manifest
the pastorall gift, (for of the internall affection our question is not) of
the spirit given to him to profit withall, but to that other by whom the form
of prayer was ind [...]ted.

4\. If to read such a form of prayer be to pray aright, and pastour like no
probable reason can be rendred, wherefore to read a ser­mon, or homilie, is
not as well to preach aright, and as is required of the Pastour of the Church.
Which so being, small reason had the Apostle,Act. 6. treating of the
ecclesiasticall ministerie, which princi­pally consists in these two
exercises,2 Cor. 2, 16. to crie out, as he did, who is sufficient for these
things? For who is not sufficient even of the vul­gar sort? who can not read a
Leiturgie, and an Homilie?

5\. The spirit (saith the same Apostle,Rom. 8, 26. speaking of all Christians)
helpeth our infirmities, for we know not what to pray, as we ought. Yes, Paul,
(with your l [...]av right well; for we have in our prayer-book, what we ought
to pray, word for word, whether the spirit be pre­sent or not. What then is to
be done in this busines? That which Tertullian saith the Christians of his
time did.T [...]tul. Apol. against the Gentles. We pray (saith he) without any
to prompt us, because we pray from the heart. But he who reads his prayers, or
rather the prayers of him that p [...]nned them, [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=13) and his lesson
out of a book, hath one that prompts him, and that diligently, both what, and
how much, and after what manner, and with what words and sillables he ought to
pray.

Lastly, if it would be just matter of shame to any earthly Father, that his
childe, who desired of him bread, fish, or an egge, should need to read out of
a book, or paper, Father, pray you give me bread, fish, or egge; how much more
contumel [...]ous is it, to our heauen­ly father, and his holy spirit,Zac. 12,
10. Rom. 8, 26, Iude  [...]0\. Zac 11, 15. wherewith he furnisheth all his
chil­dren, specially his ministers according to their place, that an help so
unworthie, and more then babe [...]sh, and indeed the instrument of a foolish
sheepheard, namely a bare reader (with which kinde of vermin Rome, and England
are pestered) should be used by such godly, & learned pastors, as wherewith
the reformed churches are furnished

### 1.4. CHAP. IIII. Of the Ecclesiasticall Presbyterie.

VVE do so acknowledg, and approve of, as divinely insti­tuted, the Presbyte
[...]es of the particular churches, as with all we judg them sundrie wai
[...]es defective. As first we require: that all receaved into the colledg,1
Tim.  [...] 2\. Tit. 1, 5, 7, 9 and company of Elders, even those which are
called governers, should be apt to teach, and able to exhorte with sound
doctrine, and convince g [...]nsayers, and that not onely pri­vately, or in
the consistorie, but in the publick assemblie also, as the nature of their
publique office requireth. I am not ignorant, what that learned man Gersom
Bucer in his late treatise hath published about this matter, [...] gov. nam.
p4. 32, 33, 44. neither do I unwillingly assent thereunto: pro­vided onely,
that what he requires in those Elders, that they be able to performe
publiquely, and in the church assembly, if not exactly, yet competently.

A second defect, which we wish supplyed is, that of annuall, o [...]
tryennuall or temporarie, they might be perpetuall, and for l [...]fe, (except
by some casualtie, or occurrence they be disabled) as the pastours themselvs.
This terme of years for the Elders administra­tion [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=14) in the Reformed
Churches,pag. 34. 35, 36. the forenamed author in the same place doth not so
much defend, as excuse; but it seemeth raithe [...] needfull to have it
reformed (which is also the desire of the said learned man) and that for these
reasons.

1\. The Apostle Paul calling unto him the Elders of the church of E­phesus to
M [...]letum, Act. 20, 17, 28. doth pronounce of them all, as well the
gover­ners, as those that laboured in the word, that they were made Bishops or
overseers of the same Church, by the holy Ghost. Now the autho­ritie of that
the appo [...]nter ought to work in the appointed great conscience, not
lightly to relinquish that charge, which by the dis­position of the holy Ghost
they had taken upon them.

2\. The same Apostle doth in the same place admonish, [...]. 28, 29, 30, 31.
and ex­hort the same Elders that they should take heed unto themselvs, and to
all the fl [...]k, lest the same, after his departure should unhappily be
damnified, either by wolves entering in among them, or such as should rise up
from themselvs speaking perverse things. Now if the date of their Eldership, &
charge were shortly to be out, they might well think with themselvs, that the
Apostles admonition for after times did not much concern them, whose term of
office should so shortly be expired, and were perhaps to follow the Apostles
depar­ture at the heeles.

3\. It was sacriledg for the Levites being consecrated to the Lord, for the
service of the Tabernacle and Temple, to retire from the office undertaken by
them, although (age growing upon them) they were exempted from some the more
labo [...]ous works of that ministration:Numb. 8. How then is it lawfull for
the Elders, or Dea­cons (being now no more at their own disposing, but as the
Levites of ould, the Lords sacred and consecrated ones) to withdraw so lightly
from his speciall service? No man under the Law might change a beast, I
[...]vi. 17, 9, 10. if clean, no not a better for a worse, if once hallowed to
the Lord. How much lesse may the church then discharge her officers (or they
themselvs) ministering faythfully, and as they ought?

Lastly,1 Tim. 5, 21.  [...]nd 6, 14. 1 Corm. 14, 37. 1 Tim. 5, 11,  [...]2.
the Apostle Paul instructing the Church in Timothy to keep the commandement of
Christ unrebukeable untill that his glori­ous appearing, doth not permit, no
not to the widowes & D [...]aco­nesses to  [...]elinquish the office once
taken upon them: unto whom [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=14) for that verie
cause he forbids mariage it self, otherwise permitted to all, and to some
injoyned. How much lesse lawfull is it for the Elders, or Deacons of the
church (whose both condition, and mi­nisterie is far more excellent) for far
lighter causes, to look back, and relinquish their vocation, wherein Christ
hath in such sort pla­ced them?

A third thing there is, and that of most moment, viz. that the Elders do not
administer their publique office publiquely, as they should, but onely in
their private consistorie. And first, the admini­strat on of everie office
doth  [...]n right follow the nature of the same; whether domesticall in the
familie, or civill in the common wealth, or spirituall in the Church: the
Elders office then being publique, requires answerable, and publique
administrat on. Not that it is unlawfull for the Elders to convene, and meet
apart from the bo­die, and to deliberate of such things as concerns the same,
and so to do sundrie things by vertue of their office, but because that is not
sufficient,Colos. 4, 17. neither do they indeed fulfill their publique, and
church-office, office, which in the Lord they have receaved, except as
privately, and and in their consistorie, so also (and that specially)
publiquely, and in the face of the congregation they exequute the same.

2\. The Apostle beseecheth them of Thessalonica that they would in love highly
esteem for their works sake, 1 Thes 5, 12, 13. not onely them which labou­red
among them, to wit, in doctrine; but them also, which were over them in the
Lord, and admonished them. 1 Tim. 5, 17. But of the work of their Elders which
govern, the Reformed churches must needs be igno­rant; neither doe, or can
they know, whether they be good, or bad. Their pastours they do prosequute
with due love, & honour, out of their own certain knowledg of them and their
work, but their Elders onely by hearsay.

Lastly,Act. 20, 17, 28. the same Apostle warneth the Elders of  [...]phesus,
that they attend & take heed to the whole flock, in which they were made
Bishops. But it cannot be, that he should ministerially, as he ought, feed the
whole church, whose voice the greatest part thereof never so much as once
heareth. To lead, or receav a she [...]p now and then into the sheepfould, to
confirm one that is weak, or correct one that stray­eth, and that apart from
the flock, is in no wise to feed the whole flock, as the Apostle requireth.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=15) And that
this point may be made the more plain, let us discend unto some such
particulars, as in which the Elders office seemeth specially to consist. And
they are, the admitting of members into the church, upon profession of faith
made, and the reproving and censuring of obstinate offenders, whether sinning
publiquely, or privately with scandall. As we willingly leave the exequut on,
and administration of these things to the Elders alone in the setled, and well
ordered state of the church, so do we deny plainly, that they are, or can be
rightly, and orderly done, but with the peoples pri­vat [...]e and consent.

For the first, Christ the Lord gave in charge to his Apostles to preach in his
name remission of sins, and therewith life eternall: and that such Iewes, or
Gentiles, as should beleiv, and repent, viz. professe holily faith and
repentance, (for to judg of the heart is Gods prerogative) they should receav
into the fellowship of the Church, and baptize. And that these all, and everie
of them were publiquely, and in the face of the congregation to be
administred, the Acts of the Apostles do plent [...]ously make known. And if
Bap­tism, the consequent of the confession of faith, in them baptized, and the
badg of our consociation with Christ and his Church, be to be celebrated
publiquely, why is not the profession of saith pro­portionably (although by
the formerly baptized through a kinde of unorderly anticipation) to be made
publiquely also, and there­withall the consociation ecclesiasticall, as the
former? The cove­nant privately made, and the s [...]al publiquely annexed are
dispro­portionate.

I further add, that since persons admitted into the Church, are by the whole
bodie, if not of enemies, at least of strangers become and are to be reputed b
[...]ethren  [...]n Christ most nearly joyned, and they with whom, they are to
call upon one common Father pub­liquely to participate of one holy bread, and
with whom they are to have all things, 1 Cor. 10, 17 even bodily goods after a
sort common, as everie one hath need, Act. 2, 44, 45. it seemeth most equall,
that not onely the Presbyters (the churches servants under Christ) but the
whole commonaltie also should take knowledg in their persons, both of their
holy profession of faith, and voluntarie submission made as unto Christ
himself, so to his most holy institutions in his Church.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=15) To come to
the second head. And 1. those who sin, that is, with publique scandall, rebuke
publiquely, 1 Tim. 5, 20. sayth the Apostle, that others also may fear. And if
the Elders themselvs, of whom he speaketh, for whose credit the greatest care
is to be taken much more any other, Beza in ann. on the place. as Beza rightly
observeth. And that not for this cause alone, that when the punishment comes
to one, the fear might reach unto ma­ny, which yet wise men in all publique
exequutions would haue carefully provided for, but also that both he that so
sinneth may be the more ashamed, and others both within, and without may
with­all take knowledg, how litle indulgent the Church is to her own dearest
ones in their enormous sins.

2\. With this also it well conforteth, that Christ the onely Doc­tour of his
Church would haue not onely sins scandalous commit­ted in publique, publiquely
reproved,Math. 18, 15 1 [...], 17. and before the multitude, but even those
which are private, obstinately persisted in, when he saith, Tell the Church,
&c.

I am not ignorant how diversly divers men do interpret these words: whilst
some by the Church do understand the civill come of the Magistrate; others the
Hierarchicall Bishop, with his offici­als; others the senate of Elders
excluding the people. And thus whilst these strive for the power, and name
withall of the church amongst themselvs, the church indeed, and which Christ
the Lord meaneth is well nigh stripped both of power, and name.

The first of these three interpretations I will not trouble my self with;Beza,
Zan­ch [...]us, Parker, G Bucer, &c. as being almost of all, and that worthily
expleded, and re­jected; and aboundantly refuted by divers learned men: the
two latter are to be aslau [...]t [...]d with almost the same weapons.

The former of these two, though it be in it self the more diffe­rent from
Christs meaning, yet comes it in this circumstance now in consideration, the
nearer the truth in our judgment, considered in its exequution: since neither
the Bishops, nor their officials, Chauncelours, Commisaries, or other Court-
keepers do exclude the people from their consistories, and courts: but to
offer them­selvs in their publique judgments, and censures to the ve [...]w of
all, who please to be present thereat. And I think  [...] of either amongst
Gentiles or Iewes, or Christians (be it spoken without offence) before this
last age, that publique judgments and [[Page
30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=16) other acts of
publique nature, as these are, should be privately exer­cised, and without the
peoples privitie. It was not so in Israel of ould, where by Gods appointment
the Elders were to sit, and judg in the gates of the cittie: nor in the
synagogues themselvs, from which manie are of minde, how truly I will not say,
that the Chri­stian Eldership was derived, after the Roman tyrannie had
confined into them the Iewes civill conventions, and judgments; nor in the
primative church, no not in some ages after the Apostles, as might easily be
proved out of Tertullian, Cyptian, and others, if I would trie the matter in
that court:Aug [...]t of Ch [...].  [...] lib. 3. but it is much more safe, as
Austin saith, to walke by the divine Scriptures.

And first the word  [...] church, originally Greek, answering to the Hebrew
[...], doth primarily, and properly signifie a conven­tion of citizens called
from their houses by the publ [...]que c [...]yer, ei­ther to hear some
publique sentence or charge given: but translated to religious use, denoteth
an assemblie of persons called out of the state of corrupt nature into that of
supernaturall grace, by the pub­lishing of the gospell. Now the Elders, or
presbyters (as such) are, and so are said to be, called, to wit, to their
office of Eldership, but called out they are not, being themselvs to call out
the church, and unto it to perform the cryers office. Neither do I think that
the name Ecclesia, Church, hath been used by any Greek author, be­fore the
Apostles times, or in their daies, or in the age after them for the assemblie
of sole governers in the act of their government, or indeed before the same
governers had seazed into their own, & onely hands the churches both name and
power.

But you will say, as learned men use to do, that these Elders su­steyn the
person of the whole multitude, and supplie their room, for the avoiding of
confusion; and so are  [...]ightly, as commonly called The church
representative.

I answer. First, no godly, no nor reasonable man will affirm, that this
representation is to be extended to all the acts of religion, or indeed to
others, then these, which are exercised in the govern­ing of the Church. What
is it then? The Elders in ruling, and governing the Church must represent the
people, and ocupie their place. It should seem then, that it appe [...]teyns
unto the people, un­to the people primarily, and originally (under Christ) to
rule and [[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=16)
govern the church, that is, themselvs. But who will so say of a government not
personall, but publique, and instituted, as the churches is?

2\. If the Elders in their consistorie represent the church, then whatsoever
they either decree, or do agreeing to the word of God whether respecting faith
or manners, that also the church decreeth and doth, though absent, though
ignorant both what the thing is, which is done, and upon what grounds it is
done by the Elders: this being the nature of representations, that what the
representing doth within the bounds of his commission, that the represented
doth primarily, and much more, as but using the other for his in­strument. Now
how dissonant this is to true faith and pietie, how consonant unto the Papists
implicit faith, no man can be ignorant: and I had raither wise men should
consider, then I aggravate.

3\. The constant, and universall practise of the Apostles & Apo­stolick
churches do quite crosse this consistorian course. The Apo­stle Paul, well
acquainted with the meaning of Christ, doth 1 Cor. 5. so reduce into practise,
the rule and prescript of his maister Matth. 18. or to use the words of the
Bishop of Chester,Bish of Win­ch [...], ans [...] to Tertus pa. 43. There
commaunds to bring into practise this power, In the name of Christ, with his
spirit, as he seems to leav no place for doubting to him, who with diligence,
and without prejudice, will compare together these two places, what the Lord
meaneth, when he saith, Tell the Church, This our Apostle doth in that place
reprove not the Elders or go­verners alone, but with them also the whole
commonaltie and bo­die, for tolerating the incestuous person amongst them.
Which therefore accordingly, as his authoritie Apostolicall,2 Ge [...]in. 11,
28. and care for all the churches d [...]d require, he admonisheth, and
directeth, that as mindefull both of the sinners repentance, and salvation,
and there­with of their own puritie, they would exclude, by due order, that
wicked man from their holy fellowship. And that by these words, (when ye are
come together) the whole church is to be understood, manie, but heavie freinds
to the peoples libertie, Iesuites, P [...]cla­tists, and others do graunt. But
we will annex certain reasons for the further clearing of the thing.

1\. They among whom the fornicatour was, who were puffed up, ver. 1, 2, 4, 7▪
13. when they should have sorrowed, and out of the middest of whom, he was
[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=17) to be put,
who had done that thing; they were to be gathered together in one, and to judg
and excommunicate that incestuous person. But the fornicatour was not amongst
the Elders alone, neither were they alone puffed up when they should have
sorrowed, neither was that wicked man to be taken out of the midst of them,
and still left in the midst of the people; and therefore not to be judged by
them alone, but by the church with them, though governed by them.

2\. It did not of ould apperteyn onely to the Levites and Elders in Israel,v.
1. 7. to purge out of their houses the materiall leven, but to eve­rie father
of familie also: so by proportion to the whole church now to purge out the
leven spirituall there spoken of: which also could not leven the whole lump,
or church, in the Apostles meaning, except it had concerned the whole church
to purge it out.

3\. The Apostle wrote not to the Elders onely, but with them to the whole
bodie,i [...]s. 9. not to be commingled with fornicators, covet [...]us
persons, or the like, called brethren: he therefore admonisheth them, as the
other,11. to cast their stone at the incestuous man, for the taking him away
from the Lords people.

Manie more Arguments, and the same verie clear, might be drawn to this end,
out of the text it self; but for brevitie sake I will omit them, and annex
this onely one which followeth, from the second chapter of the second Epistle.
The same Apostle writing to these same Corinthians about the same incestuous
person, but now penitent, as before delinquent, seriously exhorts them, that
look what severitie they had formerly shewed in censuring him for his sin, the
like compassion they would now shew, in  [...]eceaving him again upon his
repentance: therein plainly insinuateing, that this busines was not in the
hands of the Elders alone, except we will say, that they alone were made sad
by the Apostles reproof, that they alone by their studie, defence,
indignation, zeal, ch. 7, 9, 11. and 2, 7, 8. &c. testified, that they were
pure in the thing, and except it belonged to them alone to par­don, and
comfort the repentant sinner, and to confirm their love unto him.

And whereas some would inclose this whole power within the Apostles circuit;
as if he alone, Bishop-like, had passed sentence judicia [...]ie upon the
offender, and onely committed the declaration, [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=17) and publication
of it in the church, to some his substitute, I deem it not lost labour breifly
to  [...]hew how erroneous this opinion is of externall monarchicall
government, yea power also, which is more, in the church of Christ.

And, first, one alone, how great soever, cannot suffice to make the Church,See
the Bishop of Church, an­swer to Tertus p. 41, 42. or a congregation, which
Christ hath furnished with power of binding, and loosing Math. 18, 17, 18.
both reason, and scripture teaching, that for an assembly, and congregation at
least two or three are required. ver. 19. The Church (which name signifies a
multitude, designeing by a new trope, one alone singular person, Whitakers of
the authoritie of the Script. lib. 1. as saith D. Whitakers against Stapleton,
going about to prove that the name of the church belongs to the Pastours, or
Byshops, or Pope alone.

2\. It is expresly affirmed 2 Cor. 2, 6. that the incestuous per­son was
censured by many: which many or more, the Apostle oppo­seth to himself alone,
as appeareth by the context; and not to all, as some erroneously think.

3\. The Apostle plainly, and sharply reproveth the Corinthians for that before
his writing they had not voyded that sinfull man, their holy fellowship, and
so prevented the reporte by which such a crime, and the same unpunished came
to his ears. This their pow­er then the man of God doth not seaze into his own
hands as for­feyt by their default in not using it, but vehemently (and as
became a faithfull minister) exhorts and admonist [...]es them to use it, as
they ought in the judging, purging out, and taking from among themselvs that
wicked man, and so any other within, or called a brother, sinning in the like
manner.

4\. If the Apostle Paul being absent from Corinth had excom­municated this
sinner, then had he judicially condemned,See  [...] chap. 2. and judg­ed a man
unaccused, unconvicted, and unreproved (at least face to face, and before his
judg): then which what more unjust can be imagined of, or ascribed unto the
holy Apostle? I conclude therefore with Peter Martyr, The Apostle, as great as
he was, Pet. Ma [...].  [...] 1  [...]or. ch. 5. doth not so far usurp to
himself power, as that he one, and alone by himself should excommunicate:
which yet the Pope, and ma [...]y Bishops (both Romish and English) dare do:
Injudging he goes before others, as it is meet the cheif in the Church should
do, that so the lesse skilfull multitude might be directed in judging by their
voting before them.

[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=18) Thus much
of this place. The next followeth, which is Acts 1,Act. 1. When another was to
succeed in the room of Iudas the traytour, not Peter alone, or the Apostles
with him, but (that the ordination might be just and lawfull, being made with
the knowledg of the people as­sistent, Cyprian l. 1. Epist. 4. and examined by
the verdit, and judgment of all) the multitude of the disciples together did
substitute two,ver. 15. whom they deemed most ex­cellent, that of them the
Lord, who knew the hearts of all men, might take unto himself the man, which
he knew most fit. That which belonged unto God,Gal. 1, 1. namely, to designe
an Apostle immediately, was left unto him: the disciples also in this work,
rete [...]ing what might be their libertie:Calvin in Act. 1. which Calvin
notes upon this place, to have been a kinde of middle temper.

The third place followeth,Act. 6. which is Act. 6. handling the choice of
Deacons, and that by the same Church in Ierusalem, not now small, as before,
but (which I wish may be marked to stop the pas­sage, which some think lyes
open for escape through smaller as­semblies) now become great, and populous.
In this busines the Apostles informe the church what kinde of men they ought
to chuse: the multitude chuseth whom they judg fit, and meet accor­dingly; and
the same present to the Apostles: upon whom so cho­sen by the people, the said
Apostles impose hands as a solemn sym­bole of their consecration, joyning
therewith common prayer. Now if the Deacons onely betrusted with the churches
monie were not to be made but by the peoples suffrage, and election, much
lesse Pastors & Elders, unto whose fidelitie under Christ the same Church doth
commit the incomparable treasure of their souls.

To the same purpose (in regarde of the matter in hand) serveth that,Act. 14.
which we read Act. 14, 23. where Paul and Barnabas do or­deyn Elders in everie
Church, by suffrages (not their own as some fan­cie, unto whom to lift up, &
to lay on hands is all one) but the peoples; or by the lifting up of hands, by
which signe, the Grecians, as appears in Demosthenes, and others, the peoples
vote or voyce-giving in their popular assemblies was wonte to be made. I ad
(which is espe­cially to be observed) that the Apostles in doing their part in
the ordination of Elders, did what they did, as it were, by the way: staying
onely, most like, two or three daies in a place: so as they could not possibly
by their own experience take sufficient know­ledg, [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=18) what persons in
the church were apt to teach or govern: who able to exhort with sound
doctrine, 1 Tim. 3. & to convince the gainsayers: how un­blamable they were,
how watchfull, given to hospitalitie, temperate, Tit. 1. &c. and with these,
how mannered wives, and children they had. These things onely the bretheren
which conversed with them publiquely, and privately, could sufficiently take
knowledg, and experience of. Vpon their electing them did the ordination
conferred by the Apo­stles, as the hands of the Church, depend. By election
the persons elected have right to their offices; into the actuall possession
where­of they are solemnly admitted by ordination.

This troup of proofes, that known,Act 15. and notable place Act. 15. shall
shut up: in which we have the peoples libertie in the chur­ches both of
Antioch, and Ierusalem plentifully confirmed and commended by Apostolick
practise to ensueing churches, and times.

And first,See Whit k. of the author. of II.  [...] lib. 1, ch. 5. sect. 1. it
is evident, that in the church of Antioch together with the Elders (which it
appears then it had Act. 14, 21, 23.) the brethren were admitted into the
fellowship of the busines, and dis­quisition made about circumcision: Paul &
Barnabas with the rest of the delegates then sent being brought on their
journey by the church. ver. 3. the letters also being written back from
Ierusalem to the bre­thren which were at Antioch, ver. 23. and which is
specially to be noted, then, and not before, delivered when the multitude were
come together. vers. 30. So in the church at Ierusalem the messengers from
Antioch were receaved not onely of the Apostles and Elders, but of the Church
with them, vers. 4. And as the question was propoun­ded so was it, discussed
before the whole church by the Apostles, & Elders comming together to look
unto that busines. ver. 6. yet not so as the brethren were wholly bound to
silence, seeing that ver. 11. the whole multitude is said to have held their
peace, that is, to have yeilded to Peters speach, and reasons. Lastly, as
Silas and Iudas were sent with Paul and Barnabas, by the Apostles, and Elders
with the whole Church unto Antioch, vers. 22. so were the letters written back
in the name of them all to the brethren at Antioch. ver. 23. And al­though the
decrees to be observed by the churches of the Gentiles, (whereof no one,
excepting Antioch, had any delegates present) which were also part of the word
of God, and holy Canon, could [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=19) come from none
other then the Apostles,See Iohan. Wolph. in 2 long. c. 23. immediately
inspired by the H. Ghost, they notwithstanding in the publishing of the same,
did not disdam the consenting suffrage of the brethren of that par­ticular
church of Ierusalem, where the assembly was.

And surely, if it ever did, or could apperteyn to any church of­ficers or
governers whatsoever to represent the church-assemblies, in elections,
censures, and other Ecclesiasticall judgments, and oc­currences; then without
doubt unto the Apostles in an eminent, and peculiar manner (especially living
in that rude, and childish state of the church) considering both how
superlative their office was, and how admirable their gifts, and endowments of
the holy Ghost, together with their incomparable both pietie, & prudence: by
which they were both most able, and willing to promote the Christian faith in
holynes. And although this constant, and uni­form both practise, and
institution of the Apostles unto divers (po­litick persons, swelling with
pride of fleshly reason, dispising Apo­stolicall simplicitie, and who, as
[...]eneus speaks, would be rectifiers of the Apostles, [...]. against Heres.
[...]ib. 3. Theodor. dial. 1. Tertull. a­gainst Her­mog. seem worthie of light
regard, yet to us, who beleiv with Theodoret, that we ought to rest in the
Apostolicall, and prophe­ticall demonstrations, and who with Tertullian do
adore the fulnes of the Scriptures, they seem of singular weight, and moment.

And whilst I consider with my self in the fear of God, how it was the Apostles
duetie to teach the disciples of Christ to observ what­soever he commanded
them; Mat. 28, 20.  [...] Cor. 14, 37 ch. 4. 1. a Cor. 5, 5. and how the
Apostle Paul testifieth, that even the things, which he wrote touching order,
and comlynes to be ob­served in the church-exercises, were the commandements
of the Lord, as also how the same Apostle clearly professeth, that he and his
fellow officers were onely to be reputed as ministers and ambassa­dours of
Christ, to whom therefore in the exequution of their of­fice it was not
permitted to do, or speak the least thing, which they had not in charge from
him, it is unto me a matter of great scruple, and conscience, to depart one
hair-breadth (extraordinarie acci­dents ever excepted) from their practise, &
institution, in any thing truely ecclesiasticall, though never so small in it
self: whatsoever, by whomsoever, and with what colour soever is invented, and
im­posed, touching the government of the church which is the house and
tabernacle of the living God. [...] Tim. 3. And a partner in this faith I do
hope [[Page 37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=19) to
live, and die, and to appear before Iesus Christ, with bouldnes in that great
and fearfull day of his coming.

I add, that seeing the Christian congregation as the spouse of Christ, free,
and ingenuous, hath the church officers whosoever, as Christ Iesus her
housbands, so also her servants for Iesus sake, 2 Cor. 4, 5. 1 Tim. 4, 16, ch.
5, 17, 18. whom under Christ she trusteth with her eternall salvation, and
un­to whom for their labour shee oweth wages for releif and mainte­nance;
Considering also how much it makes both to whet on the diligence of the
ministers, and to inforce the diligence of the peo­ple, whilst these on the
one side consider with themselvs, how they have them set over them, whom above
others themselvs have liked, and made choice of; and they on the other side,
that they are set over those by whom they before others were made choice of,
and elected: that which Cyprian hath, seemeth most equall, and of in­stitution
morall, and unchangeable, that the commonaltie fearing God & keeping his
commaundements, Cypr. Epist. 4, li. 4, 1. should have the speciall hand either
in chusing of worthie Preists, or ministers, or of rejecting the unworthie:
which also, saith he, we see to be founded upon divine authoritie.

The same is to be held of excommunication. Seeing that it be­hooveth the
Christian multitude to avoide the fellowship of the ex­communicated not onely
in the course of religion, but even in common, and familiar conversation (the
rights of nature, familie, and common wealth ever kept inviolated): and that
whom yester­day I was to repute a brother near, and dear in Christ, to morrow
I must hould as an Heathen, and Publican, and as,Math. 18. 1 Corinth. 5. for
the destruction of the flesh, delivered to Sathan: who is so unequall a judg,
as not to think it a most equall thing, that the multitude should clearly, and
undoubtedly take knowledg both of the heynousnes of the crime, and
incorrigeable contumacie of the person, after the use of all means, and
remedies for reclayming him. This if it be not done, then doth not the church
herein live by her own, but by her officers faith; neither are her governers
to be reputed as servants, but Lords unto her; neither do they exercise their
office popular [...]lie in the church as they ought, but tyrannicallie, as
they ought not, by Chrisostoms verdit.Chrisost. in Epist. to Tit, His words
are these. He who bears himself upon an externall and worldly power, because
he rules legally, and that men must of necessitie obey him, doth oft times,
and that not without cause, exercise authoritie [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=20) against the will,
and wel-liking of his subiects? But on the other side, he who will be over
those, who voluntarily submit unto him, and can him thank, and yet will
presume to do things as himself liketh, & as if he were to give account to
none other thereof, that man raither exerciseth his au­thor [...]tie
tyrannically then popularly.

The Lord God put it into the hearts of those who bear greatest sway in the
reformed churches, to indeavour the furnishing of the same with such Elders,
as may both fully, and constantly, and po­pularly, discharge their place, for
the peace of their own consc [...]en­ces before God, the edification of the
Churches over which they are set, as also for the abateing, if not abolishing,
of that contempt in which Prelat [...]sts, and supercilious persons use to
hould these lay-Elders, as they call them.

But now lest any should take occasion, either by the things here spoken by us,
or els where of us, to conceave, that we either exer­cise amongst our selvs,
or would thrust upon others, any popular, or democraticall Church-government;
may it please the Christian Reader to make estimate of both our judgment, and
practise in this point, according to these three declarations following.

First, we beleev, that the externall Church-government under Christ the onely
mediatour,See Bodin of Commonu [...]. book 1. chap. last. and monarch thereof
is plainly aristo­craticall, and to be administred by some certain choice men,
al­though the state, which manie unskilfully confound with the go­vernment, be
after a sort popular, and democraticall. By this it ap­perteyns to the people
freely to vote in elections and judgments of the church: in respect of the
other we make account, it be­hoves the Elders to govern the people even in
their voting in just li­bertie,1 Cor. 12. 28 1 Tim. 5, 17 Heb. 13, 17. given
by Christ whatsoever. Let the Elders publiquely pro­pound, and order all
things in the church, & so give their sentence on them; let them reprove them
that sin, convince the gain-sayers, comfort the repentant, and so administer
all things according to the prescript of Gods word: Let the people of faith,
give their assent to their Elders holy and lawfull administration: that so the
eccle­siasticall elections, and censures may be ratified, and put into so­lemn
exequution by the Elders, eyther in the ordination of officers after election,
or excommunication of offenders after obstinacie in sin.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=20) 2\. We
doubt not but that the Elders both lawfully may, and ne­cessarily ought, and
that by vertue of their office,Act. 20, 18. to meet apart at times from the
bodie of the Church, to deliberate of such things as concern her welfare, as
for the preventing of things unnecessarie, so for the preparing (according to
just order) of things necessarie, so as publiquely, and before the people,
they may be prosequuted with most conveniencie, and least trouble that may be.

3\. By the people whose libertie, and right in voteing we thus avow, and stand
for; in matters truly publique and ecclesiasticall, we do not understand (as
it hath pleased some contumeliously to upbraid us) women, and children; but
onely men, and them grown, and of discretion: making account,1 Cor. 14, 34,
35. 1 Tim. 2, 12. that as children by their nonage, so women by their sex are
debarred of the use of authoritie in the Church.

### 1.5. CHAP. V. Of Holy-dayes.

IT seemeth not without all leven of superstition, that the Duch reformed
Churches do observ certain dayes consecrated as holy to the Nativity,
Resurrection, and Ascention of Christ, and the same also (as it commonly comes
to passe where humain devices are reared up by the side of divine
institutions) much more holy then the Lords day, by him himselfe appoynted.

And for this, first we are taught by Moses, thus speaking unto the people of
Israel in the name of the Lord.Exod. 31, 13 Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep
for it is a signe between me and you thoroughout your genera­tions that ye may
know that I am the Lord that doth sanctifie you, that it appertayns unto God
alone (and to no man, or Angel) as to sanctifie whether person, or thing, so
to institute the signes, or means of sanctification, of which number holy
dayes are. I ad, if the Lord as lehovah, and the God of his people Is
[...]ael, and su­pream Lawgiver,Exod. 20. do ordeyn the sanctification of a
day in the de­calogue, how far should Gods servants be, eyther Magistrates
[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=21) from
takeing this honour of God unto themselves by commaund­ing a holy day; or
subjects by observing it to give the same unto any other save God alone?

2\. It was not the least part of Israels defection, first in the wil­dernes,
afterwards under Ieroboam; that they ordeyned a  [...]east to Ichovah, whom
they represented to themselvs by the goulden calvs which they had made.

3\. Seeing that every first day of the weeke (called by Iohn the Lords day) is
consecrated by Christ himself and his Apostles to the memoriall of Christs
resurrection, and Gods solemn worship; it seems too much for anie mortall man
to appoint, or make an anni­versarie memoriall (and the same most solemn and
sacred) of the same resurrection, or so to observe it.

Lastly, that you may see it was a man, from whom this device came, and so
erred, as one saith (not to meddle with the uncertain­tie either of the day of
the month, or month of the yeare in which Christ was born, as it is most
certain on the contrarie that, this 25 of December cannot be the time, what
good reason (I would know) can be rendred, why a day should be consecrated
rather to the birth, circumcision, and ascension of Christ, then to his death,
seeing that the Scriptures every where do ascribe our redemption and salvation
to his death, and passion in speciall manner?

### 1.6. CHAP. VI. Of the celebration of Mariage by the Pastours of the
Church.

SIxtly, and lastly, we cannot assent to the receaved opinion and practise
answerable in the Reformed Churches, by which the Pastours thereof do
celebrate marriage publiquely, and by vertue of their office: [...]. 3, 16,
[...]. because

1 The holy S [...]r [...]pture divinely inspired, that the man of God, that
[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=21) is the
minister, may be perfitly furnished to every good work, doth no where furnish
or oblige the minister to this work.

2\. Marriage doth properly and imediately appertein to the fa­mily, (which is
primarily framed of man, and wife) and Citties,K [...]ch [...]m. cu [...]s
phyl. d [...]p. 28, c. 6. and other politicall bodies consisting of manie
familyes. Seconda­rily, and mediately to the common wealth, and publique
gover­ners of the same: who therefore weighing their office, and what
concerneth them doe accordingly, in the low countries, come­lily, and in good
order [...]y that knott of marriage amongst such theire subjects, as require
it at their hands.G [...]n. 1, 27. & 2, 22. Chem.  [...]xam. part. 2 of mar.
Neither did God as a minister joyn in marriage our first parents (as some
would make him) but as their common father by right of creation, and the chief
maister of the marriage: neither ought the Pastours office to be streched to
anie other acts then those of religion, and such as are peculiar to
christians:Bu [...]anu [...] in Commo [...] pla­ces. amongst which marriage
(common to Gentiles as well, as to them) hath no place.

Lastly, considering how popish superstitition hath so far pre­vailed, that
marriage in the Romish church hath gott a room a­mongst the sacraments, truly,
and properly so called, [...] and by Christ the Lord instituted; the
celebration, and consecration whereof the patrons, and consorts of that
superstition will have so tyed to the priests fingers, that, by the decree of
Evaristus the first, they account the marriage no better then incestuous,
which the priest consecrates not; it the more concerns the reverend brethren,
and Pastours of the reformed Churches to see unto it, that by their practise
they neither doe, nor seem to advantage this popish errour. And these are the
points of our difference frō the Belgick churches: which are nei [...]her so
small; as that they deserv to be neglected, es­pecially of them unto whom
nothing seemeth small; which pro­ceeds from the gracious either mouth or
spirit of the Lord Iesus: nor yet so great, as to dissolv the bond of
brotherly charitie, and communion.

If any now shal object, that there are yet other things beside these, in which
we consort not so well with them, nor they with us; as for example, 1. In the
sanctification of the Lords day, in which we seem even superstitiously rigid.
2. In a certain popular exercise of prophesi amongst us: 3. In our dislike of
the publique Tem­ples, [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=22) and sundry other
indifferent things, as they are termed; be­sides, that we are accused by some
for not having in due estimation the magistrates authoritie in matters of
religion; I do answere, and first, that in the two first of these, the same
Churches do not differ from us in judgment, but in practise: as appears
evident­ly by the Harmonie of the Belgick Synods lately published by S. R. Of
the former of those two, the author of the same book, testifieth in his
Preface to the Reader, pag. 11, 12. that the Synod held at Middleborough in
Zeland, 1581. did supplicate unto the magistrate, that by his authoritie he
would decree the sanctification of the Lords day, abolishing the mani­fould
abuses thereof. That sanctification then of the Lords day which the reformed
churches do endeavour unto, and desire to have for­tified by the magistrates
authoritie, that we (considering it as imme­diately imposed by Christ upon his
churches) by the grace of God, labour to perform, being thereunto induced by
these, amongst other reasons.

### 1.7. CHAP. VII. Of the sanctification of the Lords day.

FIrst the sanctification of the Sabboth is a part of the Deca­logue, or morall
law, written in tables of stone by the finger of God: of which Christ our Lord
pronounceth, that no one  [...]o [...]e, or title shall passe away. Math. 5,
18. Now if it be unpossible for one title of the law to be dissolved, much
more for a whole word, or commande­ment, and one of ten; by which it should
come to passe, that Chri­stians now were not to count of ten commandements of
the moral law, but of nyne onely.

If reply be made that the fourth commandement is so ceremo­niall, that
notwithstanding it hath this morall in it, that some tyme be assigned, and
taken for the publique ministerie, and exercises of religion, I answer:

1\. That the same may be said in generall, of the Mosaicall cere­monies
whatsoever: all, and everie one whereof affoardeth some­thing [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=22) morall. For
instance, The Mosaicall Temple, or Tabernacle had this morall in it, and
perteyning to us, as well as to the Israe­lites, that it was a fit and
convenient place for the Church assembly. Is therefore the precept for the
tabernacle as well morall,Exod. 25, & 26\. Exod. 20. as that for the Sabboth?
Is it alike a part of the decalogue, and morall law? Is it alike one of the
ten Commandements?

2\. If the morall sanctification of the Sabboth stand in this, that sometime
be assigned to the publique ministerie, then were the Is­raelites, especially
the preists, and Levites, bound to an everie day sabboth and sanctification
morall,Num. 29, 38 being bound everie day to offer in the tabernacle, and
temple, two young lambs, the one at morning, the other at evening for a daylie
sacrifice.

3\. If the second precept of the Decalogue do in the affirmative part injoyn
all outward instituted worship of God; then also by consequence it requi
[...]es some set time (as a naturall circumstance ab­solutely necessarie to
everie finite action) in which the same wor­ship is to be performed. In va
[...]n then is the fourth commandement, and to no purpose, if it injoyn
nothing at all, but that which was injoyned before, namely in the second.

4\. The verie essence of the fourth commaundment consists in this, that a day
of seaven be kept holy, that is separated from com­mon use, and consecrated to
God, in wh [...]ch as in a holy day the works of divine worship, and such as
serve for the spirituall man ought to be exercised, as appears plainly by the
reason taken from Gods example, upon which the commandement is founded. Take
this away, and the life of the precept seemeth to suffer violence. The truly
godly take some tyme for the exercises of Gods worship not onely publique, and
Ecclesiasticall, but private also, and dome­sticall: yea in their closets, as
Christ teacheth. Yet are not these either times, or places, in which such
things are done, then others ar [...] ▪ Eyther therefore a day in it self must
be holy, by divine institution, or the Decalogue is may [...]ed in the fourth
commandement.

But you will doubtlesse object the change made from the last daie, to the
first day of the week. I answer, 1. that change is mee [...] ­ly
circumstantiall, & in which also the essence of the precept i [...] not
abolished, but established. As for example. God promised unto children duly
honouring their parents a long life in that land (to wit ofEx [...]d. 20.
[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=23) Canaan,
then to be possessed by his people) which the Lord thy God gave unto them.
Ephes. 6, 2. The same promise by the Apostles testimonie still stands good to
obedient children, though out of Canaan, and in another land, so doth the same
precept stand in force for the san­ctification of the sabboth, though removed
to another of the seven dayes by the Lords hand.

2\. It is evident that this alteration was made both upon weigh­tie ground,
and warrantable authoritie. The ground is Christ our Saviours resurrection
from the dead:2 Cor. 8. 17 in wh [...]ch mans new creation (at least in
respect of Christ working the same in the state of humi­liation for that
[...]nd undertaken) was perfeited: a new kinde of king­dome of God, Luke 7,
28. after a sort established: and, as the Scriptures speak, all things made
new. And why not also a new sabboth after a sort? in which yet notwithstanding
the former (as  [...]he creation also by Christ [...] is not so properly
abolished, as perfited.

The authoritie upon which this change lea [...]eth, is no lesse then of Christ
himself: who, first, by word of mouth for the fortie dayes after his
resurrection,Calv. in Act 1, 3. Ioh. 20, 19 26. Luke 24. 36  [...] Gen 2, 2.
taught the disciples the things, which ap­perteyned to the kingdom of God,
that is, as Calvin saith, whatsoever things they published either by word or
writing afterward. 2\. By his example, or fact, setting himself in the middest
of the same his Apostles, the first day of the week, and as Iunius saith,
everie eigth day, till his ascension into heaven: & therein not onely blessing
them with his bodily, but much more, with his spirituall, and that speci­all
presence. 3. By his spirit speaking in his Apostles, whose of­fice it was to
teach his disciples to observ what things soever he had com­manded them, Mat.
28, 18. Act. 20, 26. 1 Cor. 4, 1. and to declare unto them the whole counsail
of God: who also in their whole ministration were to be reputed none other
then the ministers of Christ, and lastly whose both writing (& preachings
accordingly) even about order and comlines to be kept in the church exercises
were the commandements of the Lord Iesus. 1 Cor. 14, 37 Agreable here­unto it
was, that the Apostle Paul coming to Troa [...], and there with his companie
abid [...]ng seven dayes, Act. 20, 66, 27. he did not till the first day of
the week (which yet was the last of the seven) call together the a
[...]sciples to eat bread, 1 Cor. 16, 1, 2. that is to communicate in the
Lords supper. Hereupon al­so it was, that the same Apostle ordeyned, that on
everie first day of the week, as on a day sanctified for the holie assemblies,
and  [...]ttest [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=23) for most
effectuall provocations to the supplying of the necessities of the poore
Saints, everie one of the richer sort, should lay something apart, as God had
blessed him, for the releif of the Churches in Syria, at that tyme oppressed
with great penurie, and want. Lastly upon none other ground but this, was this
day, by Iohn the Apostle, na­med expresly the Lords day, Rev 1. 10▪  [...]gnat
ad Magnes.  [...]ull. Martyr. Apol. 2. Tertull. de Idol Eus [...]b. l. 4, 23
de Dionis. August. de verb. Apoll. serm. 15. as being consecrated to the
resurrection and service of the Lord Iesus: for which end also it was kept in
the primitive Churches, as appeareth by most ancient and authen­tick writers.
Neyther did Pathmos more distinctly denote a certain and known Iland, and Iohn
a certain and known person, then did the Lords day a day certain, and known
especially unto Christians, unto whom the Apostle wrote. Whereunto also
agreeth that of Austin, This Lords day is therefore so called, because on that
day the Lord rose again, or that by the verie name i [...] might teach us, how
it ought to be consecrated to the Lord.

The second reason is, because the sanctification of the Sabboth (the
circumstantiall change notwithstanding) doth as well belong to us in our
times, as to the Israelites in theirs; whether we respect the Reason of the
commandement, or the end. The reason is taken from the example of God himself,
who rested the seventh day from the works of creation. The ends are, 1, that
we framing our selvs to Gods example, after six daies spent in servile works,
or works of acquisition, might rest the seaventh. 2. That we might recount
with our selvs, not onely with thankfull, but also composed hearts, as the
creation of man,1 Pet. 1, 3. and of all other things for mans good, so al­so
his re-creation, & renovation clearly shineing in the resurrection of Christ
from the dead. 3. That sequest [...]ing our hearts, tongues,Esay 58, 13. and
hands from everie servile work (so far as humain infirmitie will bea [...]) we
might cons [...]crate unto God a certain and set time, & day, for the works of
pietie towards him, and of charitie towards men. And albeit the state of
Israell of ould compared with ours,Gal. 4, 1. was childish, and elementa
[...]ie, and so needed the more helps both for restraint, and supportance; yet
have not we atteyned to such manlike perfection, as that we need none at all
in this kinde.

And (not to meddle with the table of Christians, whose ave [...]s [...]es from
the due sanctification of this day gives no obscure testamonie, that the same
is sacred, & of God, from which their prophane con­versation [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=24) so much
abhorreth) how behooffull, and necessarie it is for the true worshippers of
God, that for some certain, and whole day they should emptie, and disburden
their hearts of their earthly cares (though in themselves lawfull) that so
they might wholy con­secrate themselvs to God, publiquely in his house, and
privately in their own; partly by preparing themselvs, and theirs for the
pub­lique worship, and ministrie, & partly by calling to minde in them­selvs,
and instructing, and examining of those which belong unto them, as they ought,
touching the things which they have publique­ly heard; as also in m
[...]ditateing of the most glorious works of Gods hands, the verie experience
of everie godly, and devout man may teach him. He that sels himself to the
holy, and severe obser­vation of this the Lords Sabboth, turning away his foot
from the Sab­both, not to do that wherin he delighteth, Esay. 58, 13, 14. on
the Lords holy day, & calling the Sabboth a delight, the holy of the Lord, &
honourable and shall honour him, not doing hi [...] own wayes, nor performing
his own pleasure, or speak­ing his own words; then shall he delight himself in
the Lord, and he will cause him to  [...]ide upon the high places of the
earth, and feed him with the heritage of Iacob his father, because the mouth
of the Lord hath spoken it: Where as on the contrarie, no man doth or can
neglect the same without apparent prejudice and wrong to pietie, and goodnes
both in himself, and those under him. To let passe other things, how easily
doth this thought steal into the heart not thoroughly perswa­ded of the
holynes of this day? what now! There is in the day no holynes by Gods
appointment, save onely, as in it, the publique sermons of the church with
prayer, and thanksgiving are to be fre­quented, and performed: for me to be
present at everie sermon, speciallie made in the cittie, both on the Lords
day, and everie o­ther day of the week, my speciall calling, and worldly
affairs will not permit: Besides, it were verie commodious for me on this
Lords day, to make an end of such or such a work which I have in hand, to deal
in such a busines, to undertake such a journey; And what should hinder me from
so doing? But provided alwaies, up­on this condition, that look what this day
wants, the morrow, or next day shall plentifully supply: or, if it so fall
out, thorough mine importunate bu [...]sines, that I bee something more
behinde this week in these things, I will certainly, and at the furthest, the
[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=24) next week
be so much the more frequent in them, and so make God, and my soul amends. And
why (as is the guise of ill debters) will not men desire, and take longer day,
even to months, and years also? considering how on the one side the heart of
man is dayly faster taken & held by the bait of worldly profit, and pleasure;
and on the other, lesse affectioned to Gods holy word, by the lesse fre­quent
hearing of it. And hence, alasse, cometh it to passe, that true pietie
languisheth so much in the most, and with it such other christian vertues as
use to accompanie it. Hence flow those tears of sorrow, and lamenting, which
no true christian casting his eyes upon the reformed churches can forbear.

The third Reason is taken from that Apostolicall determination (wrested by
many to a contrarie meaning) Coloss. 2, 16, 17.Colos. 2, 16. 17. Let no man
therefore judg you in meat, or drink, or in respect of a feast or new moone,
or sabbaths; which are the shadow of good things to come, but the bodie is
Christ. Whence it appeareth more then plainly, that onely those sabboths are
abolished by Christs comeing in the flesh, which were types and figures of
Christ to come, of which sort as there were not a few instituted of God by
Moses, so doth this Apostle here, and elswhere sufficiently declare the
abrogateing, and abolishing of the same by Christ. But that the Sabboth, of
which we now speak comes in that reckoning we plainly deny.

For, 1. In its primary institution Gen. 2. there can nothing be found not
wholy morall. Let a man haveing many e [...]es as Argus, search the same with
a candle, he seekes (as we say) a knot in a bul [...]ush, if he think to find
in it any either shadow of Christ, or shadow of shadow. If any shall except,
that God by Moses did enjoyn unto the Israelites the sanctification of this
day, that it might be a signe between him, and Israel throughout their
generations, Exod. 31, 13. that they might know, that he is the Lord that doth
sanctifie them, I do an­swer, first, in the words of Arminius,Armin. in theol.
disp. pr [...]v. p. 186, 187. that the Reason upon which God did afterwards
commend unto his people, the sanctification of the sabboth because it was a
signe between God and his people, that it was Iehovah that sanctified them,
may be applyed to the times of the new testament, & further with them also the
sabboths sanctification. 2\. Admit that this use were ceremoniall, and
typicall in the fourth comman­dement, yet were there no force in the
consequence from one end [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=25) & use typicall,
and ceremoniall, superinduced, and brought in up­on the precept, to prove the
precept it self ceremoniall, and ty­picall in the institution. By the same
reason it may be affirmed, that both the Covenant of God made with Abraham, I
will be thy God, Gen. 49, 3. and the God of thy seed, as also the right of the
first born, for a double port on, & manie things more of like consideration,
were merely ceremoniall, and typicall, seeing that even unto them also, were
annexed, and that by Gods appointment, divers typicall, and temporall
respects:Gal. 3. 8, 16, 17. of which notwithstanding none soundly minded will
deny, that the one is euangelicall, and the other na­turall. 3. Considering
that the observation of this sabboth was either injoyned (as I perswade my
self it was from Gen. 2, 1, 2, 3. & Exod. 16, 26, 30.) to Adam, in innocency
and not yet needing Christ; or at least, that the reason of the institution
did fit the state of innocencie as well, as it did the Israelites afterward I
doe undoubtedly conclude, that the same Sabboth in the primarie, and
essentiall institution thereof is not to come upon their file, which as the
shadows of future things had Christ for the body.

Fourthly, I argue from that premonition of Christ Math. 24, 20. Pray that your
flight be not in winter nor on the Sabboth. Mat. 24, 20 I am not ig­norant how
the most divines both ancient, and later do under­stand this sermon (as
Chrisostom saith) as made of the Iewes; seeing that,Chrisost ho [...] 77\.
[...] Mat. 24. as the same authour hath it, neither the Apostles did observ
the Sabboth day, neither yet were they in Iudea when these things were done of
the Romans: many of them having departed this life, and the rest (if anie
survived) having bestowed themselvs in other places. But (with due reverence
to them all be it spoken) it seemeth by the text to be otherwise. For 1.
Christ made not this sermon to the Iewes, [...]. 3. as Iewes, but to his
disciples, and those alone, and the same comming unto him secretly to be
taught by him: whom he fore­warned in the same place how that first at the
hands of the Iewes in Iudea, and after, of the Gentiles every where, they
should be e­vill intreated for his names sake. v. 3, 4, 9. 25, 26. with Luke
21. 12. Secondly, our Saviour in saying Pray ye, makes it plain, that that he
speaks of them, and their associates unto whom he speakes, to wit, Christians.
Lastly how could it be that Christ, who by his death (now drawing so neare as
that there was but a [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=25) step unto it) was
to abrogate, and abolish all Iewish ceremonies, and shadowes, should to
carefully provide for the so religious ob­servation of a shadowish, and
ceremoniall sabboth: and that not for a day or two, but for so many yeares
after the same his death; Could anie thing more weightie be spoken by Christ,
or which could more deeply imprint in the hearts of men a religious regard of
the Sabboth, then that it behooved them to obte [...]n by prayer at Gods
hands, that they might not be const [...]eined unto that thing although
permitted them of God in case of urgent necessitie, which might violate and
interrupt the publique, and solemn sanc­tification thereof; It is true then
which Chrisostome saith, that the Apostles did not observ the Sabboth, to wit,
Iewish: but the Chri­stian Sabboth, o [...] Lords day they did undoubtedly
celebrate.

The fift and last Reason may be fetcht from the verie Gentiles themselvs, who
directed by the glimps of the light of nature, how darkly soever shineing in
them, had their holy daies, and some of the same such, as in which not so much
as the pleading,Var  [...] and deter­mining of suites were admitted. It
seemeth naturall, that some day, and morall that some day certain, and
distinct, be sacred unto God: and the same (as Iunius saith) every seaventh
day): [...] Gen. 2, 2. in which men forbearing all servile works, may
consecrate, and give themselvs to God in the duties of pietie, and of charitie
to men. Which with what hinderance unto the one, and other is everie where
neg­lected, can scarse either be uttered, or conceaved. For what tra [...] ­va
[...]l if upon the overslipping of the most seasonable seed-time, a slender
harvest follow; or that (the market day being neglected) penu [...]ie of
provision should be found in the family; We christ an [...] have the Lords day
by the Lord Christ assigned us for the exercises of pietie, and mercie, in
which he offers, and exhibits h [...]rself in the fruits of his gracious
presence in a singular manner to be seen, and injoyed of his, religiously
observing the same. Let us at no hand (as alike unmindfull of Gods ordinance
and mans infirmitie suffer) the fruit of such a benefit to dy in our hands:
but let us accordingly acknowledg the same in thought, word, and work, to his
honour, and our own good.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=26)

### 1.8. CHAP. VIII. Of the exercise of Prophecie.

THere are they (whose names I forbear, for their credits sake) who have not
spared, and that in their publique writings, to lay to our charge, that we
will needs have all, and everie member of the Church a Prophet, and to
prophesie publiquely. With what mindes they let loose their tongues to utter
these, and manie mo most false and absurde vituperies against us, we leav it
to God to judg, who knoweth: with what conscience, and desert of cre­dit
therein, unto thee (Christian Reader) into whose hands this our Apologie shall
come.

We learn from the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 14, 3. that he who pro­phesieth speaketh
unto men to edification, exhortation, & comfort: which to perform
conveniently, and as becomes the church-assemblie, we make account comes
within the compasse but of a few of the mul­titude; happily two or three in
each of our churches, considering their weak, and depressed estate. Touching
prophesie then we think the verie same, that the Synode held at Embden 1571
hath decreed in these words. 1. In all churches, whether but springing up,
Harm Synod  [...]. pag. 21 22. or grown to s [...]me ripenes, let the order of
prophesie be observed, according to Pauls institution. 2. Into the fellowship
of this work are to be admitted not onely the ministers, but the teachers too,
as also of the Elders and Dea­cons, yea even of the multitude, which are
willing to confir their gift re­ceaved of God, to the common utilitie of the
Church: but so as they first be allowed by the judgment of the ministers, And
as the A­postle somet [...]mes said,2 Cor. 4. 13. We beleev, and therefore we
speak, so because we beleev with the Belgick churches, that this exercise is
to be ob­served in all congregations, therefore we also observ it in ours.Luke
2, 46, 47 & [...] 4, 15, 16. Ad. 8, 4 n [...]th 11 19, 20. 21. & ch. 13. 14 15
16 & ch. 18, 24, 25, 26, & [...] Of this our both faith & practise, we have
these amongst other speciall foundations.

The first we fetch from the examples in the Iewish church, where libertie both
for teaching and disputing publiquely both in temple and synagogue, was freely
given to all gifted accordingly, without respect had to any office.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=26) If any
object, that the examples of Christ, and the Apostles in this case are
incompetent, seeing that Christ was furnished with his own, and the Apostles
with his authoritie; he alledgeth that which is true in it self, but to small
purpose; considering we lay not our foundation in this, that Christ and his
Apostles so d [...]d; but in that libertie so to do, was alwaies, and in all
places graunted, & some­times offered them. This libertie they obteyned not by
the au­thoritie of Christ, which the Rulers of the Synagogues & Temple no more
acknowledged then they did Christ himself: but by the order then receaved, and
still continued to this day amongst the Iewes,In. 18, 18. that they whom with
the Scriptures they call wise men, with­out all regard of publique office,
having any word of exhortation to the people, should say on, as we have it
written Act. 13, 23.Mat. 23. 34. 1 Cor. 1, 20. Where­unto  [...]ad, that
divers of them in whom we instance were furnished with no such authoritie
specially from Christ.

The second we take from the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 14▪ where to the full, he
informeth the church at Corinth of the order of that exercise, which they had
formerly violated. [...] 1 Cor 14  [...] P. 1.  [...] on 1 Cor. 14, 31. Which
whole order (ac­cording to Bezaj is apparently taken, from the receaved custom
in the Iewish Synagogues. Which custom saith Peter Martyr) seeing it was of
[...]uld both good and laudable in the synagogues of the Iewes, the Apostle
disdeyns not to transfer it to the church of Christ. of which also he ten­ders
this reason, because it was not a legall ceremonie, but servs to the
edification of the Church. If this be so, then must they needs take their
marks amisse, who imagine that the Apostle in this place speaks of the
extraordinarie gift, and exercise of prophesie. And although it be not like,
that the Church of Corinth was, in that so plenteous effusion of the gifts of
the spirit, altogether destitute of extraordinarie prophets, yet that the
Apostle did not in that place aime at them, may be proved by manie mo, and the
same (as I think) firm arguments drawn from the self same text. Which that I
may do the more commodiously, the prudent reader must call to minde, that upon
the foundation of the extraordinarie prophets, [...]ph. 2, 20. as well as of
the verie Apostles, the church is built; and that that mysterie of Christ, ch.
3, 4. 5. by the spirit immediately, and infalliblie inlightining their minde,
was in the same manner, though not in all in the same degree, revealed to
them, and the other.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=27) This so
considered, 1. It seems altogether unprobable, that so manie Prophets of this
ranke (although inf [...]riour in gifts) should have been found in that one
small congregation, as the Apostle in­sinuates ver. 24, 29, 31, that Corinth
had.

2\. The Apostles in Corinth not onely behaved themselvs inor­dinately in the
church, but withall (as by interpreters from ver. 29, and 32 is generally
delivered were subject to errour in the verie doctrine which they propounded;
which to affirm of the extraor­dinarie Prophets, these skilfull m [...]ister
builders, who together with the Apostles la [...]d the foundation, together
participated the same holy spirit, seemeth not a litle to shake the foundation
of Christian religion. And if one of these extraordinarie prophets might
[...], why not they all: And  [...] the Prophets, why not the Apostles. And
[...]f they might  [...], how should it appear, that they have not cried? And
so by consequence, what either then was, o [...] now is the firmnes and
certaintie of the Christian fa [...]th?

3\. Seeing that the Apostle ver. 34, 35, injoyns women deep si­lence in this
church exercise, not permitting them a all to speak; it seems most plain that
he hath no [...]y, nor respect at all, to these extraordinarie gifts and
endowments of prophesie authorising even women furnished with them,Fool 15,
21. Iudg. 5, 1.  [...] Kin. 22, 14  [...] 2, 36. Apoc. 2, 20. to speak
publiquely, and in mens pre­sence, as appears in Mirjam, Deborah, Huldah,
Anna, as also even in Iezabel her self in regard of order, and others.

Lastly, the Apostle ver. 36, upbraideth those verie Prophets un­to whom he
directeth his speach, as such, as from whom the word of God came not: but
without cause, yea not without notable injurie, if they were extraordinarie
Prophets, that is, inspired with the holy Ghost, and his immediate
instruments: seeing that from these kinde of Prophets, as well as from Paul
the Apostle the word of God came, though in different degree, and measure.

The third foundation of this exercise is laid in the manifould, and the same
most excellent ends atteynable onely by this means. 1. That God may be
glorified, whilst everie one doth administer to ano­ther the gift, 1 Pet. 4,
10, 11. which he hath receaved, as good dispensers of the ma [...]ssuld grace
of God. 2\. That the spirit be not extinguished, that is the gift of
prophesie,1 This. 5, 9 2 [...]. or teaching; in which it may so come to passe,
that some in the church, though no ministers, may excell the verie pastours
[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=27) themselvs.
3. That such as are to be taken into the ministerie of the church,1 Tim. 1, 3.
1 Ioh. 4. 1. Apo. 2, 2, 7. with c. 1, 11. may both become, and appear apt to
teach. This seeing the Apostle would have done, he would questionlesse have
some order for the doing of it: which, excepting this of prophesie, we have
none of Apostolicall institution. 4. That the doctrine of the church may be
preserved pure,See  [...]. Acent.  [...]ra­  [...]ag.  [...]ath. pag. 168,
169. Iuke 2, 40. & 4, 21, 2 [...]. Act. 17, 2. & 18, 24, 26, 28. 1 Cor 14 35
[...] l. 6, c. 12, 3 [...] 1 Cor. 14, 4, 24, 25. Act. 20 28.  [...] a­gainst
Tu [...]. S [...]h. pa. 67, 68.  [...] Mart. in 1  [...]. 14, 29. from the
insection of errour: which is far more easilie corrupted, when some one or two
alone in the church speak all, and all the rest have deep, and perpetuall
silence enjoyned them. 5. That things doubtfull arising in teaching may be
cleared, things obscure opened, things  [...] convinced; and lastly, that as
by the beating together of two stones  [...] appear­eth, so may the light of
the truth more clearly  [...]hine by disputations, quest [...]ons, and answers
modestly had, and made, and as becomes the church of Saints, and worke of God.
6. For the edification of the church, and conversion of them that beleiv not:
and this the raither because it apperteyneth not properly to the pasteurs, as
Pa­stours, to turn goats or wolves into sheep, but raither to  [...] the flock
and sheep of Christ, in which the H. Ghost hath made them over­seers. 7\. And
lastly, lest by excluding the commonaltie and multitude from Church affairs,
the people of God be devided, and charitie lestened, and familiaritie, and
good will be extinguished between the order of mi­nisters and people.

### 1.9. CHAP. IX. Of Temples.

TO speak nothing of the office of the Christian magistrate in demolishing the
monuments, and snares of Idolatrie (which these Temples want not, if themselvs
be not such) I account that the consideration is one of a temple, [...] 2, 15.
as a temple, that is, a holy place, as it is counted of the most, consecrated
either to God him­self, or to some Saint (made therein a false God,Pet. Mart
[...] 2  [...]. 10, 27. though being a true Saint) whose name it bears; and
which for its magnificent building, and superstitious form agrees far better
to the  [...] re­ligion [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=28) pompous, and
idolatrous as it is, then to the Reformed,Ioh. Wolph  [...]n 2 King. 17, 19,
and 19, 6. and Apostolicall simplicitie. And another, and the same far divers,
of a place, although in the house sometimes consecrated for such a temple,
partly naturall, which is simplie necessarie to everie  [...] action; partly
civill, in which the church may well, and conveni­ently assemble together. The
former use I deem altogether un­lawfull; the latter not so, but lawfull,
provided alwaies that the opinion of holines be removed, and withall such
blemishes of su­perstition, as wherewith things lawfull in themselvs are
usually stayned.

### 1.10. CHAP. X. Of things indifferent.

VVE do so repute manie things as indifferent, or mean in themselvs and then
own nature (& as houlding a middle place as it were, between the things
simplie commaunded, and the things simplie forbidden of God, as that the same
things being once drawn into use, and practise, do necessarily undergoe the
re­spect and consideration of good or evill. This the Apostle teach­eth 1
Corinth. 14. in his so diligent warning the Church of Co­rinth, that all
things be done decently, in order, and to edification. The things then thus
accounted indifferent, when they once come into use in the church, do either
work the exercises of religion the more comely, orderly, and edificative, and
are such as without which, the same exercises cannot be performed but
confusedly, un­comelily, and un [...]iuitfully, at least in part, or els they
swarve from the Apostolicall Canon. With this commaundement of the Apostle,
yea of Christ the Lord, agrees the rule of the phylosophers, The ac­cessorie
fell [...]w [...]th the nature of the principall. For example. Let the
principall, as they speak, be some naturall good thing, the verie least
accessorie or circumstance, by which this principall is rightly, and orderly
furthered, and promoted undergoes also the conside­ration of a naturall good.
The same rule houlds in actions civill: [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=28) much more in the
things, which appertein to religion, and Gods worship. I therefore conclude,
that the least  [...]ite, or ceremonie ser­ving rightly, and orderly to
further the principall act, and exercise of religion, doth worthily obteyn,
after a sort, the respect and de­nomination of a religious, and
ecclesiasticall good thing: which principall act if it do not truely, and
effectually promote and ad­vance, it is a vain addition at the best, beseeming
onely vain purpo­ses, and persons,Math. 15, 9. which worship God in vain,
teaching for doctrines mens traditions: seeing whatsoever is to be done in the
church, is al­so, and first to be taught, that so it may be done.

2\. Whatsoever hath being in nature, is some certain thing first, and
properly, and to be reduced to some certain, and distinct head. Now all things
whatsoever in use, either in, or about Gods wor­ship, may and must be referred
necessarilie to some one of these three heads. Eyther they are things
naturall, and simplie necessarie to the exercise; of which sort are the
naturall circumstances of time, and place, without which no finite action can
be performed: also for the administring of Baptism, either a fonte or other
vessell to hould water: and so for other adjoints absolutely necessarie for
the administring of the holy things of the Church: or secondly, they are
things civill, and comely: as for example, A convenient place in which the
church may conveniently, and comelily meet to­gether, not a stable, or
swynestye, also that habit of the minister, that coveting of the L. Table,
those ministring vessels, and other accessories, and appurt [...]nances
whatsoever, without which the holy things of God, cannot be dispensed so
[...]villy, and comely, as is meet. Or lastly, they are properly things
sacred, and holy, and by consequence, parts of externall divine worship: and
the same either commaunded by God, and so lawfull, or of mans devise, &
there­fore superst [...]t [...]ous.

Now if any shall further ask me, what power then I ascribe ey­ther to the
civill magistrate, or Church-governors for mak [...]ng lawes about things
indifferent? I answer touching Church-gover­ners first,Izec. 44. 11 Ma [...].
20. 2 [...]. 2 Cor. 4, 5. 1 Pet. 1, 3. being to treat by and by of the
Magistrate, that no such power, to speak properly, belongs unto them; as being
not Lords but servants of the church, under Christ the onely Lord thereof:
ex­ercising, as saith Austin, from Christ, and the Apostles a m [...]mb [...],
[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=29) not a
Lordship: and who therefore are to learn, if ther will be c [...]ment with
their [...],August of the  [...] of God l. 19. B [...]r [...]t. of Caus.
[...]. 2. Which  [...] them, that a  [...] better becomes them, then as
[...]pter, as Bernard speaketh, For to  [...]ake lawes, by all mens graunt,
belongs to them, and them onely, who do swey  [...]pters,  [...] Lords  [...].

Moreover the holy scriptures everie where teach, that the high­est Church-
officers, and governers are but ambassadours of God, and interpreters, and
proclaymers or cryers of his word. But nei­ther  [...] nor interpreter, nor
cryer, no nor the herald, the most honourable of all proclaimers, [...] contr.
3. l. 5, c. 7, or publishers of Edicts, can commaund any thing  [...] of the
least matter by his own authoritie, as lunius sayth rightly. It is certain,
that the governers of Churches do stand in need of wisdom and discretion for
the applying, & determining of the common rules of order and comlynes taken
from the Scri­pture, and common sense, to certain cases, and according to
certain circumstances: But what makes this for the power of making lawes in
the Church? which as M. Perkins makes account, is a part of Christs
prerogative royall: [...] c. 18. considering withall, that neyther the Church,
not the meanest member thereof is further bound unto these their
determinations, then they apper to agree with order, and comlines: neither are
the ministers in any thing at all, (as are the magistrates in manie things to
be obeyed for the authoritie of the commaunder, [...] on 2  [...]. of  [...].
but for the reason of the commaundment, which the mini­sters are also bound in
duetie to manifest, & approve unto the con­sciences of h [...]m over whom they
are set.

### 1.11. CHAP. XI. Of civill Magistrates.

VVE beleev the verie same touching the civill Magistrate with the Belgick
reformed Churches, and willingly sub­scribe to their confession: and the more,
because, what is by many restreyned to the Christian Magistrate, they extend
indefinitely, and absolutely to the Magistrate whomsoever. And that surely
upon [[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=29) good
ground: seeing the magistracie is one, & the power the same, whether the
person be christian or heathen: neither is there wanting in an heathen
magistrate (that he might rule as he ought) authoritie of order, but will of
person: neither is his power increased by the accession of christianitie, but
onely sanctified, as is first his person. The Prince rules over his subjects,
as he is a Prince, and they subjects simply, not as faithfull or christian, he
or they. One­ly Christ the Lord of our faith hath the faithfull (as faithfull)
for his subjects: neither are the subjects of Kings as subjects,  [...]ame
part of the church, but of the kingdom. [...]p of Ch [...]. to  [...]citus
[...]. 35.

Besides, there is one and the same christian faith of the Prince and subject,
and all things common unto both, which spring from the same; seeing that in
Christ Iesus there is neither servant, nor freeman, I ad neither magistrate,
nor subject, but all are one in him. As therefore none, no not the least power
of publique admi­nistrat on comes to the subjects by their christianitie; to
neither is the Princes, thereby at all increased. And indeed how can it? The
ma­gistrate though [...]-Heathen hath power, as the minister of God for the
good of his subjects to command and procure in and by good,R [...]n. 13, 4.
and lawfull manner, and means, whatsoever apperteines either to their
naturall, or spirituall life, so the same be not contrarie to Gods word: upon
which word of God if it beat, God forbid, that the christian magistrate should
take libertie to use or rather abuse his authoritie for the same: which yet if
he do eyther the one, or other, whether by commanding what God forbids, or by
for­bidding what God commaunds, seeing it comes by the fault of the person,
not of the office, the subject is not f [...]ed from the bond of allegiance,
but as still tyed to obedience as active for the doing of the thing commanded
if it be lawfull, so passive, if unlawfull, by suffering patiently the
punishment though un­justly inflicted.

Lastly if anie civill, and coactive power in things whether ci­vill, or
ecclesiasticall, come to the magistrate, by his christianity, then if it so
fall out that he make defection from the same, whe­ther by idolatrie, or
heresie, or profanes, it must follow, that thereupon his kingly power is dim
[...]nished, and abridged: where­by how wide a window, or gate rather would be
opened to sed [...]ti­ons [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=30) subjects under
pretext (specially catholick) religion, to taise tumults in kingdoms, no man
can be ignorant.

### 1.12. CHAP. XII. Of the Church of England.

THere remains one, and that a great matter of exception against us, and the
same the fountain well nigh of all our calamitie: to wit, that we seem evill-
affected towards the church of England, and so averse from the same, as that
we do no lesse then make a plain secession, and separation from it.

I answer, First, that our fayth is not negative: as Papists use to ob­ject to
the Euangelicall churches, nor which consists in the con­demning of others,
and wipeing their names out of the bead- [...]oul of churches, but in the
edifying of our selvs: neither require we of anie of ours in the confession of
their fayth, that they either re­nounce, or in one word contest with the
church of England, whatsoever the world clamours of us this way. Our faith is
foun­ded upon the writings of the prophets, and Apostles, in which  [...]o
mention of the church of England is made. We deem it our dutie what is found
in them to beleev with the heart to righteousnes, and to confesse with the
tongue to salvation. Rom. 10, 10▪

Secondly, we accord (as far as the Belgick, and other Reformed churches) with
the Church of England in the Articles of faith, and heads of Christian
religion published in the name of that church, and to be found in the Harmonie
of the Confessions of fayth.

Thirdly, if by the Church be understood the Catholick Church dispersed upon
the face of the whole earth, we do willingly ac­knowledg, that a singular part
thereof, and the same visible, and conspicuous is to be found in the land, and
with it, do professe and practise what in us layes, communion in all things in
themselvs law­full, and done in right order.

But and if by the word Church be understood a spirituall poli­tick body, such
as was in her time, the Church of Israell; and in hers [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=30) the church of
Rome, Corinth, the seven churches of Asia, and others with them partaking of
the same Apostolicall constitution, and as unto which do apperteyn the Oracles
of God, Sacraments, Cen­sures, Government, and ministerie ecclesiasticall,
with other sacred institutions of Christ; I cannot but confesse, and professe
(though with great greif) that it is to us matter of scruple, which we cannot
overcome, to give that honour unto it, which is due from the ser­vants of
Christ to the Church of Christ, rightly collected, and constituted.

And, that there may be place left in the eyes of the prudent Rea­der for our
defence in this case, so far forth as equitie and reason will permit, he must
once, and again be intreated by me, seriously to weigh with himself, and in
his heart, this one advertizement following.

That a man may do a thing truely pleasing, and acceptable to God, it sufficeth
not, that both the door in his person be accepted of God, the thing done
commaunded by God, and that he do it with good, and holy affection before God,
except withall, and first he be possessed of that state, & condition of life,
which may affoard him a lawfull calling to that work. That a man, though never
so good, with never so good a minde, should exercise the office, or do (though
the best) works of a Magistrate, father of famillie, hous­band, steward,
citizen, or messenger, except he were first lawfully called, and preferred to
the state of a Magistrate, maister of sam [...]lie, housband, or the like; so
far were he from deserving anie praise for so doing, as on the contrarie he
most justly incur [...]ed the censure of great rashnes, and violation of all
order in familie and common wealth; as taking unto himself that honour, unto
which he was not cal­led of God. He [...]. 5. 4. The same houldeth, and that
specially in course of Re­ligion, which is the specially state of mans life:
so as if anie either as a Pastour dispence the holy things of the ministeriall
Church, with­out a lawfull pastorall calling going before; or participate in
the same, out of a just, and lawfull Church-state; neither that dispen­sation,
nor this participation can be warranted, but both the one, and other are
usurpations, and in which is seen not the use, but ab­use of holy things, and
confusion of order. And as it behoveth everie person first to beleev, and
know, that he is truly a Christian, [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=31) and partaker of
the grace of Christ, before he can hope to please God in the performance of
this or that particular Christian work; so doth it also concern everie
Christian to provide, that he be first possessed of a just, and lawfull
Church-order, before he so much as touch with his least finger the holy things
of the Church there­unto proper, and peculiar. Proper, I say, & peculiar,
amongst which I do not simpl [...]e reckon the hearing of the word, which both
lawfullie may, and necessarily ought to be done, not onely of Christians
though members of no particular church, but even of Infidels, prophane
persons, excommunicates, and any others: as being that in which no communion
spirituall passeth, either eccle­siasticall, or personall, between the
teacher, & heater, but accord­ing to some union ecclesiasticall or personall
going before: seeing that Christian saith comes by hearing the gospell, by
faith union, & from union communion.

This thus prem sed, I will speak a few things of the Church of England; not by
way of accusation of it, but for our own purga­tion in the eyes of the godly,
and equall Reader, of the imputed c [...]ime of Schism, so far as truth, and
equitie will bear.

And first, seeing that the people of God is materially (as they speak, the
church of God, it is required to the constitution of a ho­ly Church of God,Rom
1, 7. 1 Cor. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 1, 1. that the people be holy, or saints and
sanctified i [...] Christ Iesus: truely, and internally in regard of God, and
their own consciences; externally, and in appearance in respect of others,
whom it concerns to discern and judg of them, according to the word of God,
and rule of charitie. And considering that our que­stion is about the Church
externall, and visible, as it is called, we are not so fond, or raitha [...]
frant [...]ck, as to require, in respect of o­thers, other holynes in the
members thereof, then that which is vi­sible and externall.

Now how marvaylous a thing is it, and lamentable withall, that amongst
Christians anie should be found so far at ods, with Chri­stian holines, as to
think that others then apparently holy at the least, deserved admittance into
the fellowship of Christs church, and therewith of Christ? Do, or can the grat
[...]ous promises of God made to the Church, the heavenly blessings due to the
Church, the seales of divine grace given to the Church, ap­perteyn [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=31) to others then
such? Are others to be admitted into the fa­milie of God, the kingdom of
Christ, and as it were the suburbs of heaven? The Church of God is by him
called, and destinated to advance his glorie in the holynes of their lives,
and conversations;Calvin in 1 Conn. c. 5. what then have those to do with it,
or it with those, who, as Calvin saith,Idem in Rom. 2, 24. live not but with
Gods dishonour? For they, as the same author both truly and holily affirmeth)
who are called, and accounted the peo­ple of God, do bear as it were in their
forheads, the name of God, where­upon it cannot but come to passe, Revel. 4.
8. that before men even God himself after a sort should be steyned with their
filth. And this I deem the raither to be observed, seeing that there are to be
found, and these not a few, who would thrust upon the churches of our thrice
holy Lord, a ve­rie stage-like holynes: stoutly striveving to make it good,
that to constitute a true, and lawfull member of the visible church, no more
is required, then that a man with his mouth confesse Christ, although in his
works he plainly declare himself to be of the syna­gogue of Sathan.Tit. 1, 16.
But what saith the holy spirit of these impure spi­rits? They professe they
know God, saith the Apostle, but in their works they deny him, being
abhominable, and rebellious, and to everie good work reprobate. Are
abhominable persons to be brought into the temple of God? rebellious persons
into the kingdom of God? such as are reprobate unto everie good work into the
familie of God,1 Cor. 5. which is as it were the Storehouse of all good works?
If anie one that is called a brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous, or
idolatour, or rayler, or drun­kard, or extortioner, or anie waie a wicked one,
such a one by the A­postles direction, is to be expelled, and driven out of
the churches confines. And seeing that, as one truly saith, It is a matter of
grea­ter contumelie to thrust out, then to keep out a guest, with what
consci­ence can such plagues be receaved into the church, to the purgeing out
wherof the same church, furnished for that end with the pow­er of Christ,
stands in conscience bound? or by what authoritie I pray, can such persons be
compelled into the bosom of the spouse of Christ, as for the expelling of whom
far from her fellowship,1 Ioh. 1, 6. & imbraceing all authoritie ought to
conspire? He that saith he hath fellowship with God, and walks in darknes is a
lyer, and doth not truly. Profession of Christ therefore with the mouth,Ioh.
8. 40. in those that work the works of darknes, and so by consequence, that by
which a man [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=32) is raither
branded for a naturall child of the divell, then marked for a true member of
the Church.Psa. 101, 7. Lastly, David that holy man of God, and tipe of
Christ, doth holily professe, that he who works deceipt, shall not continue in
his house: And shall the workers of decept, and of all wickednes not onely be
admitted, but even constreyned into the house of the living God,Psal. 93, 5.
which the church is: O Iehovah, holy­nes becometh thine house to length of
dayes. Which notwithstanding (a sicknes desperate of all remedie) that so it
stands with the Church of England, no man to whom England is known, can be
ignorant: seeing that all the natives there, and subjects of the kingdom,
al­though never such strangers from all shew of true pietie, and good­nes, and
fraught never so full with manie most heynous impieties, and vices (of which
ranck whether there be not an infinite, and far the greater number, I would to
God it could with anie reason be doubted) are without difference compelled,
and inforced by most seveere lawes civill & ecclesiasticall, into the bodie of
that church. And of this confused heap (a few, compared with the rest, godly
persons mingled among) is that nationall church, commonly called the Church of
England, collected, and framed. And such is the materiall constitution of that
church. But if now you demaund of me, how it is formally constituted; &
whether upon profession of fayth, and repentance (in word at least) made by
them of years, any combynation, and consociation of the members into
particu­lar congregations, (which consociation doth formally constitute the
ministeriall Church, and members thereof, as both the Scrip­tures and reason
manifest) either is, or hath been made since the uni­versall and Antichristian
apostasie and defection in poperie? No­thing lesse; but onely by their parrish
perambulation, as they call it, and standing of the houses in which they
dwell. Everie subject of the kingdom dwelling in this or that parrish, whether
in cittie, or countrie, whether in his own or other mans house, is thereby,
ipso facto, made legally a member of the same parrish in which that house is
situated: and bound, will he, nill he, fit, or unfit, as with iron bonds, and
all his with him, to participate in all holy things, & some unholy also in
that same parrish church.

If any object, that yet the minister of the parish may suspend from the supper
of the Lord flagitious persons, and so by com­plaint [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=32) made to M.
Chancelour, or M. Officiall, procure their ex­communication; to let passe,
that this is meerly a matter of form for the most part, and a remedie as ill,
as the disease, I do answer, that even by this is proved undeniablie that
which I intend: viz. that all these parrishioners before mentioned, are not
without, 1 Corin. 5, 11, 12. but within, and members of the Church (and the
same, as before con­stituted) whom she judgeth.

There is besides these a third evill in the way, and the same as predominant,
and overtopping all other things in that church, as was Saul higher then all
the rest of the people: and with whose Reho­boam-like  [...]inger we miserable
men are pressed, and oppressed: and that is, the Hierarchicall church
government in the hands of the Lord Bishops and their substitutes: (the verie
same with that of Rome, the Pope the head onely cut off, upon whose shoulders
al­so many, though not without notable injurie, would place the su­preme
Magistrate) and administred by the self same Canon law.

Now this vast, and unsatiable Hierarchicall gulfe, swallowing up and devouring
the whole order,Park. eccles. pol 3, 35. and Hier. gene­rally. and use of the
presbyterie, and therewith the peoples libertie, and withall, by M. Parkers
testimo­nie (with whom a Bishop in England is the Pastour of the whole
dio­cesse, and the Priests or ministers, onely his delegates and helpers) the
verie office of the Pastours themselvs, as did the seaven lean, and evill
favoured kine the seaven fat, and the seaven wizened ears the seaven full that
went before them, Gen. 41. and so by consequence, not being of Christ the
Lord,2 Thes. 2, 4. but of him rayther, who opposeth and advanceth himself
against whatsoever is called God, or is worshiped; so as he sits in the Temple
of God, as God, 1 Chran. 29, 11, 12, 13, 19. (for unto God alone dwelling in
his Temple it apperteyns to appoint the offices of the ministers, & to
prescribe the peoples bonds) our hands are bound by that supreme, and sole
authoritie of Iesus Christ in his Churches, upon which both the order of
Presbyterie, and libertie of people, and office of Pastour are founded,1 Cor.
5, 4. and from whom as the one onely Lord, all ecclesiasti­call power
floweth,ch, 12, 5, 28. and by whom all ministeries are instituted, from giving
any the least honour or obedience to the same hie [...]archicall exaltation in
it self, or its subordinates, which (as phylosophi [...] tea­cheth) are one
with it.

Wherein yet I would not so be understood, as if we were at anie [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=33) defiance with the
persons of the Bishops, much lesse with the kings civill authoritie whereof
they are possessed, whether in matters ci­vill or ecclesiasticall.Rom. 14, 14
Of their persons their own Lords shall judg, to whom they stand or fall. There
have been of that ranke who in our Marian da [...]es have preferred the
profession of the truth of the gos­pell before their lives: I hope there are
also of their successours, who, if pressed with the same necessitie (which God
forbid) would give the same testimonie, though at the same rate, unto the same
truth of God revealed unto them.

Now as concerning their civill authoritie; albeit we do not be­leev, that the
same is at all competent to the true ministers of the gospell, especially in
that eminencie, externall glorie, and pompe of this world, in which they far
exceed manie worldly princes, and rayther seem to represent the tryumphant,
then the militant church; yet for so much as they both obteyn the same by the
gift of the king, and exercise it in his name, we do not unwillingly yeald
ho­nour, and obedience unto it, and to his majestie in it.

But whereas it seems unto manie plain, and evident, that we may adjoin our
selvs to the Church of England without any subjection, or relation unto the
spirituall government, and governers thereof; that is altogether beyond our
capacities: neither can we compre­hend it, how it may be that he, who
subjects, and joyns himself to anie publique, and politique bodie, or
communitie, whether spiri­tuall, or civil, becomes not in so doing, ipso
facto, subject to the publique government, and governers thereof, and
undergoes not a relation, and respect actually unto them. They raither are
with all seriousnes to consider, how faythfully, and sincerely they quit
themselvs, and their consciences before God, and men, who con­tending, and
proving in and by so manie words, and arguments, that the hierarchicall
government is papall, and Antichristian, do neverthelesse submit themselvs
thereunto both in the respect, and relation politicall formerly mentioned, and
also in acts properly ecclesiasticall, into which the ecclesiasticall
government, and spiri­tuall policie of the church doth necessarily diffuse it
self. Now I do earnestly entreat thee, whosoever thou art, acquainted with
Bel­gick, or raither Christian libertie,Theodoret. Dial. 1. and either free
from the mists of prejudice, or if anie way prejudiced, yet not chusing
raither to serve a [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=33) preconceaved
opinion, then to follow an apparent truth, that thou woul­dest truly &
ingenuously tell, whether if the Magistrates here (from which they are far)
should by publique edict, under severe penaltie constreyn all, and everie the
native subjects of the countrie into the bosom of the church, without anie
difference made, either in re­spect of fayth or manners, according to the
place of their habita­tion, and should set over this church so collected and
constituted, an Hierarchicall Bishop provinciall or diocesan, in whose hands
alone, with his Officials, Chauncellours, Commissaries, Archdea­cons, and
other Court-keepers, canonicall authoritie should be pla­ced, to constitute
and depose ministers, excommunicate, and ab­solve both ministers, and people,
yea whole churches (yea with the living the dead, that they may obteyn
Christian buriall): whether now in this confused heap, and under this
spirituall Lordship, thou wouldest endure to remain either Pastour or member.
I suppose not.Colos. 2, 5. You (brethren) have not so learned Christ; whom you
acknow­ledg both for the author of your faith, and instituter of your order
ecclesiasticall. Neyther yet we, having learned otherwise by the grace of God.
Christ the king doth gather, and form unto himself another kinde of kingdom
amongst men, and the same to be admi­nistred by other officers, and according
to other lawes. And if no place upon the face of the  [...]ruth should be free
for us (poore crea­tures) refusing upon meer conscience of God (as thou God
the judg, and searcher of hearts knowest) to commingle, and prosti­tute our
selvs in and unto this confusion, and domination hierarchi­call, we have most
assured hope, that heaven it self is open for us by Christ, who is the way,
and whom in this dutie also we do serve, in which we shall at the length be
fully free from this, and all other incumbrances.

Our adversaries bear in hand not onely others, but even us our selvs also,
that we do for certain trifleing matters, & as they speak, circumstantiall
corruptions, sequester our selvs from the Church of England. And as nurses use
to lisp with children, so they, that they might discend to our capacities, do
oft and much instruct us, that unworthie members must be born in the church,
especially of private per­sons; that some corruptions at least in the
discipline and externall rites, are to be tolerated; that there may be the
temple of God, though propha­ned; [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=34) the holy cittie
though without a wall; the feild of the Lord, though the enemie sowtares
amongst the wheat; also a heap of wheat, though much chaffe commingled
therewithall. And that we, dul-bayards as we are; may at the length conceav
those things, they verie seriously inculcate & whet upon us in these & the
like considerations: as that the Israelitish church in its time was steyned
with almost all enormities, both for manners and fayth: that [...]nto the same
all Israelites and Iewes whatsoever without difference, were violently
compelled by King Iosiah and others; as also, that in the parable, all were
compelled to come to the mariage, good and bad, that the house might be
filled. Lastly, that in the Apostolick Churches themselvs, there were not
wanting some who practised, and others who taught vile, and evill things: that
in one place the discipline was neglected, in another the verie doctrine of
fayth corrup­ted, and manie the like matters, which it were to long to repeat.

Surely, foolish were we if we knew not these things, impu­dent, if we denyed
them to be true for the most part; and lastly, unequall, if we acknowledged
not, that manie the same, or like blemishes after a sort, will, and do creep
into the Churches of our dayes: which yet to disclaym as unlawfull for the
same, stood nei­ther with wisdom, nor charitie. But the prudent Reader may
plain­ly observe by the premises, that they are other matters, and of grea­ter
weight, for the most part, wherewith we, and our consciences are pressed.

We do not judg it an evill intollerable (though greatly to be be­wayled) that
evill men should be suffered in the church; but that all of most vile, and
desperate condition, that such, and so great a kingdom affoards, should
thereinto will they, nill they, be com­pelled: nor that the discipline (as
they call it) or ecclesiast call go­vernment instituted by Christ, is
neglected or violated, but that a­nother plain contrarie unto it is set up by
law, and fully, and pub­liquely everie where exercised: Neither lyes our
exception against any personall, or acc [...]dentarie profanation of the
Temple, but against the faultie frame of it, in respect of the causes
constitutive, matter and form: Neither strive we about the walles of the
cittie, but about the true, and lawfull citizens, the policie and govern­ment
of the cittie of God, and essentiall administration of the same.

But to give more ful satisfaction to the indifferent reader, it seems [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=34) worth the labour
to descend particularly to a few, and the same the cheifest objections made on
the contrarie behalf. And of them, that which may and ought to be said
touching the Church of Israel, & its condition compared with the christian
churches seems to deserve the first place. And touching it; first, the
constitution of the Church of Israel is not to be considered in that whole,
much lesse apostaticall, na­tion, but in holy Abraham, from whom it came, & in
whom it was ho­ly, as the lump in the first fruits, & the branches in the holy
root: Rom. 11, 16. and that by vertue of the gratious covenant, I will be thy
God, & the God of thy seed, Gen. 17. 7. first contracted with Abraham himself,
& after renued with his seed, whole Israell. But now to affirm any such thing
of the whole English nation were foolish; to prove it impossible.

2\. God doth not now a daies select,Exod 10. 6. L [...]v.  [...]0 25. & seve
[...] from others as his pe­culiar, anie whole nation or people, as sometimes
he did the people of Israel, both ecclesiastically, & civilly:Act. 10, 35. but
in everie nation they who feare God, & work righteousnes are accepted of him.
These, in what natiō soever combyning together in holy covenant, and
worshiping God after the prescript of his H. word are that holy nation, the
common wealth of Israel, 1 Cor 5, 10. the Israel of God, the temple &
tabernacle of the living God, in which he hath promised to dwell: these he
would have scattered in all places of the world, & to hould intercourse with
the men of the world in the com­mon affairs of this life, for their gaming if
it may be unto Christ:Act. 2, 42. God adding dayly unto the church such as
should be saved. Whereas on the con­trarie, unto the church of England,
whereof all natural English are to­gether, & at once made members, it can
hardly be, if at all, that anie at anie time should be added.

3\. The verie land of Canaan was legally holy, [...] 19,  [...], 25. Gen. 14.
[...]. & the land of the Lords in­heritance, & whose fruit was to be
circumcised, & her sabbaths kept, by the Lords appointment: & in which alone
by divine  [...]ght  [...] were to be payed. And as holy things are not to be
mingled with, or prost [...]tuted unto prophane, so neither was anie place in
this land to be permitted unto prophane persons to dwell in. The seven
prophane nations, which formerly had inhabited it, [...] 7, 15 Num. 1 [...].
13. were altogether to be destroyed by the Israelites being to possesse it for
their inheritance, neither was mercie to be shewed them. After, if any,
whether born in the land, or strangers, did ought with an high hand, he was to
be cut off from among his people. [...] 15\. 12 1 [...]. Herewith accords that
of David the king, I will betime destroy all the wicked of the land. Lastly,
[...]e that did not seek the Lord God of Israell with all his heart, was to be
put  [...] [[Page 68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=35)
death, whether small or great, whether man or woman. Far be it from God­ly
princes, & other potentates in the world, to think, that it behooveth them in
this rigorous manner to deal with their subjects: although there want not, who
partly from a preposterous, & Iudaizeing zeal, & partly to serv their own
ambition, cease not to inculcate unto the kings of the earth, above that is
meet, the examples of the kings of Iudah.

4\. It is not true that the kings of Iudah or Israel did const [...]yn any
into the church by force, or compel them to undergo the condition of members,
but only being members, to do their dutie. All the Israel [...]tes and
posteritie of Iakob, had their part in the Lords covenant: unto which also
they were bound to stand under perill of cutting off from the Lords people,
both spiritually & bodily, according to the dispensation of the ould Testament
in the land of Canaan. But of this our question is not for the present: That
neither is to be considered, whether king David, Salomon, Iehosaphat & others
did force circumcision, & other Mosaicall institutions upon the Edom [...]tes,
Ammonites, and others by them subdued, & held in civill subjection; or whether
they compelled them by coactive lawes, would they, nould they, fit or unfit,
into the Church of God. That this was so, cannot be affirmed with modestie:
which yet except it so were, hath nothing in it, which e [...]ther can hurte
our cause, or help our adversaries.

Lastly, he who well weigheth with himself what legall, and typicall holines
was in use of old in Israel, shadowing out the true, & sp [...]ritual holines;
and withall by how much, both the more clear revelat on of heavenly things, &
more plenteous grace of the spirit  [...]s afforded to the churches since
Christ, then was formerly to Israel, he shall see manie things making for the
tolerating of much in Israel; which in us  [...] plain­ly intollerable:See
Rev. 2, 5. and 3, 16. & [...]thall Par [...]u [...] on 1 Cor. 7, 11. and that
God will not use that patience & long-suffer­ing towards any church now, nor
permit, or wink at those things in it, which for the hardnes of their hearts,
he bore in that ancient people.

The parable of the tares Matth. 13. followeth; with which as with some
thunderboult, men both learned, and unlearned think us beaten all to fitters.

But first, these words, Let both grow togither till the harvest, v. 30. (frō
which alone they do dispute) Christ the Lord doth not expound nor meddle with,
in the opening of the parable: from them therefore nothing firm can be
concluded. 2. Christ him [...]elf interprets the feild, not the Churh, but the
world v. 38. as also the harvest not the end of the [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=35) Church, but of
the world, v. 39. And if by the world, you understand the Church, you must
needs say, that Christ in the expounding of one parable, used another. 3. Both
the text it self,vers. 28, 29, 30, 31. & reason of the thing do plainly teach
that he doth not speak at all of excommunication, which servs for the
bettering of the tares, but of their finall rooting up to perd [...]tion.
Lastly, admit Christ spake of men apparently wicked in the Church,Se [...] S
[...]ee. of ch. di [...]cip. 2 part m [...]th. 2. p. 24, 27, 25 28. either not
to be excommunicated in certain cases (which with Gellius Snecanus I
confidently denie) or not excommunicated as they ought to be, & therefore to
be born of private members; the for­mer of which is too ordinarie, especially
in Churches enjoying peace, & prosperitie: the latter of which (the Church not
being desperately bent on evill) I easily assent to, yet doth this place
affoard no medicine for our grief; which ariseth not from any corrupt, or
negligent ad­ministration of the Churches discipline, thorough the car
[...]lesnes or want of wisdom (it may be too much wisdom such as it is) of the
ad­ministers thereof, which are personall things; but from the verie
con­stitution of the church it self, & subject of ecclesiasticall both
govern­ment and power. Yea, I ad unto all these things, that we for our parts
are willing in the busines, and controversie in hand to appeal unto the
tribunall of this verie parable, and that expounded by our adversaries
themselvs, & do willingly condiscend, that by it alone judgment be given in
this matter.

Our Saviour Christ doth plainly teach, that this feild was sown with good seed
alone; & that after, whilst men slept, the enemie, the divel came, & sowed
[...]ares amongst the wheat. But on the contrarie, in the sowing the English f
[...]ld, whether we respect the nat [...]onall or parochiall churches,
together with the wheat the tares, & that exceeding the other infinite­ly,
were at first, & yet are sown, & that of purpose, & under most severe penalt
[...]s. And hence is the first & princ [...]pall pr [...]judice to our English
harvest, & frō which I conceav all the rest to come. For unto this Ch. thus
clapped, & clouted together of all persons of all sorts, & spirits without
difference, no man equally & prudently weighing things, can denie, but that
the pompous & imperious Hierarchicall government, together with all its
accessories doth right well accorde.

To the things objected from the parable of the mariage Luke 14. & Mat. 22. I
onely answer, that those servants were the Prophets and Apostles; the son
Christ himself; the compulsion to be made no other­wise, then by the preaching
of the word: by which, as Calvin hath it, [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=36) God doth
importunately sollicit our slo [...]thfulnes, not onely pricking us with
ex­hortations, Calvin in Math. 22, 9. but cōpelling us with threatnings to
come unto him: which word of God as it is by some wholly contemned, so doth it
extort from o­thers, onely an externall & hypocritical obedience, but by manie
is re­ceaved, through the blessing of God, with al holy & devout affection.

Now unto these pa [...]ables of Christ manie are wont, and that very busily,
to annex one of their own. A heap, say they, of wheat although it have much
chaf mixed with it, & the  [...] more in quantitie then the wheat is,  [...]
notwithstanding truly, & is rightly termed a heap of wheat; according to the
Phylo [...]ophers rule, The den [...]mination to not of the greater, but
better part.

I answer; first, that this axiom is not simply true: for if in the church, or
any other convention popular, or in which things passe by voyces, the greater
part hap to exceed the better, the denominat on of that pas­sage, or decree,
and so the whole processe of the matter, is according to the greater, though
the worser part.

2\. The chaf in that wheat is either of the same wheat, or of other, & brought
from els where: if of that same, then it makes nothing to the present purpose,
since wicked men appe [...]ein not to the persons of the godly, no [...] are
their chaf: if of other, & from els where, it may easi­ly be added in that
quantitie & proportion, as that neither it may de­serv the name of an heap of
wheat, but of chaf; nor he that sels it for wheat, of an honest merchant, but
of a deceiptfull impostour.

4\. The things objected from the Apostolicall Churches are alto­gether
personall, & accidentall; from which that the churches gather­ed of men, and
by men governed, should be exempted, is  [...]aither to be desired, then hoped
for. But for us, the things which most afflict us in the Ch. of England, &
presse us in the respect fore-mentioned to a se­cession from the same, do
concern the verie materiall, & formall con­stitution of the ministeriall
church, together with the essentiall admi­nistration of the Church-policie.
And how different these things are, who seeth not?

Lastly, it is objected, that in the Ch. of England lively faith, & true pietie
are both begotten, and nourished, in the hearts of many, by the preaching of
the gospell there. God forbid, that we should not ac­knowledg that, & withall,
that infinite thanks for the same are due to Gods great power & goodnes, both
in respect of our selvs and others: Who notwithstanding the great confusion,
both of persons, and things [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=36) there to be
found, vouchsafeth to his elect so plentifull grace, cover­ing under the vayl
of his superaboundant goodnes & mercy, by their  [...]ncere fayth in Christ
Iesus, their sins & aberrations, whether of ig­norance, or infirmitie. What
then must be done? should we continue in sin, that grace might abound? or
shall we against knowledg go on to walk inordinately, because in our ignorance
God hath vouchsafed us of his grace in that disordered state of things?
without the ministerial church (of which we speak) the preaching of the
gospell both may, & useth to be had, & by it sayth to be ingenerated, except
christian churches be to be gathered of infidels & unbeleevers. Besides, what
Minos, or Rha­  [...]amant will deny, that even in the bosom of the Romish
church some fa [...]thfull persons may be found? how much more in that of
England, in which the main truths of the gospell, the most & greatest errours
of poperie being banished, are taught by so manie godly & learned men, with
such zeal, and earnestnes? Now what of these things? Is it there­fore lawfull
for a Christian, eyther to content himself with himself, without joyning to
any christian congregation; or to continue still in the bosom of the church of
Rome, as a member under the Pope th [...] head? I therefore conclude out of M.
Brightman, whose words I had raither use then mine own,M. Bright on Rev ch
vers. 26. speaking of the government & ministerie of the Church of England,
The fruit, to wit, of the word preached, doth no more exempt from blame our
corruptions, then a true child doth adulterie.

And here thou hast (Christian Reader) the whole order of our con­versation in
the work of Christian religion, set down both as breifly, and plainly, as I
could. If in anie thing we [...]er, advertise us brotherly, with desire of our
information, & not (as our countrimens manner for the most part is) with a
minde of reproaching us, or grat fying of o­thers: and whom thou findest in
errour, thou shalt not leave in obsti­nacie, nor as having a minde prone to
schism. E [...]re we may (alasse too easily): but heretiques (by the grace of
God) we will not be? But & if the things which we do, seem  [...]ight in thine
eyes, (as to us certainly they do) I do earnestly, & by the Lord Iesus
admonish and exhort thy godly minde, that thou wilst neither withould thy due
obedience frō his truth, no [...] just succour from thy distressed brethren.
Neither do thou indure, that either the smalnes of the number, or meannes of
the  [...]ondition of those that professe it,Ter [...]u [...] pre [...]er
[...] Heret. should prejudice with thee the pro­  [...]ssion of the truth: but
have in minde that of Te [...]tullian, Do we mea­sure mens faith by their
persons, or their persons by their faith? as also that [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=37) of Austin,Austin
against Maxim. 3, 14. Iames 2, 1. Let matter weigh with matter, and cause with
cause, and rea [...] with reason: but especially that of the Apostle, My
brethren, have  [...] the faith of our glorious Lord Iesus Christ in respect
of persons. But now, it so come to passe (which God forbid) that the most
being eyther fore­stalled by prejudice, or by prosperitie made secure, there
be few found especially men of learning, who will so far vouchsafe to stoop,
as to look upon so despised creatures, and their cause; this alone remaineth
that we turn our faces & mouths unto thee (o most powerfull Lord, & gratious
father) humbly imploreing help from God towards those, who are by men left
desolate. There is with thee no respect of per­sons, neither are men lesse
regarders of thee, if regarders of thee, so the worlds disregarding them. They
who truly fear thee, and wo [...] righteousnes, although constreyned to live
by leav in a forrain land, exiled from countrie, spoyled of goods, destitute
of freinds, few in number, and mean in condition, are for all that unto thee
(O gratious God) nothing the lesse acceptable: Thou numbrest all their
wandrings, and puttest their tears into thy bottels: Are they not written in
thy book? Towards thee, O Lord, are our eyes; confirm our hearts, & bend thine
ear, and suffer not our feet to slip, or our face to be asha­med, O thou both
just, and mercifull God. To him through Christ be praise, for ever, in the
Church of Saints; and to thee (loving and Christian Reader) grace, peace, and
eternall happines. Amen.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=3102&page=37)

[Home](/)

Robinson, John, 1575?-1625.. Date: 1625  

