---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Poor Robins character of an honest drunken curr with a relation of the
frollicks of his life and conversation and his epitaph.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43177&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43177&page=1)

Poor Robins CHARACTER, Of an Honeſt Drunken Curr: With a Relation of the
Frollicks of his Life, and Converſation AND HIS EPITAPH.

With Permiſſion.

London, Printed by E. C. for C. Huſſey, at the Bible in Iewen ſtreet. 1675.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43177&page=2)

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Poor Robins CHARACTER, Of an Honeſt Drunken Curr.
  * 2\. An Epitaph.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43177&page=2)

## 1\. Poor Robins CHARACTER, Of an Honeſt Drunken Curr.

HE's a Pickel'd Youth to be ſure, for he always lyes ſteep'd in his own
Liquor; of which like a Whale, he carries ſo much about him, that when ever he
Diſgorges, he may Swim away in his own Flood. Clap but a good Sucker into his
Belly, and he makes an excellent Pariſh Pump: and if you add but a Pipe to his
Muzle, he may paſs for a Water En­gine, and do good ſervice in time of Fire;
you need not fear Drawing him dry, ſo long as all the Ale-houſes, and Taverns
in Town, like little Rivulets, ſupply the decreaſe; He contains about as much
as thoſe in Churches; but is ſo uncooth a Trough, he's twice as hard to be
Gauged: yet by frequent experience, he can gueſs his Meaſure to a Pint,
ſpecially if you ex­cept [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43177&page=3) Leakage: His Veins
are ſo thronged, and his Blood ſo tainted with Scurvey, Gout, and Dropſie,
(and a ſmatch of the French-man to boot, which he got when he was Drunk, and
does not know who to lay it too.) That he defies the intruſion of any other
Diſtemper: wherefore he Stalks in as much State through a Peſti­lence; as a
well Arm'd Souldier through a ſhower of Bul­lets, for his forementioned
Diſeaſes have taken ſuch large Poſſeſſion of his Body, that there's no room
left for Infection.

He has drunk himſelf into a Jelly, and is ſo moiſt, that if you ſqueeſe him,
he drops like an Orange.

His Body a perfect Still, which he Fuells with Bran­dy, inſtead of Char-coal;
being throughly heated, you may diſcern the ſweaty Diſtilation tricle from his
face, as from the Lid of a Limbick, and if any chance to drop on his Noſe, you
may hear it hiz as if it fell u­pon heated Bricks. In fine though he always
lives Joak­ingly and Merry, he hates nothing more then a dry Jeſt.

Thus having acquainted you with his Conſtitution, I ſhall only conſider him in
his Converſation, and Friendſhip, and ſo leave him to ſleep out his nap.

And firſt for his Converſation, to take him in the Morning (for who can find
him all the Day after) he prevents his Pray'rs with a Pipe of Tobacco, and
Smoaks at ſuch a Rate as if he pr [...]fer'd Sacrifice to De­votion. A Tinder-
box is as neceſſary to him, as a green Bagg to an Atturney's Clark, with which
he ſeems as raviſh'd as Alexander with the Odiſſes, for he cannot ſleep unleſs
it lye under his Pillow. In that little night he makes, he cannot ſo properly
ſaid to ſleep, as to chew the Cudd  [...] [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43177&page=3) often diſturbs the
repoſe of a Family, with Muttering a Repetition of his Oaths, and Healths when
he awakes, he ſtares about with ſuch wild Curioſity, as one would fancy Adam
did immediately after his Creation; for he generally makes himſelf ſo Drunk
over Night, drown­ing his paſt actions in Liquor and Oblivion, that he
ſcarcely knows the Morning from the Reſurrection, and is hardly perſwaded that
ever he lived before.

But after he is convine'd of the affirmative ſpends a­bout a quarter of an
Hour in examining the Bed-poſts and Windows, before he diſcovers whether he be
in his own Lodging: And afterward remains as doubtful how he got thither.

Then Bed-ſtaves, and Slip-ſhoo's go to Wrack, for clattering on the Bed-ſtead,
like Boys at the Bear-Garden; he calls up the People as Country Wenches do
Swine, by knocking; and after a Petition for a Cup of Settle-Brain, begs them
to reſolve his Quaerie: Whereupon they tell him the truth, which indeed is
that either he came the old Porterly way, Crutch'd with a brace of Watch-men;
or elſe the Modern and more Genteel way, viz. On Pick-pack, inſtead of a
Sadan.

Now although my Honeſt Drunken Curr be guilty of many Vices, which like
Younger Brothers hang on this great one which has got poſſeſſion: Yet (Give
the De­vil his aue) I think the World has Sully'd his Repu­tation with divers
Scandals of which he is no wiſe Guil­ty: Wherefore becauſe I only intend his
Converti­on not his Conſumption; Like an honeſt Hiſtorian (ſince I Write his
Life) I ought not to ſee him wrong'd, but rather to reſcue him from those C
[...] on him  [...]

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43177&page=4) The firſt
imputation therefore that they impoſe on him is that he is proud, And why
forſooth? but becauſe when he has a D [...]op in his Eye, he brags and vapours
as if he were a better man than his Neighbours. A ſtout reaſon indeed? as if
any man might not do as much that were either Light-headed, or in a Fevour;
Nay, a Paſſion alone makes the wiſeſt of us Bethlehems. But let us do as we
would be done by, and take him when he is himſelf, (that is in a Morning,) and
then I am ſure he is as free from Pride, as a Quaker from good Minners or
Ribbons: For would Cuſtome admit, I am confident he would never go to the Ale-
houſe Naked, than undergo the hard Pennance of Sobriety the while he dreſſes
himſelf.

Secondly, They call him an Idle fellow; a good fel­low all the World knows he
is, but as for Idleneſs, let me dye if I know any one more free from it than
he; What would they know of him trow? he riſes early, ſits up late; and I dare
Swear he grudges himſelf his very Sleep, becauſe it keeps him from his
Buſineſſe: When he is at it, no man more expeditious than he, for as if his
minutes, like his Eſtate, ran away too faſt, you ſhall frequently ſee him with
an Ale-Glaſs in one hand, and a Looking-Glaſs in the other, which beto­kens
both ſpeed and frugality.

The third and moſt fallacious Accuſation is that they ſay, He's Prodigal, and
Piſſes his Eſtate againſt the Wall. But I am confident he enriches nor
Perfumes the Walls no more than others; onely this I know he does, that
whereas Uſurers uſe to hide their Riches in Earth Pots, he puts his Eſtate in
a Pewter one (which one would think were the ſafer Cabinet) ſo that it is not
the Honeſt Drunken Cur, but the Impudent Rogues, Drawers, and Tapſters, that
imbezle and make it away.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43177&page=4) Much more
might be ſaid of him both in his Vindi­cation, and in Commendation alſo: For
he is one of the quieteſt Subjects his Majeſty has, and moſt ſub­miſſive to
Monarchyal Government: He would not be without a King, if it were for no other
Reaſon than meerly Drinking his Health. He hates Coffee as Ma­homatizm, and
thinks it a Leſſer ſin to go to Bed Drunk, than to Drink it to make him Sober.

He hates a Studious man as Caeſer did a Lean one, and for the ſame Reaſon, for
he is ſo confident he's hatching of Treaſon, that he could find in his Heart
to impeach him at adventure.

As for his Friends he never troubles his Head to pick and cull them, but takes
them as ſuperannuated Maids do Husbands, or Fiſh-women do Mackerel, as they
come next to hand: For fixing himſelf in the next Ale-houſe or Tavern he comes
at; at firſt he ſits as ſul­lenly as a degraded Courtier, or an Inſurer upon
Advice of a Loſs▪ And no leſs than a Quart of Purle-Royal, or Two Kicks in the
Guts can remove his Moroſity. Af­ter he has digeſted either of them, perchance
he'l vouch­ſafe to bleſs you with a Smile, eſpecially if you will purchaſe it
at the expence of a Bawdy Song; to which you ſhall ſee him turn head, and
liſten as heedfully as a Lynnet to a Flaijolet, but infinitely more eaſie to
be Taught.

When you have done, tis twenty to one but he comes and hugs you; ſwearing you
are the moſt accompliſht Gentleman that ever he met in his Life; and tho he
ne­ver ſaw you before, from that time you may date his Friendſhip: He makes
Friends faſter than Children do Babies; and like them too, he often forgets
where he has left them.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43177&page=5) His Reaſon
like a bad Shop-keeper is ſeldom at home, or rather like a Country Gentleman,
has left the Ma­nour of his own Body; and is gone to dwell in ſtrange
Lodgings: So that 'tis no wonder, he's Hobgob­lin'd by his fiery Noſe to any
Debauchery, or that Men call him Beaſt; ſince by giving Rains to his I
Senſua­lity, he makes ſo perfect a Swine of himſelf, that he Drinks till he
can hardly Grunt. However, ſince the Church allows him Chriſtian Burial, I'le
Hopkins and Sternhold him with

## 2\. An Epitaph.

Here Lyes Drunken Tom,

VVhom Heav'n in mercy ſave,

He ſtumbel'd o're his Death,

And reel'd into his Grave.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43177&page=5)

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1675  

