---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Reasons to resolve the unresolved people of the legality of the Kings tryal
and judgment. / By Rob. Robins. Imprimatur, Gilb. Mabbot.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=117468&page=1)

REASONS TO Reſolve the unreſolved PEOPLE Of the Legality of the KINGS Tryal
and Iudgment.

By Rob. Robins.

Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbot.

LONDON. Printed for Robert White. Feb. 26.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. REASONS To reſolve the unreſolved People of the Legality of the KINGS Tryal and Judgment.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=117468&page=2)

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=117468&page=2)

## 1\. REASONS To reſolve the unreſolved People of the Legality of the KINGS
Tryal and Judgment.

LECTORI.

True Englands Truths I would declare to thee,

If Englands Iayls my Guerdon might not be.

Imprimis.

HE ſaith, that he is King ſucceſ­ſive, which if he be, he ſhould have
declared, That his Intereſt to the ſucceſsion, was an here­ditary, or an
elective ſucceſsion: If an hereditary ſucceſsion, then hereditary from the
Conqueſt; if ſo, then by the ſword have we freed our ſelves from ſlavery, as
we we were by the ſword inſlaved; if electory, then the Electors may reclaim
their own power, and call the elected to an account, his authority ariſing
from the Electors.

At the death of Kings, all the Officers of [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=117468&page=3) his Court lay
their offices at the dead Kings feet. This ceremony doth declare, That all
offices and truſts dye with him, and then (if not in a Parliament time) the
Biſhops, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Chief Juſtices, and Judges, pro­claim the next
Heir to the dead King, King; which ceremony doth manifeſt, that they are
electory, and not hereditary: For the Biſhops, Dukes, &c. are the Body of the
Kingdom, and Councel of the people, and their Repre­ſentative out of
Parliament, truſted by the King for the peoples weal; and if electory, why
ſhall not the people elect whom they pleaſe? and when the truſt is abuſed,
which the elected is truſted with, why ſhall not the people call the elected
to an account of his truſt, and puniſh him according to the Com­mon Law (which
is Reaſon) for breach of truſt, if he refuſe to yield an account of his truſt?

It hath been Englands, and other Kingdoms Cuſtom, to call to higheſt Offices,
ſuch as were of greateſt fame, repute, quality, and eſtates, thereby
imagining, that they who are conceived moſt honorable, and moſt rich; are beſt
bred in knowledg, and would duly diſ­charge [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=117468&page=3) their truſts, for
conſcience and honors ſake, and to preſerve their eſtates, being lyable to
reſtitution for wrong doing.

The truſt that Kings of England are truſted with, is, to govern well, and
therefore hath the name of Rex, being a derivative name or word, from Rego, to
Govern; which word, if obſerved well, will tell you what Rex, a King, is; for
it is an old Proverb, Regum eſt parcere ſubjectis, & debulare ſuperbos; Regum
eſt▪ id eſt, officium Regum, the office and duty of Kings.

The King enjoyes the Crown, not as his, but the Kingdoms, nor can grant any
office before he is ſworn; and when he is ſworn, it is by the peoples
Repreſentative, truſted for that office, by the dead King, in his life time;
and the Crown Lands, after he is ſworn, and crowned, allotted him for
maintenance, as a reward to maintain him, to execute his office.

After he is ſworn to execute ſuch truſts as the people have truſted him with,
he is by the hands of the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, (the chief Eccleſiaſtical
Miniſter in England, clothed in white) crowned with a Golden Crown, beſet with
Diamonds, and other rich [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=117468&page=4) Jewels, which
carry a luſtre round about the Crown and Head; which is a Celeſtial Type, fit
for ſuch a man, as a glorious renown, that will diſcharge that great truſt he
is truſted with, and hath ſworn to execute it.

By vertue of his oath, he is Chief Juſtice of England, to adminiſter true
Juſtice, as well to poor as to rich, without reſpect of perſons; and hath
thereby power to call to his aſſiſt­ance, Wiſemen, and Lawyers, and to depute
them, ſwear them, and locate them at his plea­ſure; and if they do not well
demean them­ſelves, to diſplace them, and call others.

He is alſo Lord Chancellor, and maketh a Seal (which is Treaſon to
counterfeit, for fear of wrong to be done by it to his truſt, which he is
truſted with) and is to hear and determine in equity, what Reaſon, which is
Common Law, may impoſe upon any man contrary to equity.

He is Receiver of the Revenue of the King­dom, being truſted in his hands for
mainte­nance of Officers deputed by him in Courts of Juſtice for his
aſsiſtance, in executing true Juſtice.

He is Admiral of the Sea, and the Ton­nage [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=117468&page=4) and Poundage the
Kingdoms, truſted in his hands for maintenance of a Navy, to protect the
Merchants from Pirates and Sea Rovers.

He is Conſtable of all the Towers, Caſtles, Forts, and Arms in the Kingdom,
being the Militia, which is moenia Angliae, truſted in his hands by the
people, and by them bought to preſerve the Kingdom againſt forraign
Inva­ſions, and domeſtick Rebellions.

He is Gaurdian of many Infants, until they come to the age of twenty one
yeers, left by their Parents hereditary eſtates; and to pre­ſerve the Orphant
and eſtate, and to breed them in the fear of God, and learning, and to account
when they come to age.

He is Keeper and Preſerver of the Peace of the Kingdom, and to ſee the Statute
Laws put in execution; and to have a care, that if any ſhall offend againſt
it, to fine and puniſh him at his pleaſure, or at the pleaſure of ſuch Judges
or Juſtices as he ſhall depute.

Many more Truſts have the people repoſed in him, which for brevity, I omit,
and he hath broken them; he hath turned the Militia into the peoples bowels,
and killed them [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=117468&page=5) with it; he hath
taken the Merchants, with the Tonnage and Poundage, and ſpoyled their Ships,
and Goods at Sea. Equity hath he turned into cruel iniquity, contrary to a
good Conſcience; he hath ſold Juſtice, and placed Ignorance in her Seat; he
hath ſold the peoples Intereſt to monopolizing Crea­tures; he hath thrown
wiſdom and honeſty into priſon, protected the wicked, and puniſhed the
innocent; he claimeth the Mi­litia, the Revenue, the Tonnage and Pound­age,
the Crown, and Crown Lands, to be his, and not the peoples; and refuſeth to
account to the people, being demanded ſeveral times, and ſaith he will account
to none but God, and will not by fair means, nor legal tryal, give any anſwer;
and therefore, according to Englands Laws hath his ſentence, as conſeſsing all
that is charged upon him, in reſpect he denyeth it not.

Now let all the world judg, whether the people have juſtly recalled their own
Intereſt, and adjudged him to death for ſuch abuſes, and refuſing to account.

[Home](/)

Robins, Robert.. Date: 1649  

