---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Poor Robins perambulation from Saffron-Walden to London performed this month
of July, 1678.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=1)

Poor Robins PERAMBULATION FROM Saffron-Walden TO LONDON: Performed this Month
of JƲLY, 1678.

With Allowance, July 11\. 1678. Ro. L'Eſtrange.

LONDON: Printed for T.E. and are to be Sold by the General Aſſembly of
Hawkers, 1678.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Poor ROBIN'S Perambulation from Saffron-Walden to London, &c.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=2)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=2)

## 1\. Poor ROBIN'S Perambulation from Saffron-Walden to London, &c.

### 1.1.

NOw have amongſt you Gallants, here's a ſtory

Will make you laugh, or elſe I ſhould be ſorry:

'Tis of a Journey lately made from Walden

To London, and of ſeveral places call'd in

As by the way I travel'd, with their Rarities

Of Vice and Virtue, and their great diſparities.

'Twas in the year of Grace call'd Sixteen hundred

Seventy and ſeven, as our account is numbred,

The Eve o'th' Scottiſh Champion St. Andrew,

Who wore as good a ſword as e're man drew,

Being the twenty-ninth day of November,

Called St. Saturnine as I remember,

The very next day when the Term was ended,

Wherein much (ah too much) Coin is expended,

The ſign was in Aquarius, or the Legs,

Being Wedneſday, a day for Fiſh and Eggs.

The Moon full four days old, the wind was North,

When I on this mad Journey did ſet forth.

As for the Tide I will not mention here,

For we have neither Sea nor Thames us near,

And therefore of their Ebbs, or of their flowing,

Very few perſons thereabouts are knowing.

Thus having ſhown you when, in the next place

I'le ſhow you whence my Journey I did trace:

'Twas from the Roſe and Crown, where Mr. Eve

Doth keep a Houſe like to an Under-ſheriff;

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=3)There is
good Sack, good French-Wine, and good Beer.

And if you'l dine or ſup, there is good cheer:

Or does your ſtomack to a Breakfaſt ſtand,

There's cold roaſt Beef, or Pork at your command.

For thoſe men who the truth of this deny it,

Let them go there, and do as I did, try it;

There for your money you ſhall have kind uſage,

Good words, and reckonings right, without abuſage.

There at my parting, ſome kind friends of mine

Would needs beſtow on me a quart of Wine,

Where with ſtout drinking e're my parting hour,

That Quart was made at leaſt a three or four;

But Sol his ſpeedy journey would not ſtay,

And poſting-time did call me thence away:

Yet would my Jovial friends on me attend

Part of my Journey unto Audley-end,

By them call'd Nineveh, but no great City,

Though too much ſin may be there, more's the pity

There at the ſign (of ſuch a thing I think

As never ſwam on pond or rivers brink)

Of a Black Swan, which is as rare 'tis ſaid

As of a wench with child to be a maid.

Yet although of this Sign there's no ſuch thing,

It was a ſign there was good drink within,

And that we found freſh, ſprightly, and well taſted;

With drinking which, we a long hour waſted.

But friends at laſt muſt part, though loth they be.

And ſo with much leave-taking then did we,

When, 'cauſe bad company ſhould be withſtood,

I walkt alone, and ſo had none but good.

The firſt Town I came to, was Wenden nam'd,

Who hate Eighth Henry, though a King much ſam'd;

The reaſon of the ſame, they underſtand

He was the firſt man ever wore a Band,

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=3)And that's a
faſhion to which they'l not come,

As being chargeable and troubleſome,

Therefore without Bands commonly they go,

By which ſign you a Wenden-man may know.

From Wenden I my courſe did next way bend

Unto the place is called Sparrows-end,

Where Mr. Harris my old friend the Tanner

Did entertain me in moſt courteous manner,

And having drunk ſuch ſtrong drink as we found,

With which his Houſe doth commonly abound,

To Newport-pond my courſe I next way bent,

And in at the ſign of the Black-Bull went,

Where ſcarcely in a room I had ſet down

When in came my old friends kind Mr. Br—

And Mr. Woo—two who love their friend

With true and hearty love unto the end;

For though they in another Town do live,

They to their Neighbour ſome kind Viſits give.

'Twas twelve a Clock, Dinner-time did approach,

When men whet Knives on Wheels of Cart or Coach;

The Cloth was laid, and by the ſcent o'th' meat

One might perceive there ſomething was to eat,

And ſo it prov'd indeed, for from the pot

Came forth a Rump of Beef was piping hot;

And from the Spit was brought a loyn of Mutton

Would ſatisfie the ſtomack of a Glutton;

For like a Loyn of Beef it might been knighted;

To which our Hoſteſs kindly us invited,

Which we accepted of; and to delight her,

Told her none could deny ſuch an inviter:

For ſhe's a Widow of ſuch excellent carriage,

Would make a man moſt happy in her Marriage,

Being young, freſh, fair, of a moſt pregnant wit,

And for a kind good Husband ſure moſt fit.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=4)We having
din'd, and join'd a pint or two,

Then forwards on my Journey I did go.

And firſt I came unto a Town called Rickling,

Where for to ſtay a while I made no ſtickling,

But preſently in at the Kings-head fell,

Where of Compounding Dick I there heard tell,

To whom if that it pleaſe you to reſort ye,

He for a hundred pound will mortgage forty

Shillings a year, nor do you think I jeſt,

It's very true indeed, probatum eſt.

Or lend him leſſer ſums, which if you do,

For twenty Shillings he will pay you two;

Not two and twenty Shillings, no ſuch plenty,

I mean he'l pay you two Shillings for twenty;

Pray lend him then, and this ſhall be your portion,

You ſhall not need fear being ſu'd for extortion.

From the Kings-head I out of doors ſcarce went,

But was in Quenden-ſtreet incontinent;

Of many a handſome Country-Houſe the ſtation,

It ſeems to be a little Corporation,

Yet are the Houſes not ſo neat as ſtrong,

And doth moſt to one Gentleman belong.

For nothing on it can you look aſquint,

Unleſs cauſe there is ne're an Ale-houſe in't.

Good air, brave Woods, and fine rich Meadow-ground,

And doth with every ſort of Grain abound.

The young men there do bear the Bell away

From all the Towns about at Foot-ball play.

Unto a Farmers Houſe I went out-right,

Who entertained me like to a Knight:

And though at Newport I had din'd before,

Yet here with him I muſt eat one bit more,

Some Ribs of Pork new kill'd, broil'd on a Gridiron

Of ſeven ribs, three on each ſide, and one mid-iron.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=4)But ere they
laid them on, they did them Salt,

A Shooing-horn to draw down juice of Malt;

Yet thus much of his Beer's ſtrength I do know,

'Twould well go down without helps thereunto;

And who thereof to drink too much on't ventures,

'Twill turn him Scrivener for to make Indentures;

Which made me have a care of that ſame drink,

Becauſe ſome Scriveners are K—s I think,

But whether ſo or no I'le leave to Pen,

They may be Knaves or may be honeſt men:

But to the matter, ere that we did part

I of his liquor took down many a quart;

Then fear leſt I ſhould of a Fox-skin ſmell,

I bid to him (as he made me) farewell.

From Quenden I my ready courſe did frame

Thorow a Town that hath an Ʋgly name,

Indeed to call it ſo they did not well,

Becauſe that handſom Women in it dwell;

Nor are the Men for ought that I can find

But good condition'd, debonair, and kind:

And therefore he who ere the name it gave,

To call it ſo was but an ugly K—.

From Ʋgly I next way to Stanſted travel'd,

Upon a plain High-way well ſton'd and gravel'd;

This Town of Stansted for diſtinctions ſake

Doth unto it the name Montfitchet take,

From the Montfitchets once Lords of great fame,

And who ere while were owners of the ſame.

There at the Bell, at my old friend's George Perrin,

We drunk and tipled like unto a Herring;

For there is Ale and Stale-beer ſtrong and mighty,

Will burn ith' fire like unto Aqua-vitae;

And that the reaſon is, as you may know,

That this Bells Liquor makes Mens Clappers go:

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=5)Then when
mens brains begin for to grow addle,

Some talk of riding ne'r ſat on a Saddle,

And every one doth think himſelf a Prince,

Though he in's Pocket ſcarce hath Thirteen-pence.

This Town from Walden is eight miles they ſay,

All which long ſpace I travel'd in one day,

But wearied ſore, and having drunken deep,

The leaden god then ſummon'd me to ſleep;

So that for to repoſe my drowzy head,

It was not long before I went to bed;

And though I did not go out of my way,

Yet I that very night in Holland lay.

Next morn, ere Titan ſhew'd his glorious head,

My Hoſt did rouze me from my drowzy bed;

And for ſo doing this was his pretence,

To pay a Groat for my laſt nights offence,

Which I ſoon gave unto the jovial Croney,

For being ſo ore-reached by Vulpone;

And being up, we briskly did it ſpend,

And ſo of the round Groat made a ſquare end.

Thus arm'd with Toaſt and Ale, my Muſe and I,

Having no other in our company,

Footed it on the Road, and ſtraightway came

Unto a Town Birchanger call'd by name,

Of which there is a Proverb very old,

From one Age ſtill unto another told

That there they chriſten Calves, which by mens bounty

It may extend to each Town in the County;

Becauſe the plenty of the Veal from thence,

To call them Eſſex Calves is a pretence.

Thorow Birchanger I paſs'd without drinking,

The reaſon thereof you perhaps are thinking;

Yet don't believe herein that I do ſcoff-ye,

They there ſell neither Ale, Wine, Beer, nor Coffee;

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=5)Therefore
unleſs without Town they be ſped,

They very ſoberly may go to Bed:

But though ſuch liquors are not ſold among them,

Becauſe that I would willingly not wrong them,

Strong drink in private Houſes there may be,

Of which the owners may be frank and free;

But whether that the ſame be ſo or no,

To tell to you the truth, I do not know,

Therefore it to avouch I were to blame,

Unleſs that I had taſted of the ſame.

Thus ſomething dry within, yet ne'retheleſs

In a good plight, my way I next addreſs

Unto a place call'd Hockrell, and there took

In at the Crown, with honeſt Mr. Cook;

Now here I did no entertainment lack,

With French-Wine, Rheniſh, and good Spaniſh Sack;

And being Dinner-time I fill'd my gullet,

Begun with powder'd Beef, ended with Pullet;

And after Dinner we to drinking fixt,

With taking of Tobacco intermixt.

Minding that Town my Journeys end ſhould be

For that ſame night, I was reſolv'd to ſee

The rarities of the ſame, which to diſcloſe

A little while I'le turn my Verſe to Proſe.

### 1.2.

This place called Hockrell belongeth to Biſhop Storford, ſo named from the
Biſhops of London, who once had a Pa­lace here, being an ancient Caſtle given
by William the Conquerour unto the Biſhop Mauritius, with all the
appur­tenances belonging thereunto for ever; the Ruins of which Caſtle remain
to this day. On the upper ſide of the Town ſtands a fair Church, in which lie
Interred many of the Flemings, a Family whoſe numerous branches have ſpread
themſelves thorough England, Scotland and Wales, ever [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=6) ſince the time of
Sir John le Fleming, Knight, who flouriſh­ed in the Reign of King William
Rufus. Their Market (which is kept on on Thurſdays) is very well ſerved with
all ſorts of Proviſions for the ſuſtentation of life, eſpecially Barley and
Malt, which makes our Engliſh Bachanialian juice; the operations of which
liquor take from the Poet:

Whilſt Pearls and Rubies doth ſtrong drink diſcloſe▪

They make their purſe poor to enrich their noſe.

They have three Fairs in the year, one nine days before Whitſontide, another
nine days after it, and the third on Michaelmas-day. This Town is alſo
accommodated with three Taverns, viz. the Crown, the Rein-deer, and the
George, at either of which, bringing the merry Chink, you may have the merry
drink. How many Ale-houſes is there, I had not time to number, only I ſaw the
ſigns of ſome Horned Beaſts, as the Bull, the Ram, &c. but what the people are
that dwell therein, I know not, but gueſs you may have good liquor there for
your money. As for the Cage and Stocks there, let thoſe who have been in them
give you a deſcription of them. And now after this ſerious view of the Town, I
returned to my Quarters, where I had dined, and took up my lodging there that
night.

### 1.3.

From Biſhop-Storford I next day ſet forth

Unto a Town is called Sabridgworth,

Contracted Sapsſord; but call't what you will,

In the ſame place it did, the Town ſtands ſtill.

Good Corn they ſay within the ſame doth grow,

And good Beer may be in't for ought I know;

But at that time I had no liſt to drink,

So paſt I thorough it, and ſav'd my Chink.

Unto Pye-corner went I, to the Roſe,

Where for a time I ſtaid and tope't my noſe;

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=6)There was a
jolly Hosteſs, and good tipple,

Would make the tongue run, and the legs a cripple.

But of large drinking, Reader, this know of it,

There is ſmall pleaſure in it, and leſs profit;

'Twill quickly empty all the purſe of croſſes,

Which will breed diſcontentment for ſuch loſſes.

My Hoſteſs without coyn you can't accoſt her,

Her rule is, No peny, no Pater-noſter;

She cares not for your company a bean-ſtraw,

You can't come at her back-ſide with a hand-ſaw.

But if you have the white and yellow mettle,

She ſimpers like to a Furmety-kettle.

The ſervants nimble are, and you may brag on

The credit, not to call twice for a flaggon:

The female ſervants, leſt they ſhould be ſhent,

Do anſwer (as they are) incontinent.

For Claret, Sack, ſtrong Beer you ſhall not ſtand Sir,

Both Hoſteſs, men and maids, are at command Sir.

But if the Purſe chance to be in the wane,

Then you may call, and call, and call again,

You have free liberty for to be gone Sir,

For quickly come, is turn'd anon, anon Sir.

Therefore kind Reader ſpend not all away,

But keep a peny 'gainſt a rainy day;

Then ſhall you welcome be where e're you come,

Where otherwiſe more welcome is your room.

But I've digreſt, but hope have not tranſgreſt

In theſe invective lines I've here expreſt;

Yet Reader know, although Inns and Ale-houſes

Were not ordain'd for men to drink Carrouſes,

Yet are they for the Trav'ller neceſſary,

Who elſe his meat and drink muſt with him carry;

And very oftentimes it would be found

He muſt his lodging take on the cold ground;

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=7)This alſo
muſt of them be underſtood,

That many Hoſts and Hoſteſſes are good,

Uſe people kindly for their drink and diet,

And lodg them ſoftly, where they reſt in quiet.

Where we will leave them ſleeping in their bed,

To ſhow how after in my way I ſped.

Croſſing the Fields, I in ſhort ſpace came down

To Eaſtwick, to the ſign o'th' Roſe and Crown,

Where for to ſtay I did not once intend,

But at the Inn-door there I met a friend,

An old acquaintance newly come from London,

Where women ſome are done, ſome men are undone;

To ſee how reſolutions ſoon may alter,

At ſight of him my legs began to falter,

And though before I had no liſt to drink,

Now other thoughts into my mind did ſink;

Methoughts I was as dry as was a bottle

Turn'd upſide downward, and without a ſtopple;

My eyes 'gan view the door, which open ſtood

To invite all Company in that wou'd;

Seeing an opportunity ſo fit,

How every thing invited us to it,

My friend and I reſolv'd e're we did go,

To enter in and drink a quart or two;

Yet did we think the Houſe not ſo reſplendent,

Becauſe no Buſh was to the ſign dependent;

But this gave comfort, What could not be cur'd,

It muſt be with a patient mind endur'd;

Becauſe therefore no Wine we could come by,

We were reſolv'd Beer ſhould us ſatisfie.

Being in, the firſt thing that our eyes beheld,

(like to two Soldiers marching in the field)

Came in a Bag-pudding and piece of Beef,

Which unto hungry ſtomacks gives relief.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=7)By what is
writ, Reader, thou maiſt ſuppoſe

(without the ſmelling, ſnuffing ſence, the Noſe)

'Twas Dinner time, when men do meat devour,

Or (as the Quaker ſaith) 'bout the Twelfth hour,

Our Stomacks were provided for the meat,

Nor did our Hoſt fail for to bid us eat,

Few complements need to be us'd to do it,

For (hungry) we did ſtoutly fall unto it.

And being thus refreſht with wholſom diet,

You'd think our Stomacks ſhould have been at quiet:

But other thoughts did in our mind take place,

And liquor there was wanting in the caſe;

Our Hoſteſs ſhe was very blithe and handy,

And brought us in a quartern of Nantz-Brandy,

A Liquor which the Dutch-men prize, I think,

More than Ambroſia which the gods do drink;

Therefore its fame unto the Heav'ns they raiſe,

Indeed that Liquor well deſerveth praiſe

Beyond Metheglin, Ʋſquebah, or Perry,

Or nappy Ale that makes mens hearts full merry.

Worſterſhire-Sider, nor yet Brunſwick-Mum,

In goodneſs nothing near unto it come.

Your liquoriſh Steponey, or your Bracket,

For goodneſs like to Brandy they much lack it.

Cardimum, Roſa-ſolis, Aqua-vitae,

Although that they be very ſtrong and mighty,

They are no more comparable to Brandy,

Than is a Gyant to a Jack-a-dandy:

Nor yet that Liquor Fancy on us thruſts,

Which ſcalds our mouths, and taſts like to burnt Cruſts,

As Black as Soot, or as the River Stix,

Which they with Kennel water (ſurely) mix,

It comes far ſhort of Brandy all will ſay,

Not to be mention'd with it the ſame day.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=8) Brandy
(according to the drinking Law)

It is both good and wholeſom burnt or raw;

Or raw mixed with Sugar, if you do it,

There is no drink comparable unto it;

It clears the Stomach, and it helps digeſtion,

And is a wholeſom Liquor without queſtion.

Now we at this good Liquor there did ſtay

Till two full hours were waſted of the day;

When time, which every one of truth convinces,

And will not ſtay one jot, no not for Princes,

Told us that we muſt part, that too much drinking

Cripled the Legs, and made the wits be ſhrinking,

Then 'cauſe we would not be contradictory

To Time, although to part we were right ſorry,

We paid the ſhot, a thing muſt not be undone,

And parted, he towards York, and I towards London.

From thence I on my journey forwards fell

Unto a Town nam'd Stansted-Deal, or Dell,

So call'd 'cauſe it is in a bottom founded,

With Dells or watry places moſt ſurrounded:

Here runs a River which doth ſave them charges,

Being capable of bearing Boats and Barges,

By which to London they ſend ſtore of Grain,

And bring thence Coles and other things again.

There is good liquor in that Town they ſay,

But 'twas near half a mile out of my way:

Wherefore becauſe I would not go about,

I of that nappy liquor went without;

For why, the neareſt way to London lies

Over a Common-meddow call'd the Ryes,

Which way I took, and croſſed the New-River,

That unto London doth her Streams deliver.

But now ſome other matters to explain,

A while I'le turn my Verſe to Proſe again.

### 1.4.

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=8)As I was
thus going over the Ryes, there over-took me a Journey-man Shoo-maker, going
ſo faſt, as if his buſineſs required wonderful haſt; however I had that
inquiſitive­neſs to ask him why he went ſo faſt, and that if he went ſoftlier
I ſhould be glad of his company, as being alone: He replied, that he was one
of the Gentle-Craft, and ha­ving by the perſwaſions of Monſieur Malt-worm
ſpent all his chink, he muſt haſt to London that night, having no Money to
accommodate him with a lodging by the way. I laughed heartily at his
diſcourſe, and told him he was not to be blamed for being money-leſs, ſeeing
the ſame was or­dained by Jupiter before. Thoſe words ſtruck Criſpin into a
great amazement, who would needs know how it came to paſs that Jupiter ſhould
be ſuch an enemy to good fel­lowſhip? Marry (ſaid I) I think him to be no
enemy unto good fellowſhip, though it hath happened that he hath predeſtin'd
moſt of you to be unthrifts, the manner where­of I will relate unto you.

It happened ſome Ages before my Grandmother was born, that Jupiter and Mercury
travelled together upon the earth; Mercury was wonderfully hungry, and had no
Money in his Purſe to buy him any food; and at laſt to his great comfort he
ſpied where a company of Taylors were at dinner with butter'd Peaſe, eating
their Peaſe with their Needles points one by one: Mercury came to them, and
asked them his alms; they proudly bid him ſit down and do as he ſaw them did,
and with that delivered him a Needle. The poor God being paſſing hungry, could
not content his Maw with eating one by one, but turned the eye of his Needle,
and eat two or three together; which the Taylors ſeeing, they ſtart up, and
ſaid, What fellow, a Shovel and Spade to butter'd Peaſe! haſt thou no more
manners? Get out of our company: and ſo they ſent him packing with many
ſtrokes. Mercury coming back, Ju­piter [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=9) demanded of him
what news? And he told him how churliſhly he was uſed by the Taylors. Well,
wandering on further, Mercury eſpied where a company of Shoo-makers were at
Dinner with powdred Beef and Breweſs; going to them, before he could ask them
any alms, they ſaid, Welcom good fellow, what is thy Stomack up? Wilt thou do
as we do, and taſte of our Beef? Mercury thanked them, and ſat down and eat
his Belly-full, and drank well of Double-Beer; and when he had done, went home
to his Maſter; as ſoon as he came, Jupiter asked him what news? And he ſaid, I
have lighted amongſt a crew of Shoo-makers, the booneſt Fellows that ever I
met withal, they have frankly fed me without grudging, and therefore grant me
a Boon for them. Ask what thou wilt, Mercury (quoth he) and it ſhall be
granted. Why then quoth he, grant that for this good turn they have done me,
they may ever ſpend a Groat afore they can earn Twopence; It ſhall be granted
quoth he: Mercury, as ſoon as Jupiter had ſaid the word, he bethought himſelf,
and ſaid, Not ſo, but that they may earn a Groat before they ſpend Twopence,
for my Tongue ſlipt at firſt; but Jupiter replied, my grant cannot be
recalled, your firſt wiſh muſt ſtand firm. And hence it comes to paſs that by
Mercuries miſtake, and Ju­piters grant, that the Journey-men of the Gentle-
craft have been ever ſince ſuch boon blades, and toping good Fellows.

Criſpin heard my Story with much attention, and I per­ceived that had his
Purſe been anſwerable to his heart, we had taſted what liquor had been at the
next Ale-houſe: But as the old ſong ſays, Poverty parts good company; my Lady
Pecunia having parted from him, he ſoon parted from me, and made all the haſt
he could towards London.

### 1.5.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=9)Paſſing
thus as I told you o're, the Rye,

Incontinent to Hodſden I did hie,

A great th'row-fare, conſiſting of one ſtreet,

But ſeated in an Air wholeſom and ſweet;

There is therein of Inns the duce and all,

But Beer in them methought was very ſmall,

I try'd not only one, but two or three,

But Beer in none did with my taſte agree;

Indeed there is good Ale at the Thatcht-houſe,

Which followed will give a man a douce,

And likewiſe in the Town you there may ſee

Of Taverns there's no leſs than two or three,

Wherein with Wine you there may fill your gorges,

But not ſo good (methinks) as my friend Georges.

There is a Statue of a Nimph-like charm,

Which always holds a Pitcher in her arm,

Through which ſhe water conſtant doth deliver,

Which ſaves the fetching of it from the River;

What other Rarities in this Town be,

Let them who liſt go thither for to ſee.

From thence I went and had a little pull

At Broksborn, at the Sign of the Black-Bull,

Where though there was not high and mighty Liquor,

'Twas ſtronger than at Hodſden, and more quicker;

Quicker in two reſpects, Pots came more thick,

And then the Beer in drinking was more quick;

But having by ſuch quickneſs much coyn ſpent,

I parted thence, and unto Wormly went;

There did I ſtay all night at the White-Hind,

And found an Hoſt was debonair and kind.

He told me many tricks done in his youth,

Which if ſo be they all of them were truth,

I muſt conclude (for ſo it plain appears)

He was an arch wag in his younger years.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=10)My Hoſteſs
ſhe was bonny, tite, and neat,

And full of mirth, as is an Egg of meat.

She bid me kindly welcome, ſo ſhe may

I think to any one that freely pay;

Yet this I'le ſay, her Meat was of the beſt,

Freſh, ſweet, and good, and very cleanly dreſt;

All her diſcourſe was pleaſant, ſweet as honey,

And I was kindly welcome for my money.

Next morn no ſooner Phoebus did appear,

And with his beams did gild our Hemiſphear,

But I ſoon ſhook off Morpheus drowzy clog,

Firſt drank, and paid, then forwards on did jog

Unto a Town call'd Cheſhunt, wheretofore

Was a Religious Houſe of Nuns great ſtore;

Theſe Nuns were Maids or Virgins, chuſe you which,

Or at the leaſtwiſe they ſhould have been ſuch,

But ſame hath told (if ſame hath not beli'd them)

They no ſuch Cattel were by thoſe that try'd them;

For under ground they had a private Cell

To Waltham-Abby where the Monks did dwell,

By which conveyance they each other met,

And many Baſtards by this means did get;

But whether that the ſame were true or no,

'Tis only God Almighty that doth know.

This Cheſhunt Town is three miles long or near,

And ſcattered with Houſes here and there;

Some Alehouſes upon the Road I ſaw,

And ſome with buſhes, ſhew'ng they Wine did draw,

But whether Beer or Wine were good or bad,

To taſt thereof no time as then I had:

For ſhould a man at every Ale-houſe call,

'Twould empty his Purſe, and ſpoil his brains withal;

And truly unto me it is a wonder

To ſee how Ale-houſes the Road do  [...]er,

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=10)It does to
me much admiration give

To think which ways they make a ſhift to live!

And yet I think a man may wonder more

That many men about them live ſo poor!

The Reaſon is, that what theſe poor men gain,

The Ale-houſes for drink from them do drain;

And ſo theſe poor men, to be term'd good fellows,

Do toil and moil for to maintain the Ale-houſe.

As to this purpoſe did a Neighbour mine,

Who to maintain the Ale-wives to go fine,

And idly live, whatever that he got

He ſpent upon them, on the Pipe and Pot;

He following this Trade continually,

Fell grievous ſick, as if he ſtraight would die;

Deſiring his Wives pity, he to move her,

Told her if that pleaſe God he did recover,

And that his help he to him would be giving,

Hee'd make the Ale-wives to ſpin for their living.

Soon after he recover'd his diſtemper,

But quickly grew he to be idem-ſemper,

The Ale-houſes he no ways would refrain,

Which made his wife thus carefully complain,

Husband, you ſaid, if that God ſent you health,

You would unto your ſelf return your wealth,

And make the Ale-wives for their living ſpin,

But now another mind I ſee you're in.

True Wife (reply'd the man) I were to blame

Should I deny't, and ſtill my mind's the ſame:

But firſt they muſt have Money wherewithall

For to buy Flax, ere they to ſpinning fall.

"Thus ſtill what vice a man is to addicted,

"He by excuſes ſeeks to be protected.

But to return where I did leave before,

This Town of Cheſhunt having paſſed o're,

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=11)I came to
Waltham-Croſs, from London Town

A Dozen miles juſt, either up or down:

Of which ſame Croſs, becauſe that I will write,

I will again in Proſe a while indite.

### 1.6.

This Croſs was erected by King Edward the firſt, in memory of his Wife Queen
Eleanor, a renowned and vertuous Lady, Siſter to Alphonſus King of Caſtile,
Daughter to King Ferdinand the third, and only Child of Joan his ſecond Wife,
Daughter and Heir of John Earl of Ponthien. She accompanied her Husband to the
Holy Land, in which Voyage, he being ſtabbed by a Saracen with a poyſoned
Dagger, when no Medicine could extract the poyſon, ſhe did it with her Tongue,
licking daily, while her Husband ſlept, his rankling wounds, whereby they
perfectly cloſed, and yet her ſelf received no harm! So ſoveraign a medicine
(ſaid Speed) is a womans tongue, a­nointed with the vertue of lovely
affection. Pity it is, ſaith Mr. Fuller, ſuch a pretty ſtory ſhould not be
true, becauſe then we might hear of one womans tongue that hath done good,
whereas otherwiſe we have heard of a hundred womens tongues that have done
hurt. However, no queſtion ſhe was a woman of excellent parts, to our Nation a
loving Mother, and (ſaith Walſingham) the Column and Pillar, as it were, of
the whole Realm. She dyed at Herdby in Lincolnſhire, November 29, 1290,
ha­ving been King Edwards Wife 36 years, who erected to her honour theſe
Croſſes, as Statues, at Lincoln, Grantham, Stanford, Geddington, Northampton,
Stony-Stratford, Dunſtable, St. Albans, this at Waltham, and one at
Weſtminſter called Charing-croſs; which laſt was by the Rump, that Maggot-end
of a Parliament, pulled down; to ſuch un­certain periods come oftentimes the
faireſt Structures, as this which was built of Marble, and therefore the more
ſubject to the covetouſ­neſs of avaritious hands. Thus, as John Taylor hath
it,

Old Charing-Croſs that laſted many lives,

Is turn'd to Saltſellers and H [...]f [...]s of Knives.

But this Croſs at Waltham being not ſo rich, eſcaped ruine, though time hath
made it ſomething ruinous in reſpect of its former beauty and ſplendor. But
enough of this Croſs, leſt I croſs my Reader with the tediouſneſs of the
relation thereof.

### 1.7.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=11)From
Waltham-Croſs I went to Enfield Town,

Unto the Sign there of the Roſe and Crown,

A noted place; which Houſe much money takes

For ſale of Butter'd bread, Eel-pies and Cakes;

There alſo is good Beer, and Ale ſo great,

'Tis ſaid that it will make a Cat to ſpeak.

But there is one thing makes amends for all,

Although their Ale be great, their pots are ſmall.

This Houſe is call'd old Joans, but wherefore ſo,

To tell to you the truth, I do not know;

Nor can we ought of its antiquity read

In learned Cambden, or laborious Speed,

For had they at the ſame but tope't their noſe,

They would have writ of it I do ſuppoſe;

Nor did John Taylor the brave Water▪Poet

In all his rambling Travels ſurely know it,

For honeſt John did ne're commit that crime,

To drink good Ale, and mention not the Sign;

But ſince that time I have informed been,

That thoſe ſame perſons who now live therein,

Were in another Houſe living e're while,

Nearer to London much about a mile,

And coming for to live where now they do,

They brought the name of old Joans thither too.

Here after I had ſtaid a little ſpace,

Towards London then I forwarder did trace,

And weary as I was at laſt did come

To the Blew Bell in merry Edmonton;

I call it merry, for it doth appear

That once a merry Devil lived there.

Or elſe the ſtory lies, and the Devil's in't,

If men would dare for to put lies in print;

But ancient Records they be-like do tell

One Peter Faber he therein did dwell,

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=12)And he
deceiv'd the Devil as 'tis ſed,

The Devil ſure was fairly brought to bed;

That he ſhould be deceiv'd 'tis to be wonder'd,

Where one deceives him, he deceives a hunder'd.

But Holla Muſe, where runs my buſie pen!

Return unto thy ſubject once agen,

Here at the Bell I found good Beer, good Sack,

Nor did they Cuſtomers at that time lack,

Whoſe poſtures to expreſs as they ſat quaffing,

Would make a Horſe his Bridle break with laughing:

Here one ſate in a fume of Tunidado,

Whoſe vapours unto Heaven did make ſcalado;

Another he did ſpit and ſpall ſo ſore

As if he'd ſee what he had drunk before;

Another he did ſing ſo out of frame,

'Twould ſcare the ſchreich-owles for to hear the ſame;

One had his tongue continually a walking,

Yet none could gain one wiſe word by his talking;

Another did better decorum keep,

Nodding his head a while he fell aſleep;

Some could not to one ſeat their breeches fix,

But walking ſtill were full of antick tricks:

So each a ſeveral poſture did expreſs,

Acted with very much rediculouſneſs,

That it would make one think, a man to ſee

What kind of Beaſts and Anticks, Drunkards be,

That he from over-drinking ſhould refrain,

Or having been drunk, ne're be drunk again.

Here at the Bell I little time did ſtay,

Drank only one bare pint, and went my way.

But in the Road another Tavern ſpi'd,

Where what juice was within I went and tri'd;

To give you commendations of the Wine

It much doth need, 'twas neither brisk nor fine,

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=12)Racy, nor
pure; therefore I do not ſcoff,

It needs much praiſes for to put it off;

But yet the Drawer like an honeſt Lad

Told me, although the firſt pint proved bad,

Bid me I ſhould not be too much perplext,

For why it ſhould be mended in the next;

But I well knowing his wire-drawing tricks,

By which on many a perſon they do fix;

Did leave him for ſome other one to taper on,

And bid adieu to him and his blue apron.

Next I to Totnam-High-croſs took my way,

And at the Sign o'th' Swan a while did ſtay,

Being by a friend call'd in, who with a glance

From out the window ſpied me by chance;

No Complements betwixt us were neglected,

Being glad to meet together unexpected,

And then as when friends meet, the common uſe

Is to enquire ſtraight, Pray what good news?

So was it then with us, our tongues 'gan prate

Of ſuch tranſactions as were done of late,

And afterwards to other matters fell;

And firſt of all our tongues began to tell

How Honeſty we thought from earth was fled,

Money was ſcarce, and that made trading dead.

That men of parts were flighted and neglected,

Whilſt mimick anticks were too much reſpected;

How that Hypocriſie bare ſo much rule,

Plain dealing now accounted was a fool;

How yea and nay, if you do rightly ſcan him,

Would cozen, but more ſlylier far than dam- [...]im;

That ſome men, though in Knavery were mounted;

Yet would be angry to be Knaves accounted▪

Theſe laſt were my friends words which he me told,

But I ſtraightway deſir'd him to hold,

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=13)And bid
him ſpeak with better circumſpection,

(There is no gen'ral Rule without exception)

For in our Country I my ſelf did know

As great a Knave as thereabouts did grow,

Who cauſe he would be known to be a Knave,

To have it under-hand five ſhillings gave,

And that this was a▪ real truth, no jeſt,

Hundreds might ſign it with Probatum eſt.

Thus we of Knav'ry did our judgments ſcan,

Yet Knav'ry will be us'd do what we can;

Which made that Knave to think he did not leeſe,

When as he paid ten pounds by one poor Cheeſe;

Well may we ſay with Rombus the School maſter,

'Twill cauſe a broken head to have ſuch plaiſter;

And thus a man might eas'ly make it plain,

That ſome are but bare Knaves, ſome Knaves in grain.

But to return where we did leave before▪

And of theſe cheating Knaves to write no more:

Commanding Time which will not ſtay for no man,

Me to my Journey once again did ſummon;

My friend and I that was ſo honeſt hearted,

Drunk to each other▪ then ſhook hands and parted.

Going ſtill nearer London, I did come

In little ſpace of time to Newington.

Now as I paſt along I caſt my eye on,

The Signs of Cock and Pie, and Bull and Lion,

And Handſome Hoſteſſes, with ſmiling looks,

And thought that Jack-daws might be caught by Rooks.

So I ne're ſtaid, but unto Kingsland came,

Where at that place I found the very ſame

Signs to invite the people in to drink,

Where (if you will) you may ſpend ſtore of Chink.

From thence my courſe to London I did bend,

And at the City made my Journeys▪

END.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=43135&page=13)

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1678  

