---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Rump enough: or, Quære for quære, in answer to a pamphlet, entituled, No
nevv Parliament, or, Some quæres, or considerations, humbly offered to the
present Parliament-members.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119293&page=1)

RUMP ENOUGH: OR, QUAERE for QUAERE, In Anſwer to a Pamphlet, ENTITULED, NO
NEVV PARLIAMENT, OR, Some Quaeres, or Conſiderations, humbly offered to the
preſent PARLIAMENT - MEMBERS.

LONDON, Printed for any man that loves Peace, March 14\. 1659.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. RUMP Enough, &c.
    * 1.1. The Quaere's are as follows. 1. Whether this be not the Parliament, and theſe the Perſons, who began the War with the late King? And if ſo▪ whether it do not highly and neerly concern them, even for their own ſakes, to be the Parliament that ſhall take up and Cloze the Quarrel, and not leave it to others, eſpecially, if as the general voice goes, the Kings Son must be brought in?
    * 1.2. Quaere.
      * 1.2.1. Anſ.
    * 1.3. Quaer.
      * 1.3.1. Anſw.
    * 1.4. Quaere.
      * 1.4.1. Anſw.
    * 1.5. Quaere.
      * 1.5.1. Anſw.
    * 1.6. Quaere.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119293&page=2)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119293&page=2)

## 1\. RUMP Enough, &c.

ALthough That Pamphlet, which Occaſions This, conſidered in it ſelf, is not
Worth a Reply: Yet, in regard of the Contrivers, and of the End it tends to,
it may deſerve one. I look upon it, as nothing elſe, but the Phanatiques late
Petition, ſliced into Quaeres; by ſome unskilfull hand; and with a Harmleſs
kind of Simple Malice, directed to elude the Juſtice, and Neceſſity of their
great Patrons Diſſolution.

I ſhall not much Inſiſt upon the buſineſſe, beyond the Obligation of a Formal
Anſwer: but I ſhall take ſuch heed to That, as to leave little place for a
Return; and in the reſt, make the old ſaying good▪ that one Fool may ask more
Queſtions, than Twenty Wiſe men can Anſwer.

### 1.1. The Quaere's are as follows. 1. Whether this be not the Parliament,
and theſe the Per­ſons, who began the War with the late King? And if ſo▪
whe­ther it do not highly and neerly concern them, even for their own ſakes,
to be the Parliament that ſhall take up and Cloze the Quarrel, and not leave
it to others, eſpecially, if as the general voice goes, the Kings Son must be
brought in?

#### 1.1.1.

Anſ▪ This is not the Original Parliament; That was compos'd [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119293&page=3) of Three Eſtates;
King, Lords, and Commons. Further, theſe very Perſons now ſitting, Declar'd
the King, a Party with them in the Quarrel; beginning the War, in the Kings
name;—For Him, not with (that is, as it lies here Against) Him. If thus; the
Houſe muſt be Divided, as well now, in the Queſtion, as formerly it was ſo in
the War. The Parliament (even in the Quaeriſts ſenſe) were thoſe, that
(ſuitably to their Duties, and Engagements) Voted a peace, in order to the
preſ [...]rvating of his Majeſty, but there was a Faction too, that contrary
to Honour, Faith, and Conſci­ence, did forcibly ſeclude their Honeſter
Fellowes, (by much the Major Part) and proſecute, and put to Death the King;
Thoſe that have been Honeſt, are ſafe: nay, and ſo ſhould thoſe be too, that
will at laſt be ſo, by my conſent: but I demand

### 1.2. Quaere.

What Equity, or Reaſon is there, that thoſe Perſons who murthered the Father,
and are ſtill profeſſed Enemies to the Son, ſhould have an Equal Benefit with
Others, that were Affronted for their Loyalty to the Former, and are at
preſent upbraided (as if 'twere Criminal) for their Af­fection to the Latter?
If the King's Son muſt be brought in, whether they will or no, what have we to
doe further with thoſe People, that declare they'll keep him Out, if they can?

2. Whether this Parliaments firſt undertaking and proſe­cuting the War with the late King were Juſt, and upon good and Warrantable Grounds? If it were (as no doubt it was) and God having by his Providence, after a long Interruption of ſome of them, and a longer Secluſion of the reſt, restored them to their Truſt, whether they ought not now to stand to their firſt Good Principles maintain their firſt Good Cauſe, and ſecure all the good p ople that have been engaged with them and by them?

#### 1.2.1. Anſ.

The war was just, in that part of the Parliament, which declared for the King,
and acted accordingly, but unjust in thoſe that ſwore to preſerve him, and
intended to murther him. That the Parliament ought to ſtand to their first
good Principles; we are agreed. In ſo doing; they are to bring to condigne
pu­niſhment, [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119293&page=3) —the infrringers
of their Privileges;—the introducers of Arbitrary power—the Obstructors of
ſucceſſive Parliaments; The murtherers of the late King;—the ſubverters of the
eſta­bliſh'd Government, &c.—

I grant you further, that they are obliged to ſecure all the good people that
engaged with them and by them; but not conſe­quently all thoſe that acted
violently againſt and without them▪—now my Queſtion.

### 1.3. Quaer.

How is it poſsible, for thoſe that began upon Principles of Contradiction, (as
the ſaving and deſtroying of the King, &c.)—to ſtand to their firſt
Principles.

3. Whether this be not that Parliament, and theſe the very perſons, who by the good eſteem they had among the people of their Integrity, Faithfulneſs and Constancy; whether I ſay, this be not the Parliament, who by theſe and other means engaged the Ho­nest and Well Affected of the Land in the aforeſaid War? And if ſo, whether this Parliament having new power in their hands, are not obliged in Duty and good Conſcience to ſecure all the ſaid honeſt and well affected people for this their Engaging and Act­ing under them, and not leave them as a prey to their prof [...]ſsed enemies, nor their terms of Peace to be made by they know not whom? Another Parliament, which there is too great cauſe to fear, will be too much made up of ſuch as neither have been nor are friends to the Parliaments cauſe, nor to thoſe that engaged in it.

#### 1.3.1. Anſw.

'Tis not the gaining of a good eſteem, but 'tis the Pra­ctice of Integrity,
that recommends a worthy Perſon. I may believe well of a cheat, and ha' my
pocket pick'd. But after that; I think, I ſhould deſerve a yellow coat, ever
to truſt that fellow again, though he ſhould plead;—he had my good opinion
formerly.—Some I confeſſe are yet in Being of thoſe whoſe Intereſts raiſed the
War, but theſe are not the men our Quaeriſtmeans: (and beſide; the moſt
conſiderable of that number, are in their graves) For the reſt; (to wave his
Argument from power to Conſcience.—) Thoſe people that dare not ſtand to the
Teſt of a Free, Legal Parliament, muſt not preſume to act themſelves, as an
Authority without Law, or Limit. In fine;—If this be the ſame Parliament. that
ſirſt engaged—them—

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119293&page=4)

### 1.4. Quaere.

Why ſhould the Secluders, and their Adherents;—Thoſe, which by Force of Arms,
Baffled this very Parliament, in 48▪ ſcape better, then the Cavaliers, that
fought againſt it, in 42?

4. Whether this be not the Parliament who by many Decla­rations and Remonſtrances, by Proteſtation and Vow, by Solemn League and Covenant have declared and engaged themſelves before God, Angels, and Men, and have thereby drawen in and therewith engaged all honeſt People to aſſert and defend their juſt undertaking and one another therein? whether as things now ſtand, (when this juſt Cauſe, which through Gods aſſiſtance could not be won from us in the field, is in great dan­ger to be ſtoln from us by the dark contrivances of its and our adverſaries) if this Parliament ſhould diſſolve at ſuch a time as this, and leave all, both Cauſe and all engaged by them in it to another Parliament, the greatest part whereof may be no friends but enemies, or at leaſt ſtrangers, or but little concerned in the first undertaking; whether this would not be exceeding contrary to all thoſe former Declarations, Remonſtrances, Pro­teſtation, Vow and Solemn League and Covenant.

#### 1.4.1. Anſw.

I doe allow,—the Members of this preſent Seſſion, are thoſe Perſons, that
ſtand engaged by Oath and Covenant: and to that Oath, and Covenant, we
appeal.—For granted; they stand bound to protect all the Honeſt people they
have engaged; but not the Knaves,—the Cove­nant-Breakers; I deſire only this.—

### 1.5. Quaere.

Whether or not, are they that took the Covenant, bound to protect the
Violaters of it?—Nay, can they purge themſelves of manifeſt Perjury, and
Complication, ſhould they not proſecute the obſtinate oppoſers of it?

5. Whether it be not more then ſufficiently manifest, what will be the carriage of theſe Enemies to the Parliaments Cauſe, and its Adherents, when they get power into their hands, ſince they are ſo forward already in their diſcourſes to charge the Parliament with Treaſon and Rebellion in their first underta­king the War, and look on all their Friends as Rebells and Traytors for aſsisting them in the Proſecution of it, and who are [[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119293&page=4) now in all places contriving and promoting the electing of ſuch into the New Parliament as are Enemies to the preſent Parlia­ment, their Friends and Cauſe, wherein if they prevail (as tis too likely) their work is done? how abſolutely neceſſary is it then for the preſent Parliament to continue their Seſsion, for prevention of theſe Miſ hiefs, which otherwiſe will enſue.

Ʋpon theſe and many other very weighty Conſiderations, it can by no means be
accounted either honorable, or just, or ſafe, or prudent for the preſent
Parliament to diſſolve themſelves, till first they have fully aſſerted, and
vindicated their own juſt undertaking, and the faithfull adherents to it and
them, and not to leave  [...]oth themſelves and their Friends to the Malice
and Revenge of a vanquiſht Enemy.

If this ſhould be, we may bid Adieu to the Honour and Re­nown of Engliſh Pa
liaments, and to all future hopes of aſſiſt­ance from the People, whatever the
neceſſity may be: And let Engliſh men bid farewell both to their Civil and
Religious Li­berties, if after ſo high a Conflict for them, with the expence
of ſo much blood and treaſure, and having by Gods bleſsing ſub­dued their
oppoſers, yet after all to be expoſed to a farr worſe Condition then before,
which O God forbid: We hope for better things from our preſent Parliament: All
that we add, is only this, If the KING muſt come, none ſo fit to bring him as
our preſent Parliament.

#### 1.5.1. Anſw.

'Tis not the Parliament is charged with Treaſon, but that Rebellious
Faction;—that, by an Inſolence, praevious to the murther of his Sacred
Majesty, threw out the major party of their Fellow-Members, which interpoſed
to ſave him—and tis in their behalfs, this pittifull, half-witted Pamph­leter
engages. Should theſe Gentlemen ſit, till they found a Free Parliament their
Friends, they'd hardly Riſe be­twixt This, and the Day of Judgement: and thats
all they deſire. Alas! a Trifle.—The Care they take of our Religion, and Civil
Rights, in truth is a great Favour from them, that never underſtood their
Own.—If the more ſober, conſcientious Perſons at the Helm, think not fit to
diſſolve ſo ſoon; theſe JONASSES, however, muſt be thrown over-board, to ſave
the Ʋeſſel.—He that diſſents▪ [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119293&page=5) let him produce
his Reaſons: and in particulars, but ſhew what Good, they 've either Done, or
Meant us; to Ballance the Calamities they have engaged us in. I ſhould be glad
to ſee theſe Men Repent; hardly, to ſee them Govern.—Theſe Folks are Ruined,
if they doe not Rule; the Nation, if they doe.—The Queſtion then, is but—

### 1.6. Quaere.

Whether is more Prudential; by ſaving of ſome half a ſcore Secluders, that We
ſhould Periſh; or by their SPEEDY DISSOLƲTION, that we ſhould ſave our ſelves?

FINIS.

[Home](/)

L'Estrange, Roger, Sir, 1616-1704.. Date: 1660  

