---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The good hous-wiues treasurie Beeing a verye necessarie booke instructing to
the dressing of meates. Hereunto is also annexed sundrie holsome medicines for
diuers diseases.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=1)

THE Good Houſ-wiues Treaſurie.

Beeing a verye ne­ceſſarie Booke inſtructing to the dreſſing of Meates.

❀ Hereunto is alſo annexed, ſundrie holſome Medi­cines for diuers diſeaſes.

* Imprinted at London by Edward Allde. 1588.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. ❧ A Book of Cookrye very neceſſary for all ſuch as delight therin.
    * 1.1. To make White broth.
    * 1.2. How to make White broth either for Capon, Mutton or Chickin.
    * 1.3. How to make ſtewed Broth either with Veale, Mutton or Cocke.
    * 1.4. How to make broth either for Birdes, Rabits or Mutton.
    * 1.5. How to ſmeare a Rabbet or a necke of Mutton.
    * 1.6. How to make Broth for a Carpe or a Pike.
    * 1.7. How to roſte the Fillet of a legge of Veale.
    * 1.8. To make minſt Pyes.
    * 1.9. To make a Chickin Pye.
    * 1.10. To make a Pippen Pye.
    * 1.11. To make a Quince Pye.
    * 1.12. How to make an Eele Pye.
    * 1.13. How to make a Florentine.
    * 1.14. An other how to make a Florentine.
    * 1.15. How to make Douſets.
    * 1.16. For Tarte ſtuffe either Wardens, Barberies or Damſons.
    * 1.17. How to make Prune Tartes.
    * 1.18. How to make Iellye either of capon, cock, Veale, chicken or calues feet, Tenche or Barnell: you may make Ielly of any one of theſe or two of them together.
    * 1.19. How to make blacke Puddinges.
    * 1.20. How to make white Puddinges.
    * 1.21. How to make Liuering Puddinges.
    * 1.22. How to make a Lenton Pudding.
    * 1.23. A Haggas Pudding.
    * 1.24. How to make Sauſages.
    * 1.25. To make freſh Cheeſe.
    * 1.26. For a Tanſie.
    * 1.27. To make Fritters.
    * 1.28. For a Poſſet.
    * 1.29. Porke Sauce.
    * 1.30. Piggeſauce.
    * 1.31. Sauce for a Gooce.
    * 1.32. Capon ſauce.
    * 1.33. How to make Almond milke.
    * 1.34. How to make white or red Vineger.
    * 1.35. How to ſtyll Roſewater that it may well keepe.
    * 1.36. How to make very ſweete Cakes either of Damaſke or red Roſes.
    * 1.37. How to preſerue Cherries.
    * 1.38. How to preſerue Gooſeberies.
    * 1.39. How to preſerue Damſons.
    * 1.40. How to preſerue Peare plummes either white or black.
    * 1.41. How to preſerue Barberies.
    * 1.42. How to preſerue Quinces.
    * 1.43. How to preſerue Orrenges.
    * 1.44. How to make a Cullis for a ſick body.
  * 2\. Holſome Medicines.
    * 2.1. ¶ A remedy for ſuch as cannot diſgeſt their meate, but Vomit it vp againe.
    * 2.2. For the green ſicknes.
    * 2.3. For a Burning or Scalding.
    * 2.4. For a Fellone, Ancome, or any ſuch thing.
    * 2.5. For an Itche or an heat.
    * 2.6. Lyppe Salue.
    * 2.7. For the running of the raines and the whites.
    * 2.8. For the fleam in the ſtomack.
    * 2.9. To draw vp the euelaw.
    * 2.10. For them that doo vomit.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=2)

## 1\. ❧ A Book of Cookrye very neceſſary for all ſuch as delight therin.

### 1.1. To make White broth.

TAke a long marrow bone and cleaue it long-wayes, take out the marrow, and ſet
on ye bones with your Capon or Cocke, laye the breſt downwardes, when it is
ſodden ye may take the Capon foorth and put it in a baſon with hot licour, and
lay the breſt downwards, if you will you may ſéeth a hinder Legge of béefe
with it alſo, you muſt ſet it on betimes that the ſtrength of your meate may
be ſodden in your broth: then take the fat as it riſeth, no broth till the
meat be ſodden as much as it ſhall be, then take thrée pintes or a pottle of
the vppermoſt of your broth for two platters, let it ſettle, and then take
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=3) the cléereſt
and ſtraine it through a cloth and put the fat to it: then ſet it vpon the
fier in a Pipkin, and take half a doſſen of large mace, half a ſpooneful of
whole pep­per, as much ſuger as will ſwéeten it, if you will you may put in a
pinte of Muſ­kadine or white wine, when it hath ſod­den a good while put in
your marrow you took out of the bones with half a doſſen of Dates cut in
halfe, let it but ſimper after you haue put theſe in till you take it vp, take
to this broth foure or fiue yolkes of egges in ſome Vergis, halfe a porrenger
full with ſome ſuger, and when you take vp the broth to ſerue in, then put it
to it, let not the broth ſéeth after you haue put in the egges but ſimper a
little and ſtir it well, then you muſt take Currans and Prunes and ſéethe them
by themſelues in faire water, when they be ſodden you muſt lay Prunes, and
Barberries about the Platter, if you will: ſtrawe a little Suger and Sinamon
about it alſo, laye Prunes, Currans and Barberries about the Capon, with the
marrow, Mace and Dates, but the Capon muſt be firſt broke vp but not aſunder,
for the Wine, you
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=3) néede not put
it in vnleſſe you will, the broth will be good notwithſtanding.

### 1.2. How to make White broth either for Ca­pon, Mutton or Chickin.

TAke a legge of Béefe or a rumpe, or els a ſhorte marow bone, and cleaue it
long waies and take out the marowe whole, and ſéeth the bone with the meat, if
you make but a little take any one of theſe aboue, and when they be well
ſod­den, take thrée pintes or a pottell of the vppermoſt of the broth & ſtrain
it through a boulter or ſtreyner while your meat is a ſéething, binde in a
handfull of hearbes then take a faire Pipkin and put in the cleareſt of the
broth to a quarte of broth: a pinte of white Wine or halfe a pinte of
Muſkadine, put in halfe a doſſen of great Mace, a little whole Pepper, Suger,
ſalt and a litle ſtick of whole Sinamon, binde in a few hearbes, namely,
Endiue, Suc­cory, Marigoldes, Margerum, Percelye a little Tyme, and a little
Roſemary, let all theſe ſéethe halfe an hower, then put in halfe a doſſen
Dates cut in halfe, put in
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=4) the marow that
you take out of the bone, take Currans and Prunes, binde them in a cloth and
ſeeth them in water by thē ­ſelues, and when you haue put in your marowe and
Dates: let your broth ſéethe no longer then while your marow is hot throughly,
then take fower yolks of egges and thrée or fower ſpoonefuls of Roſewa­ter,
beat them well together: take half a porrenger ful of broth and mingle it with
it and ſtirre it well together, then put it into your Pipkin of broth and ſtir
it wel till it ſéethe vp, then diſhe it and laye the fruite vpon the meat.

### 1.3. How to make ſtewed Broth either with Veale, Mutton or Cocke.

TAke it and ſet it on in a faire Pipkin of water, and when it is ſodden and
faire ſkimmed, take a handefull of good hearbes and put in it, and grated
bread, Prunes raiſons and Currans, Nutmeg, Pepper and ſault, and let them
boyle all together.

### 1.4. How to make broth either for Birdes, Rabits or Mutton.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=4)TAke a ſhort
marow bone and cleaue it a ſunder, and take out the marow, thē ſéeth the bone
in faire water, then take a porrenger ful of the vppermoſt of ye broth halfe a
pinte of white wine put in a pip­kin, then put in your meate, and if it be
birds or rabits: put in their bellies perce­lye, butter, Mace, whole Pepper,
Suger Sinamon & Currans, and leaue on the birdes heades, and put in but a
little of al theſe things afore named, but if it be mutton then put all theſe
into the brothe, beſides the fruite that is put in, put in a little grated
breade, binde in a fewe hearbes, halfe an hower before you take vp the broth,
put in ten rootes of white Endiue, cut off but a little of the roote or els it
will fall a ſunder, then put in your marow, and let it ſéeth no longer then
till it be throughly whot.

### 1.5. How to ſmeare a Rabbet or a necke of Mutton.

TAke a Pipkin, a porrenger of water, two or thrée ſpoonefuls of Vergis, ten
Onions clean pilled, and if they be great
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=5) quarter them,
mingle as muchy Pepper and ſalte as will ſeaſon them, and rub it vpon the
meat, if it be a rabbit: put a péece of butter in the bellye and a péece in
the broth, and a few Currans if you wil, ſtop your pot cloſe and ſéeth it with
a ſofte fier but no fier vnder the bottome, then when it is ſodden ſerue it in
vpon ſoppes & lay a few Barberies vpon the diſhe.

### 1.6. How to make Broth for a Carpe or a Pike.

TAke water and yeſt, and boyle them together, then take whole Mace, Currans,
Pruines, Pepper and Salte, Percelye, Time and Roſemarye bound together, with a
little Vergis and Vine­ger, and a good péece of ſwéet Butter, and boyle them
all together. To all kinde of Fiſh the ſame broth, excepting prunes.

### 1.7. How to roſte the Fillet of a legge of Veale.

TAke the fat of the Kidney cut it in pée­ces as bigge as ones finger, then
take Pepper, ſalte and Nutmeg, and ſo lard it
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=5) with that and
the fat together, and let it be very well roaſted, then make Venſon ſauce to
it with Vineger, grated Bread, Sinamon, Suger, a little pepper and two or
thrée whole Cloues.

### 1.8. To make minſt Pyes.

TAke your Veale and perboyle it a lit­tle, or mutton, then ſet it a cooling:
and when it is colde, take thrée pound of ſuit to a legge of mutton, or fower
pound to a fillet of Veale, and thē mince them ſmall by them ſelues, or
together whether you will, then take to ſeaſon them halfe an vnce of Nutmegs,
half an vnce of cloues and Mace, halfe an vnce of Sinamon, a little Pepper, as
much Salt as you think will ſeaſon them, either to the mutton or to the Veale,
take viij. yolkes of Egges whē they be hard, half a pinte of roſewa­ter full
meaſure, halfe a pound of Suger, then ſtraine the Yolkes with the Roſe­water
and the Suger and mingle it with your meate, if ye haue any Orrenges or
Lemmans you muſt take two of thē, and take the pilles very thin and mince
them [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=6) very
ſmalle, and put them in a pound of currans, ſix dates, half a pound of prunes
laye Currans and Dates vpon the top of your meate, you muſt take two or thrée
Pomewaters or Wardens and mince with your meate, you maye make them woorſſe if
you will, if you will make good cruſt put in thrée or foure yolkes of egges a
litle Roſewater, & a good deale of ſuger.

### 1.9. To make a Chickin Pye.

IF you will make one ſo bigge, take nine or ten Chickins of a moneth olde,
truſſe them round and breake their bones, take to ſeaſon them withall a
quarter of an vnce of Sinamon, and a quarter of cloues and Mace, a little
Pepper and Salte, as much as you think will ſeaſon your Pye two or thrée
Orrenge péeles ſmall ſhread, take the marow of a ſhorte marow bone cleaue it
long waies and take out the marowe as whole as you can, then cut it in foure
or fiue péeces and put it in your pye take halfe a pounde of Currans, a good
hand full of Prunes, eight Dates, fower cut in halfe and fower ſhred, a pounde
of [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=6) Suger with
that in your cruſt and all, halfe a doſſen ſpoonefuls of Roſewater, ſo heate
your Ouen reaſonablye, and let it ſtand in two howers and a halfe or thrée
howers, a quarter of an hower before you draw it take three yolkes of egges,
fower or fiue ſpoonefulles of Roſewater, beate them together and let thē
boyle a waume ſtir it ſtill till you take it off, when it is ſomewhat coole
put in thrée or foure ſpoonfull of Vergis and a little ſuger, and put it into
your pye quiſh your couer and ſo ſerue it in.

### 1.10. To make a Pippen Pye.

TAke a doſſen of faire pippens, a pound of Suger in the cruſt and Pye, halfe
an vnce of Sinamon, two orrenge péeles ſhred fine, two ſpoonefulls of
Roſewater, then heate your Ouen and let it ſtand in two howers or two and a
halfe, and make a vent in the lid thereof: this Pye is good when the Quince is
out of ſeaſon.

### 1.11. To make a Quince Pye.

TAke eight or ten faire Quinces, pare them without and wipe them within
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=7) then take an
vnce of Sinamon, a pounde and a halfe of Suger, a little Saunders, and in
euery of thē a Cloue or two, then heate your Ouen reaſonablye, and let it
ſtand in ſix howers, this Pye is not to be made after Eaſter then they be out
of ſeaſon, you muſt make no vēt in it but with your ſuger put in fiue or ſix
ſpoonefulls of Roſewater.

### 1.12. How to make an Eele Pye.

TAke two penyworth of very fat Eeles when they be flead and very faire
wa­ſhed, ſéeth them in a litle faire water, and Salte till they be halfe
ſodden, that they maye ſlip from the bones, cut awaye the ſinnes on euery
ſide, then ſlip them from the bones, and ſhred them ſomewhat fine with a knife
and take two or thrée Wa [...] ­dens and ſhread them very fine to put a­mong
them, or Pippins or other apples, if you doo want wardens, then take a litle
Salte, a little Pepper, Sinamon, cloues Mace and Suger, and ſeaſon it withall
put in a quarter of a pound of ſweete but­ter, ſo put it in paſte, and bake it
not too raſhlye, you maye put in the yolke of an
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=7) egge and a
little Vergis when it is halfe baked if you will but I think it is better
without.

### 1.13. How to make a Florentine.

TAke the calle of a legge of Veale, and al the fat of a loyne of Veale, & the
marow of a ſhorte marow bone, and half as much Veale as this dooth waye, thē
ſhred them al together, and take Currans, Si­namon, Suger, dates, ſhred two or
thrée yolkes of Egges, Nutmegge and a little pepper, boyle al theſe together
vpon a ſoft fier halfe an hower, and put therto foure or fiue ſpoonfull of
Roſewater, and a litle Orrenge péele fine ſhread, then when it is halfe colde
put it in paſte and ſet it into the Ouen, and let it ſtand no longer then the
cruſt be baked, then Ice it or laye ſu­ger vpon it, as for the Chuites you
muſt put in no Egges nor boyle it, but put in a few Prunes, let them be half
ſodden in water.

### 1.14. An other how to make a Florentine.

TAke the kidneyes of a loyne of Veale when it is halfe roſted, and ſhread it
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=8) very ſmall
vpon a trencher, then take a porringer full of marowe and ſhread it a little,
and put it among the meate with a peny diſhe of Butter, take foure yolkes of
egges and mince them very ſmall whē they be hard and put them in currans as
many as you thinke good, fower or fiue Dates cut ſmall, fower or fiue
ſpoonefull of roſewater, and put in Sinamon, ſuger and a very litle Ginger,
ſet them vpon a chafindiſh of coles in a platter, and ſtirre it till you think
it be enough, put in a litle Orrenge or Lemman péele if you haue a­ny, make
very good paſte, and driue it out ſo thin that ye may blowe it vp from the
table, then cut it round as bigge as your platter is by the nethermoſt brim,
ſpred the platter with a little butter, and laye the paſte on and then put in
your meate, and laye it a good deale hyer in the middle then els where, then
make ſuche a couer as you make to a pudding in a platter, and then ſet it in
the Ouen till the paſte be baked, and then Ice it with a litle roſe water and
ſuger, and ſet it in a litle and ſerue it to the boord.

### 1.15. How to make Douſets.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=8)TAke a pinte of
Flower wet it with water, Butter, and an Egge white and al, and make not your
paſte too lithe when they be raiſed prick them with a pinne on the bottome,
then harden them either on the harthe or in the Ouen, and take a pinte of
Creame, thrée Egges but one of the Whites, beate them well and mingle them
with the Creame, thē take Sinamon, Nutmeg, Suger, and a little Salte, and a
quarter of a ſpoonefull of Flower, ſtirre them altogether & ſtraine thē
through aboulter or ſtrainer, then fil [...] them in the Ouen: let them ſtand
in halfe an hower and then take them out.

### 1.16. For Tarte ſtuffe either Wardens, Barberies or Damſons.

TAke a faire Pipkin and fill it full of a­ny one of them: put in two or thrée
ſpoonfulls of faire water, then ſet it vpon the hot harth without any coles
about it and ſo let them boyle while they be ſofte ready to ſtraine, and then
ſtrain them in­to a faire baſon, and ſet them on a chafin­diſhe with coales
and let them boyle and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=9) put in Suger,
and Sinamon ſufficient to ſwéeten them and put it into a faire glaſſe and ſo
vſe it as you néed.

### 1.17. How to make Prune Tartes.

IF you will haue a Tarte in a great platter take two pound of Dammaſke Prunes,
half a pound of great Raiſons, if you will haue the Tarte all black take ſo
much or els but halfe, take a quarte of very good creame, eight yolkes of
Egges beate them together and then ſet them on a freſh fier to ſéethe, let it
be ſtirred conti­nually til it haue ſodden a doſſen wames then take it vp and
put it in a faire cloth or a boulter ſtrainer, tye it hard with a Packthrid
cloſe to the ſtuffe and hang it on a naile till all the whey be runne out,
that it may be ſomewhat ſtiffe, then put in as much Suger as will ſeaſon it
pow­der or other, a little Ginger if you will▪ that which you kéep for the
white put in thrée or fower ſpoonful of Roſewater, take halfe of that for
gréene if you will, then take two or thrée handefull of Spinidge, cleane
picked from the ſtaulkes: waſhe it
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=9) cleane, but
you muſt dry it well in a cloth and ſtampe it and wring out the iuice of it:
and put ſome of that iuice to the white till it be made gréene: take the
whites of Egges and mingle it as you did ye yolkes and ye may put iuice of
Spinidge either to the white or ye yellow, you may make your tarte of fower
cullours if you will as black, white, yellow and gréene, or all of one or two
cullours which you will: when your Prunes and Raiſons be wa­ſhed couer them
cloſe and ſéethe them in faire water: ſéethe them no longer then you may
eaſily ſtraine them: nor with too much water, when they be ſodden powre the
water clean from them, & let them be ſtrained with as litle licour as you can,
then put in after they be ſtrained thrée quarters of a pound of Suger: thrée
quar­ters of an vnce of Sinamon, a quarter of an vnce of Ginger, put it in a
faire Pip­kin or ſkillet and ſet them on the fier: and let it ſéethe and be
well ſtirred a prittye while till it be ſomewhat ſtiffe: then take off it &
put in a quarter of a pinte of Da­maſke roſewater, make it not limber but that
it may cut when it is in the Tarte.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=10)

### 1.18. How to make Iellye either of capon, cock, Veale, chicken or calues
feet, Tenche or Barnell: you may make Ielly of any one of theſe or two of them
together.

IF you will make a pottell: take a knoc­kell of Veale or a ſhoulder, and a
yong Cocke: cut of all the fatte that you ſée, and waſh it in as many waters
till the water be cléer: lay it in water an hower or two: and cut it in halfe
a doſſen péeces, but be ſure you chop no bone aſunder that hath any marow in
it when you take it out of water haue a Béere pottle pot with faire water and
put the water and the meat in a faire pipkin and ſet it vpon a fier at one end
of your chimney & not again the fier, let there be no fier vnder the bottome
of your pot and let it ſéethe very ſoftly: and take off the fat as it riſeth
and doo not ſtir the meat any thing in ſéething nor when you poore out the
Ielly, when it hath ſod­den fower or fiue howers take a little of it in a
ſpoone and ſet it a cooling: when it is ſo ſtiff that you may cut it with a
knife powre it out into a gally pot or els ſome
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=10) other narrow
mouth pot: and when it is colde take off the fatte that is vppermoſt if the
bottome be any thing black pare it away then take to euery pinte of the iel­ly
a quarter of a pounde of Suger if you will haue it ſtrong of the ſpice: take
halfe an vnce of Sinamon, a race of ginger, one Nutmegge, two or thrée Mace
and bruſe it very groce and put into euery pinte ſo much ſpice and Suger as is
written: and one white of an egge with a litle péece of the ſhell beaten very
well, and as ye froth of your white of the Egges dooth riſe caſt it into your
Iellye: half a pinte of white Wine, and halfe a pinte of damaſke roſe water
and two ſpoonfull of white Wine Vineger, if you make thrée pintes or a pottell
put in of theſe thrée thinges thus muche or els according to the quantitye:
that you make, if you will kéepe it a fort­nighte or thrée wéekes: put in very
little Vineger & ſet it in the couldeſt place that you haue in your houſe and
kéep it in gal­ly pots or glaſſes: when you ſet it on the fier you muſt ſtirre
it continuallye while it ſéethe vp haue your ielly bag a branche of roſemary
in the ende of it and a fewe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=11) round ſtrawes
of hay, and when it ſéethes vp poure it into the ielly bagge, and whē it is
run once through put it into the ielly bag againe with a great ſpoon very
ſoftly and when it is very cleane put it vp in ſuch thinges as you will haue
it and co­uer it not till it be colde.

### 1.19. How to make blacke Puddinges.

TAke Otmeale and ſtéepe it in ſodden Milke, then take Hogges ſuet & good
hearbes and chop them ſmall, then put in Fennell ſéed, pepper and Salte,

### 1.20. How to make white Puddinges.

TAke grated bread, currans, yolkes of egges, Nutmegs, Sinamon, and ſome Suger,
ſalte, and Béefe ſuet: and temper them with Creame.

### 1.21. How to make Liuering Puddinges.

TAke the Liuer of a Hogge, and giue it thrée or fower waumes ouer the fier,
then either grate it or choppe it verye ſmall, and take a little grated bread
and two egges well beaten whites and all,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=11) and Currans,
Nutmegges, Pepper, and Salte, and Hogges ſuet.

### 1.22. How to make a Lenton Pudding.

TAke grated bread, a little Suger, nut­megges, Sinamon Salte, and yolkes of
Egges, tempered with a litle creame.

### 1.23. A Haggas Pudding.

TAke the Haggas of a Calfe, perboyle him, and when he is colde choppe him very
ſmall: then take a litle grated bread and put two yolkes of Egges with good
hearbes chopped very ſmall, and currans Nutmeg and ſalte.

### 1.24. How to make Sauſages.

TAke the Fillets of a Hogge, and halfe as muche of the ſuet of the Hogge: and
choppe them both very ſmall, then take grated bread, two or thrée yolks of
egges a ſpoonfull of groce pepper, as much ſalt, temper them with a little
creame, and ſo put them into the ſkinnes and broyle thē on a gridiorne.

### 1.25. To make freſh Cheeſe.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=12)TAke new milke
and put a litle runing to it, and when it is ſcumde breake it: then take ſome
Suger, Sinamon & roſe­water, and ſo put it in a chéeſe moule, and put Creame
to it.

### 1.26. For a Tanſie.

TAke either walnut trée leaues or let­tice alone, or all other good hearbes,
ſtampe them and ſtrain them▪ and take a little Creame and grated bread,
nutmeg, pepper and Suger, fower Egges two of the whites: beate them together
and ſo frye it in a pan.

### 1.27. To make Fritters.

TAke a little faire warme water, as much Sack, and take half flower half
bread, mingle them altogether: then take fiue or ſix egges and break therin
whites and all, a little nutmeg, Pepper and ſalt, and cut in Appells very
ſmall: then take a faire ſkillet with Suet and let it boyle on the fier and ſo
put the batter in it.

### 1.28. For a Poſſet.

TAke a poſnet full of creame and ſéethe it and put Suger and Sinamon in it,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=12) then take
halfe Ale and halfe Sacke and put Suger and Sinamon in it.

### 1.29. Porke Sauce.

TAke Vineger, Muſtard, Suger and Pepper.

### 1.30. Piggeſauce.

TAke halfe Vineger, and halfe Vergis, a handfull of percely and Sage chopte
very ſmall, a Pomewater ſhredde very ſmall, then take the grauie of the Pigge,
with Suger and Pepper and boyle them together.

### 1.31. Sauce for a Gooce.

TAke Vineger and appells ſhred very ſmall, two ſpoonfulls of muſterd a lit-
Pepper and Salte: and take Suger ſuffi­cient to ſwéeten it, then boyle it well
to­gether.

### 1.32. Capon ſauce.

TAke water, Onions, pepper, and ſome of the grauie and ſalte, and boyle thē
together

### 1.33. How to make Almond milke.

TAke a péece of the ſcrege end of a neck of mutton, a good handful of huld
barly a good handfull of colde hearbs, a litle ſalt
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=13) then take a
handful of almonds & blanche them and grinde them in a ſtone morter, and
ſtraine the licour through a faire bol­ter, then put in a litle Suger, and ſo
giue it to drinke.

### 1.34. How to make white or red Vineger.

FEtche your Vineger at Saint Kathe­rins a grote a gallon to the quantitys of
ſixe gallons and put thereto a pottle of Elder flowers ſuch as will ſhake off
whē they be ripe, and ſée your veſſell be cloſe ſtopped vp and filled, and
thus you maye renew your veſſell euery yéere with Vi­neger and flowers
according to the quan­titye but let the olde remaine: this maye you doo either
with ſtrong or ſmall béere and the remnants of barrells.

### 1.35. How to ſtyll Roſewater that it may well keepe.

WHen that you ſet your ſtyll vp vpon the plate: ſifte as many fine aſhes v­pō
your plate as may be half an inch thick at the leaſt: and lay them euery where
a­like ſauing in the middle a little thicker, and vpon the aſhes ſtrew a
little beaten [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=13)
baye ſalte euery where a like, then ſet on the bottome of your ſtyll ſomewhat
ſtoo­ping that it maye be higher behinde then before forcaſting the water well
out in the ſtilling, when you ſtyll: gather your roſes as drye as you can and
put them in­to the ſtyll preſently if the Roſes be drye if you haue more then
you can ſtyll when they be newe gathered put them into a flaſkit not too
thicke for it will mare both the Roſes and the water, when you ſtyll: couer
your Roſes with papers and caſt a cloth ouer the papers, that water that ye
will kéepe longeſt take it alwaies awaye before the cake be through ſtilled &
keepe that water by it ſelfe, & that which is laſt ſtilled by it ſelfe: that
ye comes laſt of the cake is not ſo good as that which comes firſte, let your
glaſſes be waſhed a fort­night before you néede them becauſe they muſt be very
drye before you put in your water, ſtop not your glaſſes before they be
through drye for they will be muſtye: ſet them in a window a daye or two that
the Sunne maye come to them, and when they be very drye: ſtop them with wax or
corke and ſome ſercenet about the Corke
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=14) or waxe: and
couer them with leather or parchement, and ſet them by til you haue occaſion
to occupy them, euery glaſſe that is filled with Roſewater as ſoone as it is
filled, ſet it into an Ouen after you haue drawen Pyes or white Bread, and let
it ſtand in a wéeke or more till you haue oc­caſion to heate your Ouen againe:
if it be not too long, and ſo ſet it in twice or thrice before you ſet them vp
for all the yéere, and ſet your Glaſſes in a Baſon or péece for feare of
burſting: whē you ſet vp your Glaſſes for all the yéere, wrap them in woollen
and ſet it in a Cubbert or ſhelfe, and kéep this water in this order and it
will laſt two or thrée yéere.

### 1.36. How to make very ſweete Cakes either of Damaſke or red Roſes.

TAke your Roſes very faire coloured and ſomewhat cloſe, if you will make your
cakes large take a pecke of Roſes to euery cake or halfe a pecke, and put two
Cakes together bottome to bottome, and put into euery cake beſides two
handfull of ſwéet Margerum rootes and all, for at
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=14) that time of
the yéere cut Margerum is not ſwéet, cut of the rootes of ſwéet Mar­gerum, and
two good handful of lauender and an vnce of the beſt Damaſke powder you can
get, a quarter of a pound of orris and one vnce of Cloues, let not the cloues
or the orris be beaten much, when you doo ſearce your orris ſée it be not
woormeaten and ſmell wel, all this powder wil ſerue but for fower cakes, ſtraw
into your ſtill ſome Roſes firſte in the bottome, then Margerum, Lauender, and
ſome powder and then Roſes againe and a little pow­der, then Lauender and
margerum, more powder then you did before, then put a few Roſes in the top
ſomewhat thin, whē they be halfe ſtilled take them foorthe and laye them
betwixte two papers and laye not one Cake againſt another before they be
colde, then ſaue them in papers, and cut the papers bigger then ye Cakes, and
ſewe them round as ſoone as you can put them into an Ouen after they be
ſtilled: and heate the Ouen no hotter then if it were after Pyes or Cakes, and
let them ſtaye no longer thē a day or a night: then take them out and when
they be cold lay
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=15) them betwixt
your clothes, and if they be not drye then ſet them in againe a wéeke or a
fortnight, and after they be through drye: prick the papers on both ſides vnto
the brim euery where thicke, theſe cakes will continue thrée or fowre yéere.

### 1.37. How to preſerue Cherries.

TAke thrée pounde of Cherries and clip off halfe the ſtalkes, thrée pound of
Suger and as much roſewater as will wet the Suger and no more, then put in all
your Cherries and ſet them ouer the fier and ſhake them thrée or fower times
for burning to the bottome of the pan, let them ſéethe in euerye place a like,
and ſkumme them continually: it is no mat­ter for taking vp ſirrop for it will
goe to the bottome: and you may put it in again where it dooth ſéethe faſter,
& in any wiſe haue ſome cléer fier by to put vnder wher it dooth want, and let
it ſéeth a reaſonable good pace alwaies, and when it riſeth to a froth al ouer
haue thrée or foure ſpoons by you, and ſet out a little in a ſpoone that you
may ſée whether it doo Ielly or no: as ſoone as the ſirrop in your ſpoone is
colde [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=15) ſet out
more til you ſée it be ready: for the cullour will alter very muche if it
ſéethe paſt the time, therfore when it is of a reaſonable thicke Ielly take
them off, couer them not vntill they be colde, put them vp in glaſſes or gally
pots and break the Ielly as little as you can.

### 1.38. How to preſerue Gooſeberies.

TAke foure pound of Gooſeberies pul off the bloſſomes off the toppes, but not
the ſtalkes, take foure pound of ſuger to them, and firſt put in two pound of
ſu­ger, and do no more thē wet them in roſe water, you muſt lay your
gooſeberies one by one and not one vpon another, and ſet them vpon a ſofte
fier little more thē em­bers, and you muſt kéepe them ſtill ready to ſéethe
but not to ſéethe, for the ſpace of thrée or fower howers, they will yéelde
much licour, and as your licour encreſeth ſo caſt your ſuger which is left on
the top in euery place a like, ſome at one time and ſome at an other, and whē
they haue béen on the fier thrée or fower howers, let them ſéeth very ſoftly
ſcarce a quarter of an hower and ſkumme them with ye back of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=16) a ſpoone or a
knifes poynte, and ſo ſet out in a ſpoone to coole as is aboue ſayde, and when
they be Iellied take them off the fier, and doo to all your preſerued thinges
in putting them foorth and glaſſing of thē as is before written, & preſerue
all your thinges if you can either with earthen or in pewter, and your pewter
muſt be ſcoured with faire water and beatē ſand, and if you haue no pewter
nor earthen panne thē take a braſſe pan which is very ſwéet and ſcoure it
with lome very bright.

### 1.39. How to preſerue Damſons.

TAke fower pounde of Damſons, thrée pound of ſuger to them, lay your dam­ſons
one by one in a faire Charger, and put one pounde of ſuger in the bottom
e­uery where a like, then put in your dam­ſons, and throw one pounde of Suger
on the toppe of them, and take halfe a doſſen ſpoonefull of red Roſewater, and
take a feather and ſprinkle it euery where vpon them, ſet them vpon a Triuet
and a very ſofte fier vnder them, and let them boyle euery where a like very
ſoftlye, as your ſirrop increaſeth, ſo put on the reſt of the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=16) Suger, and
when it beginneth to Iellye ſet it foorth in a ſpoone as you doo ye other, you
muſt let them boyle fowre or fiue howers very ſoftlye, and as the ſcumme
riſeth ſo take it off, and as you doo the o­ther aforeſaid: ſo doo this, couer
thē with a faire platter in the boyling, and as the ſtreame of the water
riſeth take off the platter once in a quarter of an houre, and wipe the water
of it with a cloth, and lay it on againe as long as it is a boiling, and when
they be boyled enough take off the Platter and couer it no more, then take
twentye Cloues being ſomewhat bruſed not broken, and that being taken off the
fier put in the cloues and put them down in the ſirrop.

### 1.40. How to preſerue Peare plummes either white or black.

TAke fower pound of faire peareplums and take fower pounde of ſuger to thē as
much roſewater as wil wet the ſuger, to the white peare plums Damaſke roſe
water, and to the black plums red Roſe­water, kéep out one pound of your Suger
vnwet, laye in your Peare plummes one by an other, and ſet them vpon a very
ſoft [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=17) fier for
the ſpace of two howers, let them be ready to boyle but let them not boyle and
as the ſirrop increaſeth throwe ye reſt of the Suger vpon them, and euery hand
while turne & couer them with a diſhe as you doo the Damſons, and wipe off ye
wa­ter alſo: and when they haue béen vpō the fier two or thrée howers, then
let them boyle half an houre ſoftly, or a litle while more or leſſe till they
be Ielled, and take héede the cullour alter not from white, when they be
boyled inough, powre the ſirrop vpon them till they be colde.

Preſerue your white Bulleſſe euen as your Peare plummes.

### 1.41. How to preſerue Barberies.

TAke a pounde of Barberies and ſtone them but pull thē not off the bunches
take the faireſt and reddeſt bunches you can get, when the ſtones be taken
out: way one pound of them and take a pound and a halfe of Suger to them,
wette the Suger verry well with redde Roſe­water, and ſet it on the fier and
as ſoone as it boyleth vp drawe the ſcumme on one ſide and put in the
barberies and dip them wel in the ſirrop with a ſpoon, & let
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=17) them boyle
very ſoftly the ſpace of a quarter of an hower euery where a like, you muſt
dip them downe and turne them as ſoone as they be on the fier, then take thē
off when they haue boyled almoſt a quarter of an hower, di [...] and poure
ſirrop vpō them till they be halfe colde.

### 1.42. How to preſerue Quinces.

TAke fower pound of Quinces & fower pound of Suger, a quarte of faire wa­ter
and let it boyle once vp & haue fower whites of new laid egges, and one of the
ſhelles, and beate them very well for the ſpace of halfe an hower, with a
pinte of faire water, and when your ſirrope firſte ſéetheth vp, caſt in the
whites of Egges that you haue beaten, and ſtirre them till they haue ſodden
two or thrée waumes, then take it off the fier & poure it through a Ielly bag,
and put a roſemary branche in the bottome, then pare your Quinces and core
them and ſet on the ſame ſirrop, and put in your Quinces and let thē lye one
by an other eaſily that you may well turn thē, that you bruſe not one
another, and let them ſéethe euery where a like,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=18) and turne
them very often, and whē they haue boiled two or thrée howers, take the
kernells that you pull out of your Quin­ces, and kéep the Ielly of the
kernells as whole as you can, then core them & make two or thrée balles of the
kernels and put them in the pan with the Quinces, and when your Quinces haue
well boyled that it will Ielly very well that you may cut it, take them off
and poure them into a faire baſon or earthen veſſell, and fil the holes of the
Quinces with ſirop, thē take a ſtick of ſinamon and a ſcore of cloues being
ſomewhat bruſed, and put the ſame into the ſirop.

### 1.43. How to preſerue Orrenges.

TAke of the higheſt culloured orrenges and the thickeſt rindes that you can
get, let not the rindes be ſofte, pare them very thin, core thē and pull out
the meate of them, when you haue doon ſo: lay them in the water and ſhifte
them thrice a day for thrée dayes, and ſet on two pannes or kettells with
faire water, and when the water dooth ſéeth put in your Orrenges, and let them
ſéeth till the water be ſome­what bitter, then ſhifte them into the o­ther
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=18) water and two
or thrée more wa­ters as long as the water taſteth bitter, or hath any high
cullour, & when they are ſomewhat tender take them off and let your ſirrop be
ready for thē, take to foure pound of Orrenges, foure pound of ſuger and vſe
your ſirrop as you muſt the ſirrop of Quinces, and be often turning of your
Orrenges, and let them ſéeth very ſoftlye two or thrée howers till your
ſirrope be ſomewhat hye, and then take them off and poure ſirrop vpon them
till they be ſomewhat colde, put in a few Cloues a­mong them.

### 1.44. How to make a Cullis for a ſick body.

TAke a Cock or a Capon ſet him on the fier in a faire pipkin, & when it
ſéethes ſcumme it cleane, then take hearbes ac­cording to the party that is
ſicke, two or thrée dates, a handfull of Raiſons of the Sunne ſtoned, and let
it but ſimper on the fier till all the meate be conſumed a­way, then ſtampe
them altogether and ſtraine them through a faire boulter and ſo giue the party
to drinke.

¶ Heere endeth the Booke of Cookrye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=19)

## 2\. Holſome Medicines.

### 2.1. ¶ A remedy for ſuch as cannot diſgeſt their meate, but Vomit it vp
againe.

TAke mintes and ſtamp them wel, and crummes of bread burned in the fier, and
Vineger, and make thereof a ſalue, ſpread it vpon a linnen cloth, and then ſet
it vpon a brick, and put thereon ye powder of Cloues, then lay the ſame vpon
the ſto­mack & you ſhall finde great help therin.

### 2.2. For the green ſicknes.

TAke one peny woorth of Turmericke, and one pound of Saffron, and beate them
ſmall: and take a quart of new milk and a garlick head, which being ſtamped
and ſtrained put it into the aforeſaid, and warme thē all together and drink
it mor­ning and euening and walke after.

### 2.3. For a Burning or Scalding.

TAke the fat of the guttes of a Shéepe, and the trittles of a Shéepe and
ſéethe them together, and take a courſe cloth and ſtraine them together and
make a cake of it and melt ſome of it in a Saucer
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=19) and with a
feather anoint the place thrée times a day.

### 2.4. For a Fellone, Ancome, or any ſuch thing.

TAke a quarte of the dragges of ſtrong Ale and a little ſmall Otemeale, as
much white caſtle ſope as a Walnut, and boyle them together and ſtirre them
til it come to be made a plaiſter, and then lay it to the ſore being ſpread
vpon a cloth.

### 2.5. For an Itche or an heat.

TAke a ſpoonefull of liuing Brimſtone fine beaten, take a Porringer full of
déeres Suet, a penywoorth of Champhry and beate it with a blaunched Almonde,
and boyle them altogether vntill it come to an ointment, and then annoint the
itch or the heat.

### 2.6. Lyppe Salue.

TAke a good péece of freſhe Butter, as much Déeres ſuet half as much waxe, two
or thrée ſpoonfull of good ſallet Oyle, and boyle them together til it come to
an ointment.

### 2.7. For the running of the raines and the whites.

TAke the pith of an Oxe back & wheate flower & Muſkadine and make a lit­tle
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=20) Cake thereof
and bake them vpon the harthe, and then eat thereof euerye mor­ning and drink
a cup of Muſkadell after it and it will help you.

### 2.8. For the fleam in the ſtomack.

TAke the yellow root of a dock & ſtampe it and ſtrain it with good Ale &
drinke a good draught of it & it wil make you vo­mit and helpe you of the
fleam in the ſto­mack.

### 2.9. To draw vp the euelaw.

TAke half a pinte of Sack, half a ſpoon­full of bruſed pepper, heat it very
hot, then put it into a narrow mouth pot, and let the partye drawe the aire vp
into his mouth as hot as he can ſuffer it.

### 2.10. For them that doo vomit.

TAke half a Capon and thrée pintes of water, and let it ſéeth half away, & put
into it halfe a pinte of redde Roſewater, an vnce of ſinamon ſtickes, and a
quarter of a pint of iuice of quinces, then ſéethe it altogether and ſtraine
it and drinke of it euening and morning when you liſt.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=9069&page=20)

[Home](/)

Date: 1588  

