---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Strange newes from Yorke, Hull, Beverley, and Manchester. Or, a continuation
of the proceedings passages, and matters of consequence that hath passed this
last weeke in his Maiesties army before Hull, with some occurrences from Yorke
during the Kings absence as also of my Lord Stranges comming in a warlike
manner against the town of Manchester and slew three of the inhabitants
thereof. Beeing all that passed here from the 16 of Iuly to the 23. Sent in a
letter from a worthy knight now resident in Yorke, to a gentleman in Kings
Street in Westminster, Iuly 25. 1642. Also the humble petition of Sir Francis
Wortley Knight and Baronet to the Kings most Excellent Majestie. With his
Maiesties answer thereunto. Edw. Nicholas.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=125349&page=1)

Strange Newes from Yorke, Hull, Beverley, and Mancheſter. OR A continuation of
the proceedings paſſages, and matters of conſequence that hath paſſed this
laſt weeke in his Maieſties Army before Hull, with ſome occurrences from York
during the Kings abſence

As alſo of my Lord Stranges comming in a warlike manner againſt the Town of
Mancheſter and ſlew three of the Inhabitants thereof.

Beeing all that paſſed here from the 16 of Iuly to the 23.

Sent in a Letter from a worthy Knight, now reſident in Yorke, to a Gentleman
in Kings Street in Weſtminſter, Iuly 25\. 1642.

ALSO The humble petition of Sir Francis Wortley Knight and Baronet, to the
Kings moſt Excellent Majeſtie.

With his Maiesties Anſwer thereunto. EDW. NICHOLAS.

London, printed for Iohn Thomas. 1642.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. STRANG NEVVES from Yorke, Hull, Beverley, and Mancheſter. Iuly, 23. 1642.
  * 2\. To the KINGS moſt Sacred MAJESTY The Humble Petition of Sir Francis Wortley Knight and Barronet; In behalfe of Your Maieſties Commons of the County of YORKE.
  * 3\. HIS MAIESTIES ANSWER.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=125349&page=2)

## 1\. STRANG NEVVES from Yorke, Hull, Beverley, and Mancheſter. Iuly, 23.
1642.

Worthy Sir.

MY Service firſt preſented unto yon, I have thought it not unneceſſary in
theſe diſtra­cted times, to acquaint you with ſome paſſages about Hull, where
his Majeſties Army lyes ſtrongly entrenched; As alſo of divers other
Occurrences that hath paſſed of late in theſe Nor­thren parts, whereof I ſhall
impart unto you the truth in euery particular this laſt weeke.

On Saturday the 16. of Iuly, my Lord of Holland preſented a Petition from both
Houſes of Parlia­ment to his Majeſty at Beverley, touching a Pacifica­tion,
betwixt his Majeſty and both Houſes of Par­liament? His Lordſhipp kneeling,
offered to kiſſe his hand, which his Majeſty refuſed, ſaying, how durſt he
looke him in the face; with divers other paſſages, and at laſt Commanded him
to depart out of his preſence: But his Lordſhipp replyed, after [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=125349&page=2) his departure
from his preſence, in the hearing of divers Gentlemen (who thronged to ſee and
heare of the paſſages betwixt his Majeſty and him) That hee muſt have another
Anſwer from his Majeſty, before he Returned. This night my Lord tooke Coach
and Ridd to Yorke, and returned upon Sunday morning to Beverley againe, and
there attended his Majeſty for an anſwer of the Petition untill Tuſday at
night, And after came to Yorke againe, where he, and Sir Phillipp Stapleton,
and Sir Iohn Holland, who accom­modated him; tooke Poſt for London on
Wedneſ­day morning, and my Lord, is to attend his Maieſty againe on Wedneſday
next at Beverley Iuly 27.

This Thurſday, Iuly 24\. His Maieſty tooke His Iourney towards Leiceſter, and
it is reported he will will goe to Northampton from Leiceſter, to ſee the
Commiſſion of Array put in Execution; as alſo to ſee how thoſe Counties ſtands
affected to him, and his returne is expected at Beverley againe, on Wed­neſday
next; The King hath a great ſtrength, both of Horſe and Foote, before Hull,
where they have entrenched themſelves betwixt Beverley and Hazell, being 6.
Milles a ſunder; At Hazell his Maieſty hath builded a Fott, being within 3.
Milles of Hull, where he hath planted 4 Culverings or feild peeces, which was
ſent him from Sheifeild, by the Lord Maltravers, which came through Yorke on
Saturday laſt, & was convayed a way upon Munday morning to Beverley to his
Maieſty, for his Service.

My Lord of Lindſey is made Lord Generall of his Majeſties army before Hull,
who ſent Captain Leg. and Captaine Wilmot (who lately came over from [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=125349&page=3) Holland, and both
delinquents to the Parliament,) to fire ſome windmills betwxt them and Hull,
theſe two Captaines with a troope of horſe, and a 100. Muskieters and Pikes,
ſallied out of their quarters on Tueſday at night about 12. a Clocke, to fire
theſe two Windmills, but Sir Iohn Hotham either by ha­ving intelligence of
their intention, or by ſeeing of the Mills on fire, let fly ſome peeces of
ordinance at them, which cauſed all the foote to runne away, lea­ving all
their armes behind them, and the horſe re­tyred as faſt after them, holding it
the greateſt poli­cy to ſave their lives by ſuddaine flight, but they came no
more to fetch their armes they had left be­hind them, for they heard Sir Iohn
Hotham had ſur­prized them, it is reported that they loſt as many armes as was
worth an 100. pounds the next night after Colonell Munroe ſallied out in
another quar­ter to burne a windmill that ſtood within halfe a mile of the
Towne, which Sir Iohn Hotham had no­tice of, yet could not prevent, though he
ſhot above 100 peeces of Ordinance off that night, and yet no man was hurt,
but Colonell Munroe, who was ſhott through the Arme, with a Muskett bullet
from the towne; he is ſince he received that ſhott in the arme made
Leivetenant Colonell to my Lord Generall; Yeſterday, Sir Iohn Hotham tooke 3.
peeces of Ordi­nance, which was goeing to Barton upon Humber, in a Veſſell
from Hazell, and brought them into the towne. It is reported, Sir Iohn Hotham
hath ſince taken another Veſſell loaden, which was going to Yorke to his
Maieſty; wherein was 150. tunne of Beare, 50. tunne of Wines, with great ſtore
of [[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=125349&page=3) Wheat,
Salt, Fiſh, and other Comodityes. Here is Suppley of Horſe, and Foote, from
all parts on this ſide Trent, that daily repaire to his Maieſties Army at
Beverley, and all that comes are entertained and entred into pay, ſo that
proviſion begins to grow de [...]re and very ſcarce. There is a Captaine at
Yorke, who is an Engineere, that now is in practiz­in to caſt Braſſe Morter
peeces, wherein to ſhoote Granadoes, which when they are finiſhed are to be
ſent to Beverley, and are intended for fireing the Towne, by ſhooting of fire
balls into it; from which calamity God protect them The Earle of Warwicke hath
ſent 3. ſhips to releive Sir Iohn Hotham in Hull,

Yeſterday was muſtred in York a Troope of Horſe which came from Berkeſhire,
under the Command of the Lord Howard, who are this day gone towards the Kings
Army, being in all 44. and well appointed it is this day reported by divers of
good credit, that my Lord Strange on tueſday laſt, came with divers troopes of
horſe and foote, to Mancheſter, to put the Commiſſion of Array in execution,
according to his Maieſties Proclamation, but was oppoſed by the whole towne;
whereat, ſome of my Lord Strangs troopes diſcharged ſome Carobynes at them
being charged, and ſlew 2. or 3. of them, and after they had committed this
bloody outrage, departed all a way, whereby we are informed the towne of
Man­cheſter remaides in a great diſtraction and feare, by reaſon of this
combuſtion. Drumes beate up in Yorke this day for Volentiers, that would ſerve
the Lord Generall the Earle of Lindſey, in his Maieſties ſervice, againſt the
towne of Hull, to repaire to the [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=125349&page=4) Holy Lambe, in
Petergate in Yorke, where they ſhall be entertained, and receive pay. This day
the Lord Cromwell came to Yorke, from the Parliament.

Theſe Sir, Receive as an information of nothing but truth, theſe Northerne
counties in generall, are in great diſtractions & feares, expecting daily when
to be ſuppriſed, and bereaved of their lives and eſtats if God in his mercy
prevent it not; Let all true Pro­teſtants pray for a happy Union, and a good
agree­ment, betwixt King and Parliament, elſe diſtruction lyes at every mans
doore, Sir, untill the next occa­ſion, I Reſt.

Your unfeined freind and Servant A. F.

Yorke in Petergate Iuly 23. 1642.

## 2\. To the KINGS moſt Sacred MAJESTY  
The Humble Petition of Sir Francis Wortley Knight and Barronet; In behalfe of
Your Ma­ieſties Commons of the County of YORKE.

VVHeareas Our lives and Fortunes are unavoyable contigencies, liable to tryals
at Law, aſwell in Criminall as Civill Cauſes, and depend upon matter of Fact
up­on Iuries, which for the moſt partare men and Mer­cynary [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=125349&page=4) men; and laboured
by the one ſide or the other to appeare upon the Iuries, as Tales men; and the
ableſt are by Connivency or corrupt Compoſi­tion left at home, and ſpared by
the Bayliffe of ſeve­rall Weapontakes.

For Redreſſe whereof, May it pleace your Moſt Ex­ceellent Maieſty, to give
your Princely Command, That the Sheriffes Booke of Freeholders, may be brought
in at leaſt every Eaſter Seſſions▪ That a competent number of ſuch as are
ableſt and fiteſt to appeare and do Services, may be appointed by the Iuſtices
Aſſembled in the ſeverall Riddings of this County; their knowledge of the
Country Aſſiſ­ted by the Baliffe; and Bookes for the ſervices at the Aſſizes
and Seſſions: And that they have particular Summons (as by the Statutes of
this Kingdome) they ought to have? which alſo allowes a Fee to the Sheriffe
and Bayliffe for every Jury Impannel­led and Summoned; and that at the end of
every Aſſizes, one or two Juſtices of every Riding, may examine the
appearances and defaults with the Clarkes of the Court? that ſuch as appears
and do ſervice, may be acquitted. and no iſſues rune out a­gainſt them; and
that ſuch as neglect their duties may not be ſpared, allowing ſuch reaſonable
Fees for their paines therein, as ſhall be thought meet? ſo that iſſues may be
awarded and levyed, and not Compounded for (as uſually they are.) And that
none who hath his Quit-Writ, may be imforced at every Aſſizes to plead his
exemption, and pay for it. So ſhall our Iuries be full, and the Service not
done by the tales men, but by the ableſt, as well for as Underſtanding, and
the opreſſed be eaſed by your
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=125349&page=5) Princely
favour therein; conceiving Your Maieſty to be not onely Rex Regni, but Comes
Commitatus, and all the office and power of your under Sheriffe to be derived
from your Maieſty, as the Fountaines of all Honours Iuſtice and government,
humbly beſeech­ing your Sacred Maieſty, that accordingly your She­riffes may
be commanded by you, that this your Princely favour may be acknowledged, not
onely by us, but our Childrens Children may reape the benefit thereof. We
further humbly beſeech your Maieſty, to commend this our Petition to the care
of the Honourable Houſes of Parliament, that a law to eſtabliſh this your
Princely favour may be made and enacted, with what additions ſhall be thought
convenient by their Wiſedomes: And in the meane time, this your command be
obſerved & kept inviolable by the Sheriffe and other Officers.

> And we ſhall as in Duty bound, Pray for Your Maieſties long and happy Reign
Over vs.

## 3\. HIS MAIESTIES ANSWER.

HIs Maieſty in anſwer to this P [...]tition, is graciouſly plea­ſed to commend
that the Sheriffes for the future time ſhall at every Chriſtmas and Eaſter
Seſſions, cauſe their un­der-Sheriffes to bring the booke of Freeholders to
the ſeverall Seſſions held in every Riding, that the ableſt men for Eſtates
and vnderſtanding may be appointed, by advice of the Iuſtices to ſerve at the
Aſſizes and Seſſions, according to Law; & that hereafter the Bayliffes of
liberties, and Sheriffes Bayliffes, give particular ſummons (as by law they
ought) to every freeholder to be impannelled upon Iuries to appeare at the
Aſſizes that he may know of what juries he is to ſerve, and may be
unex­cuſeable if he appears not. And his Majeſty will be further graciouſly
pleaſed to give his royall aſſant unto a Bill to be pre­ferred and paſſed the
Houſes of Parliament for the purpoſes a­foreſaid the ſame tending to the
advancement of Iuſtice, and the publique good of his people.

At Our Court at Yorke the 18. of Iuly, 1642.

EDW. NICHOLAS.

[Home](/)

A. F.. Date: 1642  

