---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Keep within compasse Dick and Robin, there is no harme in all this, or, A
merry dialogue betwen two or three merry coblers, with divers songs full of
mirth and newes, which may very fitly be applyed to these times by Tho.
Herbert.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=1)

_[figure]_

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=1)

Keep within compasse DICK and ROBIN: There is no harme in all this. OR, A
merry Dialogue between two or three merry Coblers, with divers Songs full of
Mirth and Newes, which may very fitly bee applyed to these times.

By Tho. Herbert.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Lambert, and are to be sold at his shop in
Smithfield, over against Hosier Lane at the signe of the Bunch of Grapes.
1641.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. A Dialogue between Dick and Rohin: OR, Two merry country Coblers.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=2)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=2)

## 1\. A Dialogue between Dick and Rohin: OR, Two merry country Coblers.

Dick.

WEll met honest Robin, I am glad that it is my fortune once more to meete
with, thee before thou art hang'd?

Rob.

Why thou whorson Ras­call dost thou thinke ever I make account to be hang'd?

Dick.

I if thou beest not, I dare to bee hang'd or thee, if ever thy wise bee
pleasd.

Rob.

When my wife is pleas'd I thinke in my conscience the world will bee at an
end: 'sfoot I have such a wife as I thinke the devill hath not such another in
his dominion.

Dick.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=3)

Why, what atles her?

Rob.

Prethee Dick tell me, wast thou ever in London?

Dick.

Yes that I have, what then?

Rob.

And didst thou ever heare a thing cald Boe. bel ring there?

Dick.

Yes that I have by a good token, I once walking in Cheap-side to buy three
yards of blacke pudding, the Bell made such a hum­ming in my yeares, as if a
thousand Tinkers had beene at worke there.

Rob.

But didst thou sirrah Dick here my Wife: when her tongue is upon the pinne of
scolding, (which is almost at all times) thou wouldst thinke that thou wert a
hun­ting with the Devills Reagles, which were scenting after a Citie
Pettifogging Lawyer.

Dick.

Is shee so well verst then in the art of scoulding?

Rob.

I dare pawne my eares that O­vid had never better skil in his de Arte A­mandi,

Dick.

Thou speakst Latin Robin.

Rob.

A foolish sentence which I have heard often repeated, which they say in our
vulgar Translation, is the Art of Love.

Dick.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=3)

I, but is Scoulding her worst fault?

Rob.

No, hang her: I caught her not long since lying chick by choule with a Sattin
Doublet.

Dick.

Thou art in iest art thou not?

Rob.

I cannot tel whether I am in iest or no; but I am sure I found her making me a
Cuckold in good earnest. Nay, and Ile tell thee what a tricke shee served mee
too: I like a good honest man, going to make a dis-iunctive betwixt her and
the Sat­tin doublet, shee like a whore as shee was, very orderly, leapes out
of her bed, and without any mercie at all, snatches up a good handsome Crab-
sticke, and belaboured my iacket very handsomely, and when shee had done, shee
went to bed againe unto her Sattin doublet, to whom shee lay very closely.

Dick.

And what didst thou doe all the while?

Rob.

Faith Ile tell thee, when I saw there was no remedy, very faire and honestly I
lighted them with a Candle, for feare least betwixt them they should make my
hornes grow crooked.

Dick.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=4)

Faith, thou hadst very hard fortune to meet with her.

Rob.

Push, Ile tell thee more yet, when we were married first, if I had given her
the least occasion which could bee, she would have been up very earely in a
morning, when her neigh­bours did thinke like a good huswife shee had beene up
beating of her Bucks, she very coura­giously was bumbasting of my poore
Car­kasse?

Dick.

Can she fight so well?

Rob.

Faith for a little while I durst have turn'd her loose to the strongest devill
in hell for about or two.

Dick.

And is shee as bad still?

Rob.

No, no, (God be thanked) the world's well amended now.

Dick.

How didst thou doe to tame her?

Rob.

Ile tell you; at length being resolutely bent with all the might and power I
had, I tide her up to racke and manger, where I kept her so long fasting,
untill shee swore never to scold, or lift up her hand against mee any more.

Dick.

And hath shee beene as good as her word.

Rob.

Let her breake it when shee pleases, I know the way how to feed her againe
with the same sauce.

Dick.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=4)

But leaving of this discourse concer­ning thy wife: canst thou tell mee any
newes from abroad?

Rob.

'Faith Robin I can tell thée none, but can sing some.

Dick.

Prethee doe: but bee sure thou keepe thy tongue within compasse.

Rob.

Let me alone for that: wherefore open your eares.

Song.

Some say at London there is newes.

That great men transport over shooes,

(For which I'me sure the Countrey rues)

By whole sale.

Some say that Tradesmen are growne sad,

Because of late they were so mad,

To lose the thing which once they had,

True dealing.

And I doe also understand,

That Patentees must out of hand,

Bee banisht from our English land

For nimming.

Dick.

Art thou sure Robbin that there is no harme in all this, art thou not out of
compasse.

Rob.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=5)

As sure as I take this Can and drinke to thee: I am sure there is no harme in
all this.

Dick.

Then prethee lets have the second part to the same tune,

Rob.

A Bore I heare of late was caught,

For eating meate and leaving draffe,

He must be better manners taught

By cutting.

Some said in England was the Pope,

But I did ever better hope,

He should be first choakt in a rope,

You know where.

Dick.

I drinke to thee Robin, I am sure there hath beene no harme in all this.

Rob.

More newes I have you yet to tell,

Wherefore I pray you marke it well,

Ile shew you what lately befell

To Robin:

He went so much upon the score,

That he could trusted be no more,

Wherefore he ranne out of the doore

Most swiftly.

From whence he went away to Sea,

Sure he was bitten with a Flea,

For he could not but pitty plea,

For cheating.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=5) The
Hostesse when her guest was gone,

Did wring her hands, and make great moane,

And many times did fetch a groan

For Robin.

O Robin thou art gone, quoth she,

And plaid the knave thou hast with me:

O that I were but now with thee

A scolding.

Then rapt she out an oath and swore,

That shee her purse would lend no more

To such as would runne on the score,

And cheat her.

Dick.

Why but Robin is thy names-sake runne away?

Rob.

Yes faith Dick that he is, and it is re­ported, that he fled as swift as if
hee had beene carryed in a Swallowes belly.

Dick.

Is't possible? Ile tell thee (Ro­bin) hee was as faire a speecht fellow as one
should have heard speake in a Sommers day.

Rob.

Ile warrant thee hee owed more scores than one: or else I know that hee had
such friends as would not have suffered him to runne away for so small a
trifle as that was.

Dick.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=6)

It may be so indeed: yet Robin, thou hast kept within compasse, upon which I
drink to thee, that thou maist whet thy whistle: I am sure that there is no
harme in all this.

Rob.

Prethee Dick tell me why thou art so cautious of being harmfull?

Dick.

So soone as thy song is ended, Ile tell thee,

More newes I have yet to relate,

Tis not concerning any State,

But of a Knave and a make bate,

cald cut-throat.

His purse is full, and he doth wrong;

Alas! he hath lived too long:

But now he is in prison strong,

As some say.

He set his neighbours by the eares,

And put them in a thousand feares,

His poore wife she shed brinish teares,

For him knave.

He ruled them like as a Lord,

And bound them with a threefold cord,

And all upon his owne accord,

Most basely.

But now he singeth in a Cage,

A way to coole his fiery rage,

And some say he must tread a stage,

Cald Gallowes.

Dick.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=6)

This was a hundred to one (Robin) Rich, cut throat of our parish.

Rob.

The very same.

Dick.

'Sfoot, I knew him very well, hee was Constable once was he not?

Rob.

Yes that he was.

Dick.

Hee was a devillish domineering fel­low: but a poxe on him, I have reason to
re­member him, through woefull experience.

Rob.

Why did hee ever doe thee any hurt?

Dick.

Yes; when hee was Constable hee made me sit for three whole houres together
with my leg in a Pidgeon hole: looke if the very print of the Stocks be not
here still. Well but if the Rope and he be marryed together, as I live, Ile
not mend a shooe, or boot, but will make holiday on purpose to dance at his
wed­ding.

Rob.

So will many a good fellow more be­sides thy se [...]fe: Ile tell thee, our
whole Cor­poration of Coblers are resolved that day not to plucke a stitch.

Dick.

Hast thou any more newes to sing, I am sure there hath beene no harme in all
this?

Rob.

A little more, and then I conclude.

Dick.

Lets have it.

Rob.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=7)

As I was walking I did meet

Poore Iohn the Plough-man on his feet,

And as he went he did mee greet

Most kindly.

I askt him whither he did goe

So fast along? he full of woe,

Did say against a bended bow

To London.

He went to sue for his owne right,

For which he wronged was by might,

And forced for to take his flight

From his owne.

And now he sayd was his intent

To goe unto the Parliament,

To see if that he could present

His wronger.

Dick.

Faith he was the wiser for that, for as I heard the poore man wronged is sure
to be righted there.

Rob.

Then by my consent al England should goe thither.

Dick.

Nay but keepe within compasse, least harme be found in that.

Rob.

You are still so cautions: I pray now my song is ended, shew your reason for
it.

Dick.

I will because I heare daily many bu­sie fellowes talke about that which
nothing concernes them: as that such a Lord hath done [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=7) more than hee can
answer, and such a one is committed, and such a one, whilst the Pillory tels
him a tale, hee must lend an eare to it: what have such poore shrubs as thou
and I to doe with such matters? let every Tub stand upon his owne bottome;
then may wée talke and spare not, and yet keepe within com­passe.

Rob.

Thou saist very true.

Dick.

Now I have shewed you my reason, let us drinke the other pot, and sing thou
the o­ther Song, and so we will bequeath our selves to our quiet rest.

Rob.

Listen to me then.

You that in quiet meane to sleepe,

Be sure your tongues yee silent keep,

For danger in a hole will creep,

By babling.

Meddle not with state affaires,

Nor those which sit in great mens chaires.

Lest that you chance to lose your eares

For lying.

If we bee merry sing a song,

Sweet and merry, not too long,

Drinke up your liquor good and strong

In silence.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=8) So shall
you sing and sleep secure,

So shall your mirth daily endure;

My counsell for to take be sure,

Good fellowes.

And so I bid you all good night:

If that my newes it have beene slight;

Ile tell you better when tis light,

And Sun-shine.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=49562&page=8)

[Home](/)

Herbert, Thomas, 1597-1642?. Date: 1641  

