---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The New academy of complements erected for ladies, gentlewomen, courtiers,
gentlemen, scholars, souldiers, citizens, country-men, and all persons, of
what degree soever, of both sexes : stored with variety of courtly and civil
complements, eloquent letters of love and friendship : with an exact
collection of the newest and choicest songs à la mode, both amorous and jovial
/ compiled by the most refined wits of this age.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=1)

THE NEW ACADEMY OF COMPLEMENT

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=1)

THE NEW Academy OF COMPLEMENTS, ERECTED For Ladies, Gentlewomen, Cour­tiers,
Gentlemen, Scholars, Souldiers, Citizens, Country-men, and all persons, of
what degree soever, of both Sexes.

Stored with Variety of Courtly and Civil Complements, Eloquent Letters of Love
and Friendship. WITH An Exact COLLECTION Of the Newest and Choicest SONGS à la
Mode, Both Amorous and Jovial, COMPILED By the most refined Wits of this Age.

London: Printed for Samuel Speed, neer the Inner Temple-gate in Fleetstreet.
1669.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=2)

## To the Reader.

IF thou a Fresh-man art, and thorough bent,

To bear Loves Arms, and follow Cupids Tent,

Finde whom to love; The next thing you must do,

Learn how to speak her fair, to write, and wooe.

Last having won thy Mistriss to thy lure,

I'le teach thee how to make her love endure.

This is my aim, I'le keep within this place,

And in this Road my Chariot-wheel I'le trace,

Whilst thou dost live, and art a Batchel [...]r,

The love of one above the  [...]est pre [...]er,

To whom thy soul says, Thou alone content me,

But such a one shall not from heaven be sent thee.

Such are not dropt down from the Azure Sk [...]e,

But thou must seek her out with busie eye.

Well knows the Huntsman where his toyls to set,

And in what Den the Boar his teeth doth whet.

Well knows the Fowler where to lay his Gin;

The Fisher knows what Pool the Fish are in,

And thou that studiest to become a Lover,

Learn in what place most Virgins to discover:

Which having done, make one thy sole delight,

Then thou must study to dissemble right;

Swear by her Beauty, seemingly be loath

To break the Bond of such a sacred Oath:

Sigh when she sighs, and what thou seest her do,

By imitation strive to do so too.

Gaze on her eyes, and when thou seest her sip,

K [...]ss thou the Glass where she shall place her Lip.

But I'le no longer keep thee at the door,

Peruse the Book, for that will teach thee more.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=3)

## An Advertisement To all Gentlemen, Book­sellers, or others.

WHereas Samuel Speed Book­seller, hath lately disposed himself to a Wholesale
Trade for Books, not making any Appearance of that Imployment, as formerly he
did, These are to certifie, That those persons that please to apply themselves
to him for Books, shall be as well used as by any person whatsoever; And
whosoever hath any Study, or Library of Books, or Copies, either in
Manuscript, or such as have been already Printed, to dis­pose of, shall
receive from him the full Value thereof, to the said Parties ample
Satisfaction.

## Table of contents

  * To the Reader.
  * An Advertisement To all Gentlemen, Booksellers, or others.
  * 1\. Complemental Expressions towards Men, Leading to The Art of Courtship.
  * 2\. Complements towards Ladies, Gentlewomen, Maids, &c.
  * 3\. Letters for all Occasions.
    * 3.1. 1\. A Tender of Service to the Kings most excellent Majesty.
    * 3.2. 2\. A Tender of service to the Queens most excellent Majesty.
    * 3.3. 3\. Respects from an Honorable Lady, to the Queen.
    * 3.4. 4\. A person of Quality to a worthy Lady, the one a Protestant, the other a Roman Catholick.
    * 3.5. 5\. One Lady to another, with Complements of extream kindness.
    * 3.6. 6\. A Letter of kindness from one friend to another.
    * 3.7. 7\. From one Friend to another.
    * 3.8. 8\. A Lady to a Gentleman, concerning his sick M•striss.
    * 3.9. 9\. The Gentlemans Answer, to a Lady concerning his sick Mistriss.
    * 3.10. 10\. The Lovers first Address to his Lady.
    * 3.11. 11\. The Lovers Complemental Letter to his Mistriss.
    * 3.12. 12\. The Ladies Return to her servants Lines.
    * 3.13. 13\. A Ladies fore-warning her Friend of another Ladies Society.
    * 3.14. 14\. Our Ladies Advice to another, near Marriage.
    * 3.15. 15\. A Lover to his false Mistriss.
    * 3.16. 16\. On sending a Book.
    * 3.17. 17\. A Lady to her discourteous Lover.
    * 3.18. 18\. A Brother, on the occasion of his Brothers not writing.
    * 3.19. 19\. A Gentlemen to a Lady, in his Friends behalf.
    * 3.20. 20\. Another to the same purpose.
    * 3.21. 21\. A Letter of Complements from one Friend to another.
    * 3.22. 22\. An Answer to the former Letter.
    * 3.23. 23\. The lover to his deliberating Mistriss.
    * 3.24. 24\. Civil Complements from one Friend to another.
    * 3.25. 25\. A Gentlemen to his Lady, whom he fears would make a New Choice.
    * 3.26. 26\. A rich old Gentleman, to a fair young Virgin.
    * 3.27. The Answer. 27. A beautiful young Virgin, to a decrepit, rich, old Gentleman.
    * 3.28. 28\. A Letter of Courtesie from Friend to Friend.
    * 3.29. 29\. One Gentlewoman to another in behalf of a Friend.
    * 3.30. 30\. The forsaken Maid, to her treacherous Friend.
    * 3.31. 31\. The Lady to her importunate Lover.
    * 3.32. The Answer. 32. The Lover to his Threatning Lady.
    * 3.33. 33\. A Letter of Enquiry, from friend to friend.
    * 3.34. 34\. Comfortable Advice to a Friend on the death of a Son, or other near Relation.
    * 3.35. 35\. A Tender of Service to a Mistriss.
    * 3.36. The Answer. 36. A disdainful Lady to her Servant.
    * 3.37. 37\. A sick Lady to a Gentleman.
    * 3.38. The Answer. 38. A Gentleman to a sick Lady.
    * 3.39. 39\. The Lover to his unbelieving Mistress.
    * 3.40. The Answer. 40. The Lady to her Lover.
    * 3.41. 41\. The Lover to his Mistress, having gained her affection.
    * 3.42. 42\. A Gentleman to his Lady, upon his urgent occasions of taking, a Iourney.
    * 3.43. The Answer. 43. A Lady to her Lover, upon his taking a Iourney.
    * 3.44. 44\. A crack't Virgin to her deceitful Friend, who hath forsook her for the love of a Strumpet.
    * 3.45. 45\. The Lady to her slandered Servant.
    * 3.46. The Answer. 46. The slandered Lover to his Lady.
    * 3.47. 47\. The Iealous Lover to his beloved.
    * 3.48. The Answer. 48. A Lady to her Iealous Lover.
    * 3.49. 49\. Civilities from one Lady to another.
    * 3.50. 50\. A Gentlemans request (for a sum of Money) to his Friend:
    * 3.51. 51\. A Lady to a Gentleman, on his Recovery from a Fit of Sickness.
    * 3.52. 52\. The Recovered Gentleman, to the aforesaid Lady.
    * 3.53. 53\. The Lover to his Mistriss, upon his fear of her entertaining a new Servant.
    * 3.54. 54\. A Fair young Virgin, to an old Rich Miser, whom her Guardian did design should Wed her.
    * 3.55. 55\. The Ingratiating Gentleman to his angry Mistriss.
    * 3.56. 56\. A Gentleman of good Birth, but small Fortune, to a worthy Lady, after she had given a d••ial.
    * 3.57. 57\. A Lover to his Mistriss, who had lately entertained another Servant to her bosom, and her bed.
    * 3.58. The Answer. 58. The Lady to her Lover, in defence of her own Innocency.
    * 3.59. 59\. A Lady to him whom she affects.
    * 3.60. The Answer. 60. A Lover to his Amorous Lady.
    * 3.61. 61\. The Affected Lover to his Mistriss.
    * 3.62. The Answer. 62. A Lady to her Affected Lover.
    * 3.63. 63\. A Lady to her despairing Lover, who had deserted his suit at the first Repulse.
    * 3.64. 64\. A Gentleman to a fair Lady, whom he accidentally discovered at a Window.
    * 3.65. 65\. A sick Lady to her Lover, enjoyning him to forbear his Visits, she being infected with the Small-Fox, or some other Malignant Distemper.
    * 3.66. 66\. The fearful Lover, to his supposed unconstant Mistriss.
    * 3.67. The Answer. 67. A Lady to her fearful Lover.
    * 3.68. 68\. A Wife to her Extavagant Husband.
    * 3.69. The Answer. 69. A Lover to his Distempered Lady.
    * 3.70. 70\. A Lady to her Servant, that for some private reasons concealed his Birth and Fortunes.
    * 3.71. 71\. The absent Lover, to his supposed unconstant Mistriss.
    * 3.72. 72\. A Gentlemans advice to his Mistriss, how she should blinde the eyes of her watchful friends.
    * 3.73. 73\. A Gentleman to his new Mistress, upon his relinquishing an old one.
    * 3.74. 74\. A Captious Lover to his Vertuous Lady.
    * 3.75. The Answer. 75. A Vertuous Lady to her Captious Lover.
    * 3.76. 76\. A Lover in Commendation of his Mistriss.
    * 3.77. 77\. A Ladies thanks to a Gentleman for a civility lately received.
    * 3.78. 78\. A Gentleman to a sick Lady.
    * 3.79. The Answer. 79. A sick Lady to a Gentleman.
    * 3.80. 80\. A Husband to his Lasc•vious Wife.
    * 3.81. 81\. A Gentleman to his Friend, returning thanks for sending him a Book.
    * 3.82. 82\. A Gentlemans request to his Friend for a sum of Money.
    * 3.83. The Answer, 83. A Gentleman to his Friend that sent to borrow Money.
    * 3.84. 84\. A Lover to his Mistriss.
    * 3.85. The Answer. 85. A Lady to her Lover.
    * 3.86. 86\. A Gentleman to his Rival.
    * 3.87. 87\. A Virgin to her Parents, that would have her matched to one whom she cannot love.
    * 3.88. 88\. A Gentlemans first Address to his Mistriss.
    * 3.89. 8•. Another to the same effect.
    * 3.90. 90\. A Courteous Lass to her Paramour, who had gotten her with Childe.
    * 3.91. 91\. A Gentleman to his (once scornful, but now) Affectionate Mistress.
    * 3.92. 9•. A Kinde-hearted Gentlewoman to her boasting Favorite.
    * 3.93. 93\. The Lover to his inconstant Mistriss.
  * 4\. Songs Alamode, Composed by the most Refined Wits of this Age.
    * 4.1. Song 1.
    * 4.2. Song 2.
    * 4.3. Song 3.
    * 4.4. Song 4.
    * 4.5. Song 5.
    * 4.6. Song 6.
    * 4.7. Song 7.
    * 4.8. Mock Song 8.
    * 4.9. Song 9.
    * 4.10. Song 10.
    * 4.11. Song 11.
    * 4.12. Song 12.
    * 4.13. Song 13.
    * 4.14. Song 14.
    * 4.15. Song 15.
    * 4.16. Song 16.
    * 4.17. Song 17.
    * 4.18. Song 18.
    * 4.19. Song 19.
    * 4.20. Song 20.
    * 4.21. Song 21.
    * 4.22. Song. 22.
    * 4.23. Song 23.
    * 4.24. Song 24.
    * 4.25. Song 25.
    * 4.26. Song 26.
    * 4.27. Song 27.
    * 4.28. Song 28.
    * 4.29. Song 19.
    * 4.30. Song. 30.
    * 4.31. Song 31.
    * 4.32. Song 32.
    * 4.33. Song 33.
    * 4.34. Song 34
    * 4.35. Song 35.
    * 4.36. Song 36.
    * 4.37. Song 37.
    * 4.38. Song. 38.
    * 4.39. Song 39.
    * 4.40. Song 40.
    * 4.41. Song 41.
    * 4.42. Song, 42.
    * 4.43. Song. 43.
    * 4.44. Song 44.
    * 4.45. Song 45.
    * 4.46. Song. 46.
    * 4.47. Song. 47.
    * 4.48. Song 48.
    * 4.49. Song 49.
    * 4.50. Song 50.
    * 4.51. Song 51.
    * 4.52. Song. 52.
    * 4.53. Song. 53.
    * 4.54. Song 54.
    * 4.55. Song 55.
    * 4.56. Song 56.
    * 4.57. Song 57.
    * 4.58. Song 58.
    * 4.59. Song 59.
    * 4.60. Song 60.
    * 4.61. Song 61.
    * 4.62. A Catch 62.
    * 4.63. Song 63.
    * 4.64. Song 64
    * 4.65. Song 65.
    * 4.66. Song 66.
    * 4.67. Song 67.
    * 4.68. Song 68.
    * 4.69. Song 69.
    * 4.70. Song 70.
    * 4.71. Song 71.
    * 4.72. Song 72.
    * 4.73. Song 73.
    * 4.74. Song 74.
    * 4.75. Song 75.
    * 4.76. Song 76.
    * 4.77. Song 77.
    * 4.78. Catch 78.
    * 4.79. Song 79.
    * 4.80. Song 80.
    * 4.81. Song 81.
    * 4.82. Song 82.
    * 4.83. Song 83.
    * 4.84. Song 84.
    * 4.85. Song 85.
    * 4.86. Song 86.
    * 4.87. Catch 87.
    * 4.88. Song 88.
    * 4.89. Song 89.
    * 4.90. Song 90.
    * 4.91. Song 91.
    * 4.92. Song 91.
    * 4.93. Song 93.
    * 4.94. Song 94.
    * 4.95. Song 95.
    * 4.96. Song 96. On Cupid.
    * 4.97. Song 97.
    * 4.98. Song 98.
    * 4.99. Song 96.
    * 4.100. Song 100.
    * 4.101. Song 101.
    * 4.102. Song 102.
    * 4.103. Song 103.
    * 4.104. Song 104.
    * 4.105. Song 105.
    * 4.106. Song 106.
    * 4.107. Song 107. A Dialogue between the Evening and a Boy.
    * 4.108. Song 108.
    * 4.109. Song 109.
    * 4.110. Song 110.
    * 4.111. Song 111.
    * 4.112. Song 112.
    * 4.113. Song 112.
    * 4.114. Song 113.
    * 4.115. Song 114.
    * 4.116. Song 115.
    * 4.117. Song 116.
    * 4.118. A Drinking Catch, or Song 117.
    * 4.119. Song 118.
    * 4.120. Song 119.
    * 4.121. Song 120.
    * 4.122. Song 121.
    * 4.123. Song 122.
    * 4.124. Song 123.
    * 4.125. Song 124.
    * 4.126. Song 125.
    * 4.127. Song 126.
    * 4.128. Song 127.
    * 4.129. Song 128.
    * 4.130. Song 129.
    * 4.131. Song 130.
    * 4.132. Song 131.
    * 4.133. Song 131.
    * 4.134. Song 133.
    * 4.135. Another 134.
    * 4.136. Song 135.
    * 4.137. Song 136.
    * 4.138. Song 137.
    * 4.139. Song 138.
    * 4.140. Song 139.
    * 4.141. Song 140.
    * 4.142. Song 141.
    * 4.143. Song 142.
    * 4.144. Song. 143.
    * 4.145. Song 144.
    * 4.146. Song 145.
    * 4.147. Song 146.
    * 4.148. Song 147.
    * 4.149. Song 148.
    * 4.150. Song 149.
    * 4.151. Song 150.
    * 4.152. Song 151.
    * 4.153. Song 152.
    * 4.154. Song 153.
    * 4.155. Song 154.
    * 4.156. Song 155.
    * 4.157. Song 156.
    * 4.158. Song 157.
    * 4.159. Song 158.
    * 4.160. Song. 159.
    * 4.161. Song 160.
    * 4.162. Song 161.
    * 4.163. Song 162.
    * 4.164. Song 163.
    * 4.165. Song 164.
    * 4.166. Song 165.
    * 4.167. Song 166.
    * 4.168. Song 167.
    * 4.169. Song 168.
    * 4.170. Song 169.
    * 4.171. Song 170.
    * 4.172. Song 171.
    * 4.173. Song 172.
    * 4.174. Song 173.
    * 4.175. Song 174.
    * 4.176. Song 175.
    * 4.177. Song 176.
    * 4.178. Song 177.
    * 4.179. Song 178.
    * 4.180. Song 179.
    * 4.181. Song 180.
    * 4.182. Song 181.
    * 4.183. Song 182.
    * 4.184. Song 183.
    * 4.185. Song 184.
    * 4.186. Song 185.
    * 4.187. Song 186.
    * 4.188. Song 187.
    * 4.189. Song 188.
    * 4.190. Song 18•.
    * 4.191. Song 190.
    * 4.192. Song 191.
    * 4.193. Song 192.
    * 4.194. Song 193.
    * 4.195. Song 194.
    * 4.196. Song 195.
    * 4.197. Song 195. Dialogue Pastoral, Strephon and Phillis.
    * 4.198. Song 196.
    * 4.199. Song 198.
    * 4.200. Song 199.
    * 4.201. Song 200.
    * 4.202. Song 201.
    * 4.203. Song 201.
    * 4.204. Song 202.
    * 4.205. Song 203.
    * 4.206. Song 204.
    * 4.207. Song 205.
    * 4.208. Song 206.
    * 4.209. Song 207. A Dialogue between Orpheus and Charon.
    * 4.210. Song 208.
    * 4.211. Song 209.
    * 4.212. Song 120.
    * 4.213. Song 211.
    * 4.214. Song 212.
    * 4.215. Song 21•.
    * 4.216. Song 214.
    * 4.217. Catch, Or Song 215.
    * 4.218. Mock-Song 216.
    * 4.219. Mock-Song, in Answer.
    * 4.220. Song 217.
    * 4.221. Song 21•.
    * 4.222. Song 219.
    * 4.223. Song 220.
    * 4.224. Song 221.
    * 4.225. Song 222.
    * 4.226. Song 223.
    * 4.227. Song 224.
    * 4.228. Song 225.
    * 4.229. Song 226.
    * 4.230. Song 227.
    * 4.231. Song 228.
    * 4.232. Song 229.
    * 4.233. Song 230.
    * 4.234. Song 131.
    * 4.235. Song 132.
    * 4.236. Song 233.
    * 4.237. Song 234
    * 4.238. Song 135.
    * 4.239. Song 236.
    * 4.240. Song 237.
    * 4.241. Song 238.
    * 4.242. Song 239.
    * 4.243. Song 240.
    * 4.244. Song 241.
    * 4.245. Song 242.
    * 4.246. Song 243.
    * 4.247. Song 244.
    * 4.248. Song 245.
    * 4.249. Catch or Song 246.
    * 4.250. Song 247.
    * 4.251. Song 248.
    * 4.252. Song 249.
    * 4.253. Song 250.
    * 4.254. Song 251.
    * 4.255. Song 252.
    * 4.256. Song 253.
    * 4.257. Song 254.
    * 4.258. Song 255.
    * 4.259. Song 256.
    * 4.260. Song 257.
    * 4.261. Song 258.
    * 4.262. Song 259.
    * 4.263. Song 260.
    * 4.264. Song 260.
  * Appendix A The Table of Letters contained in this Book.
  * Appendix B The Table of Songs contained in this Book.
  * Appendix C Books Printed for Samuel Speed Book-seller, between the Two Temple Gates in Fleet-street.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=3)

## 1\. Complemental Expressions towards Men, Leading to The Art of Courtship.

SIR, Your Goodness is as boundless, as my de­sires to serve you.

Sir, Your Vertues are the Load-stones that draw even your enemies to love and
to admire you.

Sir, It is my profession to appear in all places a ser­vant to your Merits.

Sir, I have nourisht in my self a continual care of seeking opportunities to
do you service.

Sir, You have so pursued me with your favors, that I am capable of no other
pleasure, but to entertain them.

Sir, Such is your deserts and my necessity, that I want both words and
services to express how unfeign­edly I honor you.

Sir, Your bounties have been showr'd upon me with such excess, that I am
uncapable of a Complement.

Sir, I shall desire no greater glory from you, than new proofs of my
obedience.

Sir, When I have finisht your desires, I should in­  [...]reat you to reserve
some new Commands, so great a pleasure I take in being yours.

Sir, You have deserved more services from me, than my life is able to perform.

Sir, Such is the excess of my affection, that all my  [...]assions do but wait
upon your good fortunes.

Sir, I confess I never merited the effects of such [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=4) nobleness, as that
you should account of me as an ob­ject for your vertuous inclinations.

Sir, The pleasure I entertain to consider your good­ness, is more satisfaction
to me, than my advance­ment.

Sir, Should I not render you thanks for your many favors, I should die of a
deep impatience.

Sir, Your goodness hath forced me to a silence, that I am not able to render
you sufficient thanks for so great a favor.

Sir, You are so highly generous, that I am altoge­ther sencesess.

Sir, With the same joy that I formerly en braced your friendship, I
entertained the good news of your happy Marriage; and shall love you with the
same passions as before.

Sir, I have made a vow to honor you all my life, and not to remit one point of
the passion I have to do you service.

Sir, I am daily in disquiet, and shall be, till some occasion be offered me
suddenly wherein I may appear to you to be more than verbal.

Sir, This tyranny of your humor or inclination, is too great a punishment for
me to groan under.

Sir, 'Tis my ambition to conserve the Honor I have obtained of being your
servant.

Sir, You are so noble in all respects, that I have learn'd to love, as well as
to admire you.

Sir, I am grown jealous of your generosity, your favors come so fast on me,
that I shall be forced to seem ingrateful.

Sir, Your passions are mine; Nor can I live more in freedom, than when I am
bound to you in the bonds of Friendship.

Sir, You are the rising Sun which I adore.

Sir, I wear you in my heart.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=4)Sir, You are
the Star I reach at.

Sir, You are the Miracle of Friendship.

Sir, Your Goodness wants a President.

Sir, You have the power to sway me as you please.

Sir, Be pleased to instruct me how I may thank your love.

Sir, I am your Friend, and that word speaks me wholly yours.

Sir, You have so far engaged me, that I know not what I can do, that is not at
your command.

Sir, Wh [...]n I would admire you, you wrap me up in wonder.

Sir, My zeal is so fervent towards you, that I am sick with passion.

Sir,  [...] you have not cast off the name of Friend, make  [...] companion of
your cares.

Sir, I take so much pleasure in serving you, that I am proud to please you.

Sir, You are the onely Anchor of my hopes.

Sir, I shall study to chronicle your Vertues.

Sir, Fear no dangers, my Arms shall be your San­ctuary.

Sir, You are so full of fair desert, that I have no faculty but what is yours.

Sir, You are so highly noble, that your Purse is my Exchequer.

Sir, I am a captive to your Honor, and your fair Example steers me.

Sir, You [...] Complements call your Faith in question.

Sir, You tell me stories midnight would blush to hear.

Sir, The Ocean's not more boundless than your Favors.

Sir, Be confident of my affection, while I have room to lodge you in my bosom.

Sir, I am sick till I see you, whose presence is my restorative.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=5)Sir, Your
Language is more dubious than an O­racle.

Sir, You have the power to steer me as you please.

Sir, I am in so great an Extasie for your safety, that passion, like midnight,
sits upon my thoughts.

Sir, To be obedient to your Commands, is a duty I am proud of.

Sir, The blessings of your Mistriss fall upon you.

Sir, I'le rath [...]r doubt an Oracle, than question what you deliver.

Sir, My want of power to pay those Debts I owe to you and Honor, makes me
accuse my fortunes.

Sir, I yield my self to your direction, manage me at your pleasure.

Sir, Your Accomplishments speaks you the Muses Darling; you have suckt the
Marrow of the Court.

Sir, You are amorous as the youthful May.

Sir, I'le be just to you, as Heaven to Truth.

Sir, I'le out-wait a Bayliff to attend you.

Sir, You value my weak deserts with too much partiality.

Sir, Necessity hath neither law, nor shame; for con­trary to my nature, I am
forced to become an hum­ble and an earnest Suit [...]r to you.

Sir, You have over-run the world in Honors Race.

Sir, I am honor'd in this Acknowledgement.

Sir, I shall inform the Lady of your zeal in her Commendation.

Sir, Be pleased to instruct me how I may requite your love.

Sir, You have power to oblige my soul.

Sir, I must die, or live to be ungrateful.

Sir, Let me beg the trouble of a pardon; if I have mi [...]tted those honors
due to your desert [...].

Sir, Without a Complement, I am your Friend, and that one word speaks me
wholly yours.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=5)Sir, Pray
admit this stranget to your knowledge, his deserts will requite your trouble.

Sir, Since I must be conquer'd by your courtesies, 'tis my glory to be your
slave.

Sir, Having your favor I am rich, without it none so miserable.

Sir, I shall not be more importunate than mannerly.

Sir, This Visit is as welcome, as the greatest honor you could do me.

Sir, May your own Vertues be your Guard.

Sir, I congratulate your happy presence.

Sir, May this meeting create a lasting League of Amity betwixt us.

Sir, I should be entirely happy, should I finde an occasion to imprint the
Characters of your Vertues in my brest, by a more firm acquaintance.

Sir, Your Civilities have endear'd you to me; you shall rule as a Plant in the
O [...]b of my affections.

Sir, May your love be fortunate, that delights may stream into your bosom.

Sir, The pleasures of the morning wait upon you.

Sir, Your Vertue and Eloquence make you im­mortal upon earth.

Sir, From the first time that I beheld you, I have made it my zeal to express
my self your most humble servant.

Sir, If you love, as you say you do, you will have patience: True love will
last a siege.

Sir, It is the design of my Ambition to be passion­ately your most faithful
servant.

Sir, The pleasure I have in your love, and the assu­rance of my own innocency,
hath caused me to give this new remembrance of my being wholly yours.

Sir, Rather than loose your company, I would compass the utmost bounds of the
Terrestrial Globe.

Sir, I am yours, and will be so, though fate & death forbid.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=6)Sir, I am in
earnest, 'tis not my humor to treat my friends with dreams.

Sir, This your Barbarity to your Friend, shall not make me forget you, nor my
own duty, for though the strongest love oftentimes degenerates into the
greatest hate, yet I am resolved to live and die yours.

Sir, Your suit is an impertinent trouble to us both, for be assured it is as
possible for the Stars to forget their course, as for me to love you.

Sir, Nothing shall rob my heart of the fair image of your Vertues, but Death
it self.

Sir, Your Bounty exceeds the small slock of my Merits, that durst not have
entertained such an un­grateful thought, as to be worthy of those favors you
afford me.

Sir, It is by your bounty I am enabled to make a Present, accept therefore of
this small one, that the world may testifie how much I glory to proclaim the
first Founders of my estate.

Sir, I have  [...]ound you so much my faithful friend hitherto, that I doubt
not but you will appear so here­a [...]ter, if need require.

Sir, Fortune is now propitious, and hath sent you this grateful
acknowledgement for all your favors.

Sir, Your Minde c [...]ntains a Spring of Vertue, each day affords me a fresh
Character of your Friendship.

Sir, Your reality hath gained my affection, and I want nothing more, than an
occasion to testifie my ac­knowledgements.

Sir, Fortune is now turn'd Strumpet, and extorts from me an interest for the
sum of favors she formerly did trust me with.

Sir, Fortune, I thank her, hath now brought me ac­qu [...]inted with
Necessity; for this is my opportunity of embracing so rich a Treasure as your
self.

Sir, Be wise, and as the Proverb saith, Look before [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=6) on leap; he is
happy that can withstand a Tempta­  [...]ion with a noble Resolution.

Sir, Should I twine my arms to Cable, sit up all  [...]ight like a Watching
Candle, and di [...]til my Braines through my Eye-lids, yet I must love you; I
then lo­sing you, and you me, who is the third person shall hinder us
[...]punc;

Sir, You seem to be a man of much reading, you talk of nothing but of warbling
Rhapsodies.

Sir, You understand your Authority over me, I dare not deny my endeavors to
perform whatsoever you shall please to command.

Sir, Heaven which hears and answers prayers, give a blessing to all your
vertuous desires.

Sir, The late courtesies you did me, are but bor­rowed, and like an honest
Tenant, I shall provide my Rent against the time of your demand.

Sir, I would advise you to be careful of your Ho­nor, but I doubt you were
never yet right worshipful.

Sir, Let this suffice, I am satisfied; your innocency hath cleared my
jealousie.

Sir, I am ignorant wherein I am guilty of any thing may prompt you to suspect
either my love, or duty.

Sir, I cannot be so tedious in the performance of your Commands, as you are to
employ me.

Sir, Farewel, you are grown rude; I dare not hear you farther.

Sir, I hate your base desires, you and your lust con­tinue, till shame work an
amendment.

Sir, Sin is a brave Orator; you give your lusts the golden titles of pleasure
and delight, but forget what bitterness attends the end.

Sir, I submit to your Censure, either to approve or to condemn, you are the
Oracle of the Court.

Sir, Be not daunted, Love and Fortune joyn with the Cou [...]agious.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=7)Sir, I
should sin, should I suspect your Vertue, whose glory it is to vanquish all
deceits.

Sir, Such is my interest in your prosperity, that I will never condemn
fortune, whil [...] she makes you her Darling.

Sir, Pardon me, if my presumption hath run beyond the rules of good manners.

Sir, Adieu, may pleasures be your attendance, whilst I court your return.

Sir, In all your dangers, let my bosome be your religious sanctuary.

Sir, Your Bounty hath added so many feathers to my wings, that I am in haste
to do you service.

Sir, May we from this day date our immortal friendship.

Sir, I cannot stoop too low in my observance to your desires.

Sir, Your fortunes are your own, but your fate is mine.

Sir, You humble your self in exalting me.

Sir, I would beg a favour of you, but my modesty bids me stay.

Sir, I am ready to obey, no man can be more proud of your commands.

Sir, Let me beg your acceptance of a trifle, onely the earnest of my
gratitude.

Sir, 'Tis your presence that compleats our joys.

Sir, My blessings are derived from you.

Sir, Pursue your pleasures, my life shall be engaged to your interest.

Sir, I would thank you for the honour you have done me, but shame and my
fearful blushes teach me a farther duty.

Sir, I must blushing leave you, having nothing to requite you with but words.

Sir, You are kinde in this friendly Visit, your [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=7) welcome, and my
thanks are infinite.

Sir, Let us embrace as friends, and not as Cour­tiers.

Sir, Sleep is not more welcome to the wearied Tra [...]ller, than you are to
my House.

Sir, My entertainment speaks me most freely wel­come.

Sir, Let me know your ground for this suspition.

Sir, How have my actions rendred me suspected?

Sir, Envy hath no power to hurt your fame.

Sir, Malice can never blemish your deserts.

Si [...], My submission waits upon your pardon.

Sir, Nothing is wanting, but my all, your pre­sence.

Sir, One that desires to serve you sends this paper to salute your hands.

Sir, You bestow too great an Honor on him that is your creature.

Sir, Teach me to be grateful, I dare presume my soul would be apt to learn any
thing that might tend to your service.

Sir, My Thanks and the endeavours of my life are a debt I owe to you.

Sir, I shall be your debter, if you keep me in your minde.

Sir, I have one sute, and shall dare to beg no more.

Sir, I  [...]latter my own discretion in nothing more than in loving you.

Sir, I am proud when a kinde opportunity makes me yours.

Sir, Understand your own worth, and then know I can have no power to slight
any occasion of s [...]r­ving you.

Sir, Your love is the Exchequer of my Wealth.

Sir, The rough humours of your age, are unfit to be compelled with the smooth
brows of youth.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=8)Sir, I
beseech you be more sparing of your courte­sies, lest the world take you for a
prodigal.

Sir, Be not so inconstant in your affection, lest in the conclusion you appear
too much like the Mary­gold, to open at the Sun-shine of prosperity, and to
[...]hrink before the clouds of adversity.

Sir, By your singular Character, the Lady seems to be so rarely accomplish'd,
that to her onely, I commit the Treasures of my life and fortunes.

Sir, My late confidence hath this excuse, that nei­ther Fate nor Fortune
delighteth in a Coward.

Sir, I will rather hazard my reputation, than be negligent of your Commands.

Sir, I will endeavour hereafter to encounter your graces and courtesies, with
an unwearied constancy in the roads of Vertue.

Sir, Let me be still a sharer in your savors, so shall I grow proud of my own
fortunes.

Sir, This part of the world shar [...]s in your prosperi­ty, since you were
born to serve your Prince, and to command his people.

Si [...], My onely glory in your service, is to be hum­ble and to obey.

Sir, Your Endowments shine beyond the degree of brightness.

Sir, Your inventing new Fables, speaks you a good Poet, and me a good subject
for your Romant [...]ck Fancy.

Sir, Your good Fortune and noble Resolutions shine so clear in all
employments, that it appears Na­ture made all things to honor you.

Sir, Your Vertues are so well known, you cannot think I  [...]latter.

Sir, I never had those ambitious thoughts to think you could affect so
imperfect a creature as my self.

Sir, Your Vertues may give a lustre to a Princes Court.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=8)Sir,
Without you, the States necessities encrea [...]e.

Sir, I could not allot more moderate limits to my Ambition, than to do you
service.

Sir, You can never die, succeeding Chronicles will give a life to your Heroick
acts.

Sir, If you command, I will despise the worst of fate, or bow to the
infelicities of cruel fortune.

Sir, My appetite is sick, for want of a capacity to digest your Favours.

Sir, Whatsoever your designs are, let your reputa­tion continue fair.

Sir, He that tramples on your fame, stamps upon the reputation of the whole
Court.

Sir, Your Vows have so amaz'd me, I know not how to answer.

Sir, In all shapes and under the most fearful aspects that can appear, I am
yours.

Sir, I will forbear commending you, since all that I can say is dishonorable
to your deserts.

Sir, The chief objects of my thoughts hath been the glory of your Name.

Sir, I prostrate my presumption at your feet, I shall lose happiness if you
forsake me.

Sir, My very thoughts are yours, you have an in­terest in them as well as me.

Sir, All my acknowledgments come far short of the obligations I owe to your
honor.

Sir, You mistake my disposition, if you judge I affect praises, Heaven never
made me so intem­perate.

Sir, Should not my friendship appear on any occa­sion to serve you, it would r
[...]main as a recluse.

Sir, The World would be so unpeopled, and Nature would loose her pride, were
there no such men as you to maintain their Honours.

Sir, Your Vertue can be recorded by none but by your self.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=9)Sir, Though
you injure me, my humility shall make me silent.

Sir, Though your anger seems to thunder, I can forbear no longer.

Sir, Your favors come so fast, they will neither suf­fer me to be miserable,
nor to seem so▪

Sir, Your actions are so vertuous, they carry an authority always with them.

Sir, Build not too much on your confidence, lest you tyre him whom you have so
often injur'd.

Sir, If you alledge excuses for so poor a trifle, you make your self a
stranger to my love.

Sir, You fetch your conceits too far, they transcend the subject on which you
do bestow them.

Sir, Your fortunes are fair, but your judgement may be admir'd.

Sir, Your excellent qualities might become the presence of a Prince.

Sir, It is by your contents or discontents, that I measure the necessities and
fatalities of this world.

Sir, Your favors have raised me so high, that I seem to stand upon a
precipice, and to discern my fall with the greater terror.

Sir, I have long since learnt, a Lovers religion is to swear and forswear.

Sir, I have a new life in being yours, your good­ness gives me a new creation.

Sir, Futurity shall crown the Reliques of your Ho­nored Ashes with Palms and
Laurels.

Sir, I shall not hold my self absent from you, whilst I retain any room in
your heart and memory.

Sir, You are the heir of a rich inheritance, the evi­dence of your Vertue
entitles you to Heaven.

Sir, 'Tis no wonder there is so little goodness in the world, since by the
rich stock of Vertue that rests in you, others are become bankrupts!

[[Page 13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=9)Sir, I owe
my good Fortune to your favourable assistance.

Sir, My wishes go along with your endeavours, may your desires be happily
performed.

Sir, I should prove cruel to my self, should I neg­lect one that nobly loves
me.

Sir, Forbear your hasty protestations, I do believe your soul's without a
blemish, and I glory in my choice.

Sir, Leave your superfluous Language, I am none of those Ladies that are
enamoured with flattering Acrosticks; or to have their names so dis-jointed in
an Anagram, 't would puzzle ten Magicians to set them together again.

Sir, You have a good smack at Poetry, and I grant you too, Love and Poesie are
divine, commonly in­fused together; yet 'tis ordinarily tyed to rules of
flat­tery.

Sir, Your Oratory makes me suspect your faith, let it suffice I love you; Nor
shall it be long ere Hymen shall seal the Contract.

Your very servant, Sir.

## 2\. Complements towards Ladies, Gentle­women, Maids, &c.

MAdam, It is a vain illusion, if you dream that ever you can gain a reputation
by my ruine.

Madam, The grace of eloquence is seated on your lips.

Madam, Your beauty is the conqueress of man, who is never to be satisfied with
the lustre of your eyes.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=10)Fair one,
your feature and your vertues excel all mortal sence.

Madam, When I see you I am in paradice, it is then that my eyes carve me out a
feast of Love.

Madam, Mortal eyes are never to be satisfied with the wonders of your beauty.

Madam, Your complexion clear as is the skie, was never fram'd but to be
ador'd.

Madam, Though my person is removed from you, my purpose is not, for I still
retain and will till death, the resolutions of being, Madam, Yours.

Madam, I dare be confident you have too much Vertue to study the Art of
dissimulation.

Madam, Be faithful to him that dares look on death to preserve you, or indure
all the despights of fortune to defend your reputation.

Madam, Your beauty hath so bereav'd me of my fear, that I do account it far
more possible to die, than to forget you.

Fairest, Take this for a certain truth, I shall ra­ther choose to abhor my
self, than to pitch my af­fectionate resolutions on any object but the
excellence of your beauty.

Madam, Your Kindred may be cruel in keeping us asunder, but my heart shall
never stray from the du­ty it bears to your Vertues.

Madam, I shall ever sacrifice the best of my endea­vours to the favour of your
affections.

Madam, It was not through a conceit of my own deserts, that I have shot at so
fair a mark as your Ver­tuous and innocent fair self, my presumption hath
onely this excuse, it was directed by Love, and I may well stray, when my
guide is blind.

Madam, You have vanquished me, I am an eternal prisoner to your beauty.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=10)Fairest,
Your beauty is Loves Copy to read won­  [...]ers on.

Madam, Your soul is so divinely bright, that what  [...] otherwise dare not
approach to you, lest it sees its  [...]wn deformity.

Madam, You have my prayers at all times, though you go hence, we cannot be
absent from one another,  [...]ince I have placed you in the secret cabinet of
my  [...]eart.

Oh Madam, If the thoughts of your departure make me melancholly, the real
absence will be a mi­sery worse than death.

Fair Maid, It is cruelty to frown at parting, that  [...]loud bids me expect a
storm, but oh what bliss I find in this deceit; you seem angry by your
[...]rowns, and yet each brow lodges loves deity within it.

Lady, I did not intend to have written to you, but my affection hath
overswayed my reason, be not still cruel lest you make me so desperate, that I
shall be no longer either my own or yours.

Madam, Since I want merits to equallize your Ver­tues, I will for ever mourn
for my imperfections.

Dear Love, My heart will not suffer my tongue to utter that fatal word
[...]arewel, since when I l [...]ave you, I shake hands with my most perfect
object of Beatitude.

Madam, If you know not how to love, I know not how to live, unless in
torments.

Madam, Be pleased to wear this Diamond, which comes with an Ambition to
recover a greater lustre by your smiles.

Madam, Make me poor, or miserable, use your plea­sure with me, so you enrich
me with your love.

Dear Lady, Must I needs part with all my felicities at once, Then adieu fair
Sun of my soul, and suppose  [...] am with you, for we cannot part, since our
hearts so firmly are united.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=11)Fair One,
Adieu, Be still more fortunate, and le [...] cruel, whilst I, though the most
unhappy, resolve to continue constant.

Madam, Unless you give me your self, it lies not i [...] your Art or power to
requite that affection wherewith I do adore you.

Madam, I never yet offered my affections to any beauty but your own, since
then you have the pre­heminence above all others, be favourable to him that
gives it, and with it, himself wholly to your dispo­sal.

Madam, give me but the favour to suffer me to dis­cover my affections, and
then if you shall think fit, si­lence me to perpetuity.

Madam, Remember my respects when you are gone hence, It will be some
consolation to me, though I have not the sight of your fair eyes, if I may be
assured you have me but sometimes in your thoughts.

Fair Lady, My whole estate is summ'd up in your smiles.

Madam, What crime of mine hath raised your an­gry frowns?

Madam, To call you fair, is an Epethite beneath your beauty.

Madam, Cupid hath fixt himself in your eyes, and wounds all that come but near
him.

Blush fair Creature, Blush, since to be coy, is to be cruel, and to be cruel,
is to be otherwise than what you seem, a Beauty.

Fairest, It is now high time to cherish my desires, let them be no longer
prisoners to the shades of si­lence.

Dear Madam, Your love is the perfection of my desires.

Fairest, Make me so happy, as to raise my affecti­ons to the honor of being
yours.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=11)Madam, Be
wise and dote not so much upon your own beauty, the man with the bald pate can
so alter your physnomy, that in a short time it shall fright you more than a
Judge doth a Thief.

Madam, 'Tis past your Art to shun me, I will put a Girdle round about the
world but I will finde you,

Madam, You are the Queen of Beauties, your ver­tues give a commanding power to
every mortal.

Fair Lady, 'Tis your beauty is the divinity which mortals desire to know and
to admire.

Lady Fine, Your Tyrant-beauty hath but a short reign, you cannot say 'tis
yours, for you cannot dis­pose of it, nor possess it long.

Madam, 'Tis true you are handsome, but remember Faces are like Books, they
that study them do best know them, and the truth is, they are liked onely as
they please the Courteous Reader.

Madam, Why will you shun me; let me but view my wealth, otherwise where is my
comfort more than if I should think to feed my eyes with looking on a Cask of
Jewels in the dark?

Dear Lady, I am happy in loving you, but the most unhappy if you deny your
love.

Dear Madam, Compleat my Joys, or the Gods themselves will rob me of you.

Madam, I am sick of love, be you my Physitian or I shall suddenly expire.

Coy Mistriss, Once I loved you, but have learned more wit now than to follow
such a blinde guide as Cupid.

I faith Widdow, I am in love, and 'tis with you, the untoward boy Cupid has
wounded me, 'tis such a busie Urchin no person can be quiet for him, He glides
through the Isle of man in a minute, gets into Middle­sex; [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=12) and keeps his
Christmass there till he's fir'd out, with heat and flames.

Scornful Girl, Can you imagine I ever did intend to dote, especially on that
small stock of beauty of yours, which serves only to convince me, you are not
extreamly ugly.

Exc [...]llent Beauty, Painters, Poets, nor Players were ever guilty of half
so many cruelties, as you (by the darts of your eyes) do exercise on those
that admire you most.

Dear Madam, When I am absent from you, I am sick of love, but every visit
gives somewhat of conso­lation to my passion.

Lady, I am wholly yours, it is your beauty that hath taken me from my self.

Madam, Your Vertues are my meditations; you and my thoughts are never absent.

Madam, you are the admiration of the world, like a fair picture you draw all
mens eyes to see and won­der.

Fair Creature, You are that rich Cabinet wherein Nature hath lockt up all her
ra [...]ities.

Madam, So to usurp an Authority, is according to neither Law nor Reason.

Fair one, This kiss from your inspiring hand, will add to my former happiness.

Madam, This Favor, and you Crown your Ser­vant.

Madam, Your Beauty hath the Art to teach Christi­ans to turn Idolaters.

Madam, Be merciful or I am miserable, your eyes are as the Ambassadors of life
or death.

Divine Lady, Could I be one of those wise men that rule the stars, you might
then conclude, I might be able to govern my own affections.

Madam, If there be a Heaven to reward vertues, [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=12) your name will
be recorded in the Register of Saints.

Madam, Your frowns are the emblems of death, but your smiles give me a second
being.

Madam, To be absent from your service is a Tor­ment, since every of your
Commands afford me a new Creation.

Madam, I have pass'd my vows, to confirm them, I give you my heart and hand,
to continue yours till death.

Madam, Confirm me in your favour with a smile.

Fair One, I'le pay the last tribute of my lips to your fair hands.

Madam, Your heart is like pibble, smooth, but stoney.

Madam, Continue constant, and be assured, I will rather loose my life, than
part with my resolutions of serving you.

Madam, Since you are born into the world to be admir'd, you should not eclipse
your self from him that can live no longer than he serves you.

Most Divine Lady, I could live an Age upon those Lips.

Madam, I am real, my love is white as Truth, and innocent as Vertue.

Oh Madam, Be like your self, fair and not re [...]em­bling Narcissus,
benighted with the clouds of scorn.

Madam, May heaven smile upon you, farewel and prosper.

Madam, You are all sweetness, and I the admirer of your Vertu [...]s, Oh let
me  [...]ly into your bosom.

Madam, Be not cruel but save that creature whose life depends on you, who
[...] every power ownes not himsel [...] but you.

Madam, You are a Deity to whom my heart pre­sents its devotio [...].

Madam, My soul is in a  [...]lame, and remains a Sa­crifice [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=13) till you shall
please to accept it.

Madam, May I become the scorn of time, when I prove so monstrous as to give
you the least occasion to repent your love.

Madam, Oh let me confirm my happiness upon your Lip, and study there by some
new way of num­ber, to multiply my bliss.

Madam, The treasuries of Grace and Nature were quite exhausted, to accomplish
your perfections.

Madam, My language is as my Intentions, plain and real, he that makes use of
golden words, does it only to gild over the corruptions of his soul.

Dear Madam, I am ravished with the well-tuned Harmony of your pleasant voice.

Lady, I return to you all your Vows, be free, as the Air you breath in.

Madam, Can you be so unjust as to deem my lan­guage feigned? I will sooner
forget to eat, than to ho­nor you.

Madam, Far be it from me, to speak a language should displease your ear.

Farewel incomparable Mistriss.

Madam, Had I a hundred hearts I should want room to entertain your love.

Madam, Be assured I will either enjoy you, or die a Martyr in your quarrel.

Madam, for your sweet sake my meditations are loaded with Metaphors; I am
valiant, witty, and will be any thing to be yours.

Mistriss, To be plain with you, I love you, but I want utterance, and that is
a good sign.

Sweet bit of beauty, the delight of mine own soul I am come to visit thee, and
have brought with me a hundred thousand salutations.

Most resplendant Lady, I am full of the fruits of love, and should be proud if
you would be pleased to participate.

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=13)Dear Mor
[...]el of Modesty, How I love you, and so sincerely, that I protest to make
you Mistriss of my thoughts, Lady of my returns, and commit all my Moveables
into your hands, and upon the same I give you an earnest kiss in the high road
to Matrimony.

My Dear Girl, Thou hast catcht me, my heart thou hast had before, now here's
my hand.

Fair One, Seal my pardon for my former rudeness, and may I forget my love if I
loose my civility here­after.

Madam, I owe all that I have to your Beauty, it is the sole Commandress of my
thoughts.

Dear Madam, The breath of new blown Roses is not more sweet than yours, I
could kiss thee, till I engender on thy lips.

Madam, By your fair self, I love you with as much true zeal as Anchorites do
their prayers.

Dear Mistriss, I am in paradice when I but dream of your perfections.

Fair Lady, A thousand Cupids, call me to kiss your hands.

Fairest, By the Law of Love and Arms, I may de­mand a kiss.

Madam, You are the fairest Nature ever did design for wonder.

Madam, The perfume of your sweet breath in­forms me your Mother fed on Roses
when she bred you.

Madam, I shall be more grateful, than to slight those benefits you showre upon
me.

Fair One, You have taught me to despise my self. I can do nothing but admire
your Vertues.

If I am void of Reason, Fairest creature, suffer Love to be my Advocate, that
will not allow of limits.

Mistriss, Be not angry if I tell you, my love when once abused, may turn into
a fury.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=14)Without
doubt Madam, if the Gods, as Poets fan­cie, created Beauty it was their
Master-peice, since they themselves are unable to oppose that force which they
ordain'd.

Madam, It is impossible any one should see your beauty and not become a
captive.

Madam, I shall forbear to talk of Beauty, or of Vertue, unless you are
present.

Madam, I should be ignorant of what is rare, did not your Vertues instruct my
understanding.

Madam, They that diminish your worth or Beau­tie, dare rob all that is good,
and sin against truth it self.

Madam, It was the spring of your Beauty, that first raised in me those noble
desires, which soon after bursted into streams.

Dear Madam, Thus I embrace thee as my Wealth and Honor.

Fairest, Your absence will be death to him that loves you above all that can
be dear or precious; should Armies keep us distant, I would charge through a
Grove of Pikes, and encounter with Death him­self, but I would gain you.

Madam, Your features bound me in fetetrs as soon as first I saw them, and the
excellent endowments of your minde hath since retained me not onely your
pri­soner, but your servant.

Madam, You are the Epitome of Nature, in whom is comprised all that favours of
what is sweet or glo­rious.

Madam, give me leave to call you mine, and one day the effect shall be your
own.

Dear Madam, spake once more, Angels will listen to the Musick of your Voice.

Madam, you have laid a charm upon my soul, my senses are captivated by the
incomparable Harmony of your hand and voice.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=14)Madam, The
thankful Lute shews how much it does rejoyce to be graced with the touch of
your fin­gers.

Madam, It is the glory of great minds, to forgive great faults, and upon the
acknowledgement of my error, you cannot finde an object more deserving your
compassion.

Madam, May your own Vertues attend you ever, that you may continue as faithful
to me, as I esteem you dear.

Madam, The chiefest grief I bear with me from this place, is the sence of
leaving my heart where I cannot stay my self.

Madam, I have a heart, but it is worn in your brest.

Dear Madam, Conceal not your eyes from me, they are the two bright stars by
which the Barque of my af­fections steer's to the wish'd for shore of my
fe­licity.

Madam, I court the love of all, but yours I would purchase with my life.

Madam, Continue to be good, and hold him still  [...]n your memory, whose
onely felicity it is to hope to be  [...]nshrined in so fair a monument.

Madam, I have been like a lump of Ice, till of late  [...]he heat of your
favours, revived my besotted spi­  [...]i [...]s, but the darts of your
piercing eyes have so alter­  [...]d the whole frame of man in me, that I am
become  [...] perfect flame, which nothing can quench but the  [...]leasant
streams of your love.

Madam, The Magnetick stone, observes not the  [...]ummons of the North star,
with more activity, than do your commands.

Madam, When I want a will to continue yours, may I no longer be my own.

Madam, You are already the most accomplished [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=15) Lady in the
world, may Heaven compleat its bount in making you as happy as you are fair.

Madam, This kiss to your fair hand.

Madam, Be assured my love and loyalty shall be in separable, while I have life
to retain any affections fo [...] your beauty.

Fairest Virgin, Such is my zeal for your divine ver [...]tues, that though it
is my ambition to live and lov [...] you, yet should an opportunity be
offered, the con [...]stancy of my dying heart should manifest how muc [...] I
am yours in death.

Madam, I will be stedfast as inviolated faith, im [...]moveable as a rock; and
till death will glory in m [...] constancy as the chiefest Jewel of my life.

Madam, My desires lie captiv'd at your feet; bu [...] one glance from your
sparkling eyes, will enliv [...] them again, and add a fresh Vigour to your
languish­ing prostrate.

Dear Madam, Desire but my content, let me b [...] have your wishes, and I will
be in a continual thirst  [...] do you service.

Madam, My inclination binds me as much to plea [...] you, as my duty does to
serve.

Madam, 'Tis my misfortune to be but half mad [...] Heaven hath given me
desires, but not deserts.

Madam, I should be simple and unworthy, shou [...] I imagine this Present
worthy your acceptance, sin [...] what we think are rarities are not truly so,
unless  [...] the character of your esteem.

Madam, I have sent you but a small token, choo [...]ing to be thought rather
ignorant than ungrateful.

Madam, To abide with you, is to inhabit with  [...] Graces, since nature hath
designed you for the sto [...] house of all her most excellent rarities.

Madam, Imagine me to be yours, and fear not  [...] ere long the effects shall
answer your expectations.

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=15)Dear Lady,
Speak again, Angels will be mute and listen to your voice.

Madam, I am silenced with your breath, each word of yours lays a Charm upon my
soul.

Madam, You are favourable in this that you will suffer me to make my own
Apology.

Madam, You are Mistriss of most rare perfecti­ons, such as command the world
to express abundance of Duty, both by admiration and obedience.

Madam, In those smiling dimples, Cupid hath pitch­ed his Tents.

Madam, You are all Vertue, from your sweet lip the morning gathers blushes.

## 3\. Letters for all Occasions.

### 3.1. 1. A Tender of Service to the Kings most excellent Majesty.

May it please your Majesty,

I Am not ignorant of the great presumption, where­with at this time I give a
trouble to your Majesty; Nor can my deserts give me any hopes that the least
[...]eam of your love should shine on any thing that in  [...]e can be thought
a merrit, since I have learned, you  [...]ay command in all things, and it is
contrary to the  [...]uty I owe to your excellent Majesty to disobey in any.
[...]ut that your Majesty may know, you have a Subject  [...]hat durst be
Loyal even in disloyal times, I have now  [...]ttempted to arrive at the
height of my felicities, [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=16) which is not
onely to be honest, but to be known to be

Your Majesties most humble servant and obedient subject.

### 3.2. 2. A Tender of service to the Queens most excellent Majesty.

May it please your Majesty,

THough I am a stranger to your Majesty, yet since I bear the glorious title of
a Loyal Subject, I have hence assurance that your Majesty will vouchsafe to
give this boldness a favourable aspect, for indeed I should doubt my own
fidelity to my Royal Soveraign, should not your Majesty countenance my duty
with an acceptance of my service; let me now onely beg the trouble of a
pardon, and I shall for ever study as in du­ty bound, to manifest my self

Your Majesties Loyal Subject, and most humble Servant.

### 3.3. 3. Respects from an Honorable Lady, to the Queen.

Madam,

IF my passion had not over-ruled my reason, I would certainly have kept my
Letters from becoming so mean an object for your sacred eyes, till some
com­mandment of your own had put them upon occasion to give them attendance,
but the care I have to pre­serve my self in the Honor of your memory, and
fa­vour, will not suffer me to continue any longer silent; I therefore most
humbly pray your Majesty, to con­tinue your self in assurance even from hence▪
that my devotions are ever aspiring to your Service; which yet I should half
suspect to be less perfect, if my incli­nations might not own as great a part
of that ambi­tion, as my obligations, but the one accompanying the other, will
establish me for ever, in an unchangeabl [...] resolution of being,

Madam,

Your Majesties most humble Servant.

[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=16)

### 3.4. 4. A person of Quality to a worthy Lady, the one a Pro­testant, the
other a Roman Catholick.

Madam,

THough a sinner of one Religion, I am come to pay my vows to a Saint of
another, for I approach to your presence with as profound a reverence as I am
ca­pable of bearing to a creature, when your Ladiship is pleased to pardon the
presumption of your servants, you excel in goodness; but when withall you
descend so low as to admit of their poor desires, for real ser­vices, you
exceed your self; I have but little to say, but my h [...]art would easily
tell me of enough to do, if my power to serve you were correspondent to my
will, yet howsoever I shall be daily praying that you may be as happy as the
world knows you to be worthy; and especially that the expenc [...] of so
ignorant a life as mine, may one day serve for some straw or stick, to­wards
the erecting of that great building; Till then I am prostrate at your feet,
and with a fervent zeal shall continue,

Madam,

the Adorer of your Vertues, &c.

### 3.5. 5. One Lady to another, with Complements of ex­tream kindness.

Madam,

WHen neither the place nor the person can make a worthy oblation, that
devotion were better mannered which should sacrifice to your memory up­on the
Altar of Silence; But yet so much desire I to live in yours, as that I rather
choose to appear in this kinde to your trouble, than to suffer any thing like
for­getfulness, to seem to entomb those affections of mine to your service;
which want not Life, howsoever they are deprived of Lustre, wherewith to crown
the [[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=17)
estimation which your worth hath begotten in my soul, and will certainly
inhabit there, while there is any sence in

Madam,

the most affectionate of all your servants.

### 3.6. 6. A Letter of kindness from one friend to another.

Sir,

YOu may imagine I dream or dote, otherwise I should not speak thus loud, nor
thus far off, nor make so long a reach to you still, by the arms of my ill
written lines; But I thought once you were near hand, and coming to visit me,
when soon after I un­derstood you design'd your self for other ends, which yet
put me into such a Valiant choller, as some of them know who were nearest to
me, and must bear with my humours; lest I should want them I might be angry
with my self; for I can do nothing but in ear­nest, though that earnest,
proves commonly as true a nothing, as if I were in jest; pray let me have an
ac­count of your health, and of those affairs wherein you may guess my love
may say I am concerned, for be assured you shall never be owner of any care,
whereof I will not have a part, either by taking; if you will give it; or else
by stealing it, if you will not give it, but will needs be the first to offend
justice so far, as to hide it from

Your most real, real friend, &c.

### 3.7. 7. From one Friend to another.

Sir,

THe express of your goodness hath raised me to a degree of happiness, beyond
even mine own power of wishing, and after such heighth of good fortune, this
only regret can take hold of me, that you did impose something upon me as
disagreeable, as [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=17) [...]his was
complying with the very utmost of my am­bitious desires, that so I might
thereby have had the sa­  [...]isfaction of giving you an experience, that I
shall ever have an infinite joy in performing any Action, which by the
difficulty thereof, may the better serve to express my obedience to your
commands, as become [...], Sir,

Your most humble servant.

### 3.8. 8. A Lady to a Gentleman, concerning his sick M [...]striss.

Sir,

I Was too sensible of those troubles which I left with you, not to enquire
whether you are eased of part of them, or not; And therefore I beseech you,
send me word how the Noble sick Lady doth, whose health I infinitely wish;
both for your sake and mine own: Besides that, even the world is concerned,
that so excellent a creature, who is so hardly found, may not be so quickly
lost. Favor me in this particular, and the Kindness shall make me, Sir,

Your obliged servant.

### 3.9. 9. The Gentlemans Answer, to a Lady concerning his sick Mistriss.

Madam,

I Am infinitely engaged to you for the sence you have of my troubles, and the
love you bear to the Life of my Life; she is yet extream ill, and yet so good,
that I fear Heaven will deprive us of her Ver­tuous Society. I am so highly
sensible of not onely yours and my own, but of the concerns of all that know
her, that if there be not health enough in the world for us all, may heaven
give her a liberal por­tion of it, though it be abated out of mine; so much I
owe to her vertues, and not a little to your self, for your care of her, and
Madam,

The humblest of your servants.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=18)

### 3.10. 10. The Lovers first Address to his Lady.

Madam,

I Am indebted to my Friends for the knowledge of your Vertues, and to your
self for the Acknow­ledgements you are pleased to exercise in your
remem­brance of me; a person who hath nothing to make him considerable, but
what your favourable Opinion thinks fit to allow. And the custom whereby I am
made over to misfortune, forbids me the hopes of conceiving that ever I can be
so happy as to be admitted into the number of your Servants; which is
infinitely desired by, Dear Madam,

The Admirer of your Worth, &c.

### 3.11. 11. The Lovers Complemental Letter to his Mistriss.

Incomparable Lady,

I Was happy in receiving a Command from you, and shall be proud in my
performance, since it is the glory of Kings and Princes to be concerned in
your S [...]rvice; Let but one accent fall from your divine lips, and the very
windes are ready to convey it, the me­lody of your warbling Voice can charm
the Syren to a silence, and compel the Crocodile to spare his dissem­bling
sorrows. Dear Madam, the sight of your beauty is sufficient to create fresh
blood in withered reins of age, and give a new life to expiring mortals: If
you are sad, Angels themselves are so. Pardon my pro­lixity, Divine Lady, I am
in a Labyrinth greater than the Cave that enclosed the Cretan Minotaure; 'Tis
easier to eat fire and not be burnt, or to cut Diamonds with Glass, than to
speak your real Praise; O then how happy am I in your love! That love that
gives Speech to a dumb man, that love that makes Ideots turn Orators, and
inspires the Age with such admira­ble Fancies, that all people become Poets,
onely out of a duty to your Deserts, that they celebrate your [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=18) Praises, which
is a Task too great for them, as it is for, Excellent Lady,

Your sincere Admirer.

### 3.12. 12. The Ladies Return to her servants Lines.

Kinde Sir,

WHen I think of you, I am in a maze, insomuch that I suppose you to be every
thing that is good; Majesty is placed on your brow, your Tongue for its
eloquence may be Musick for the Gods, your looks are so pleasant and so airy,
that Cupid appears there in in his best grace; and when you walk, the earth
doth humbly seem to shrink, as being sensible of the weight it bears. But
hold, my passion runs beyond the bounds of modesty, Discretion now perswades
to give the preheminence to Pallas, not to Cupid, you were pleased to try a
Conclusion on my feminine Capacity, and you may believe (upon necessity) I can
reverberate accordingly. But, Dear Sir, though I must acknow­ledge my
affection is of a large extent, yet (since I have conversed with the Poets) I
cannot but admire at the prodigiousness of your Sex in former times; should I
believe all to be gold that glisters, I might see my error as well as others
have done before; however Sir, I dare not apprehend you to be otherwise than
Noble, a little more experience may wipe off all my woma­nish suspicion, for
such is my high esteem of your worth already, that I want but little of saying
how much I am

Yours.

### 3.13. 13. A Ladies fore-warning her Friend of another Ladies Society.

Sir,

PErhaps you may pretend that this procedure of your [...] is onely to awaken
me, for the better tryal of my faith and constancy; but believe me, it is not
[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=19) safe to
jest with edged tools, or to play with fire; Nor is it any ways commendable in
you, to associate your self with the wanton Lady, I need not name her, since
you know to whom that Epithete belongs. 'Tis true, she is reported to be
handsom, there is then the more danger, and wiser men than you have been
en­snared with the bewitched Allurements of a strange woman: To be merry with
a Lady, or to converse and walk, and use language tending to Courtship, with a
Lass that delights to hear her self commen­ded, is freequent with men, and may
be born with, when managed with discretion, but to stake your reputation upon
so slender an account as to offer Courtship to that same piece of Vanity,
argues much fondness, little wit, and less constancy: Let me there­fore
earnestly desire you, for the sake of your own fair credit, to forbear these
extravagancies, that you may rid me of that suspition which as yet lies heavy
upon my heart, I shall then retain the same opinion of you which I have
hitherto had, that you are a man master of your self, and too true a Lover to
admit of any o­ther sharers in your affections but my self, since our late
Contract, and the Truth of a Gentleman, have laid such a lawful Injunction
upon you. Pray, if you are minded to cure my distracted thoughts, use some
sudden means, lest my distemper grow too violent for a remedy, till then I
shall (not rest but) remain

Yours, even in impatience.

### 3.14. 14. Our Ladies Advice to another, near Marriage.

Good Soul,

IT is an unruly Age we live in, and my love hath oc­casion [...]d this trouble
to you: I understand there is a Gentleman Mr. A.B. is extreamly prodigal of
his pre­tences to you, in the way of Love and Marriage: my Caution is onely
this, that you have an eye to your [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=19) own welfare,
build not upon empty promises, for if you once suffer him to please his humour
before he is firmly yours, you will certainly forfeit your own Ho­nor.
Consider, as he is above you in purse, and the portions of this life, (Beauty
onely excepted, for of that Nature hath given you a bountiful proportion)
whether his intentions are real or feigned, make him your own, and then if you
fall in two, (you may un­derstand the phrase, by observing the occasion) he
will be bound by the Laws of God and Nature, to bear a part with you in
whatsoever happens. The truth is, I had not taken upon me to give you this
admoni­tion, did not report speak loudly of his passion for you, and of his
conditional promises to be yours here­after, if you consent to be his first:
Such a love hath subtile limits, and more Meanders than a harmless maid can
easily discover. It is reported too, that you in­cline somewhat to believe
him, and are apt to think he means nothing but what is honorable, yet know
this from one more experienced in things of this na­ture than you are, that if
he should perform his Vows to you after he hath feasted his appetite, yet such
a Breach in your reputation, will continually admit of strange sallies,
checks, and opprobrious tearms, as Strumper, Slut, Light House-wife, &c. and
what did you afford me, that another man might not have had? and when the
glass is once broken, it is not easily ce­mented: Dear Soul, keep heaven about
you, and let good thoughts guard your innocency, so shall your Honor be
unspotted, and your life happy; which is the earnest desire of

Your cordial friend and servant, &c.

### 3.15. 15. A Lover to his false Mistriss.

Stain to thy Sex,

HAth modesty now forsook thee, that thou durst abuse that affection, that
adored thee? did I [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=20) manifest my self
a dotard to gain thy love, and having had a multitude of promises from thee,
of constancy and firm affection, darest thee now to admit of an­others flame?
Now thou seemest more deformed than ever I thought thee fair, so ugly a
Monster is Ingra­titude. By this I do perceive thou didst enjoyn me to smother
our affections, onely that thy new servant might not have any occasion to be
jealous; I will hate thee for thine own sake, and him, for robbing me,
al­though but a trifle; And that my revenge may soar high enough to reach thy
Perjury, I will begin with him, and then proclaim thy l [...]nity, and how
thou hast disserted me, after a long League of Friendship, after thou hadst
past thy Vows to be none but mine, and hast admitted a stranger to thy bosome:
Was it for this that I delighted daily to be praising thee? How did I spend my
time in making Encomiums upon thy Beauty, Vertues, and thy Person that I once
so much admired? I will now study to contradict my own fond▪ opinion, and so
decipher thee, that thou shalt seem as odious to the world, as thou dost to
me, else let Fate do so, and more to

Base Wretch,

Thine once, but now his own.

### 3.16. 16. On sending a Book.

Madam,

THat you may perceive I do not forget you, let this poor Present inform you;
it is the Famous Ro­mance, Entituled, Pharamond, and written by the Au­thor of
Cassandra and Cleopatra were it not a Piece of great worth, I should not have
thought it fit for your perusal; However were it otherwise, I dare assure my
self it would not be unwelcome, since to question that, were to doubt of your
good will to

Madam,

Your faithful servant.

[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=20)

### 3.17. 17. A Lady to her discourteous Lover.

Sir,

THere was a time, and that within your own me­mory, that you were pleased to
flatter me with the glorious Titles of Divine Mistress, Most Accompli­shed
Lady, and what not? Yet to manifest the frailty of all these Expressions, and
how little you meant what you so often reiterated, you were lately pleased to
give me a flat denial to my poor request. Certainly Sir, I should have been
commanded by you in con­cerns of higher moment, and not onely so, but that
your slighting of me may be more apparent, you have not bestowed your Visits
as you use to do: If I have given you any occasion thus to estrange your self,
I should not think you so blame-worthy as at present I take you to be; But
that you may see I am not quite void neither of good nature, nor affection, I
must needs confess I do somewhat doubt my own deserts, as well as your
dis­position, and am resolved to continue, till you shall to­tally renounce
me,

Wholly yours.

### 3.18. 18. A Brother, on the occasion of his Brothers not writing.

Dear Brother,

THough your occasion enforce you to turn Te­nant to your own time, yet I had
thoughts that such a trifle as my self, might be admitted into your memory, at
some interval or other. It is now four or five Letters you are indebted to me
for, however I confess my self so much engaged to you on other ac­count, that
I fear you would think you  [...] too great a looser, should we but qui [...]
score [...] Dear Brother, cast an eye upon your Books,  [...] perhaps I
ap­pear amongst your Debtors, you will make more of me than a blank, or
cypher; which that you may [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=21) do, I will still
bear the badge of your obligations, and when I appear false, let me be cast
aside as none of your Coyn, but as a Counterfeit▪ in the mean time, Sir, call
me what you please, so you pardon the Errors of this trouble, which I
concluded might be more fitly of­fered, than my acknowledgements should be
concealed; but I shall sin no further against your patience, onely believe me
to be, as formerly,

Your affectionate Brother to command.

### 3.19. 19. A Gentlemen to a Lady, in his Friends behalf.

Madam,

THrough an ardent desire to become your debtor, I have attempted to crave a
favor of you in be­half of a Friend, whose deserts when once known, will speak
both his thanks and commendations; I am ad­vertised by him that there is a
Lady, to whose young Beauty you have no small relation, and he having a
passion for her, knows not how to gain the favorable opportunity to kiss her
hands; 'Tis therefore my re­quest, that you remember me when you see him, and
if you can further his resolutions, be assured the ac­knowledgement shall be
great, as your civility, and with all observance paid by, Madam,

Your real Friend and Servant.

### 3.20. 20. Another to the same purpose.

Madam,

PArdon me if I tell you, you cannot be just, if you spare your civilities to
me, since my affection is such to your service, that I shall ever esteem it
the glory of my life, to be employed by your commands; since therefore
necessity doth compel you, receive this Gentleman as my Friend, that I may
honor your merits, and endeavor to get some for my self, that I [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=21) may be the more
capable of performing those duties which shall become due from, Madam,

Your very Servant, &c.

### 3.21. 21. A Letter of Complements from one Friend to another.

Sir,

YOu have so well studied the Art how to oblige, and withal how to express your
favors, that for my part I am ignorant how to proclaim either my thanks or
services without a blush, for putting so harm­less a creature in so ill a
habit; Nor indeed shall I ever be able to satisfie my self therein, unless I
could tell, with a safe conscience, how to play the thief, and steal your
words and actions from your self. Let me now onely adventure to tell you, that
it is a kinde of tyranny in you, to make me so much your servant by force, who
was walking so fast that way, upon the feet of mine own free will. We have
here nothing not [...] wor­thy, but that we all live so fairly in friendship,
as if fa­ction were a stranger to our train; As for my self, if I were any
thing, the love I bear you would multiply it, and the favors which I receive
by you, would dignifie it; And howsoever, the honor of your Commands, if I may
hope for them, will give me such a being, as with­out immodesty I will boast
of to the universe; Nor shall any soul be found more faithful to any ones
com­mands, than mine to

Yours.

### 3.22. 22. An Answer to the former Letter.

Sir,

I Have been in your debt too long for your last Let­ter, the words whereof
were delivered by your own choice hands, as so many fair pictures drawn by an
experienced Artist, onely let me tell you, I can discover a little daubing
here and there, but as you are [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=22) my friend, I
dare not doubt your ingenuity. Indeed I do not think it possible for entire
affection to be more generously express'd, I can but return thanks to you, or
rather indeed such an answer, as may better consist of thoughts than words. I
must crave your pardon, now I am compel'd to let you know I have scarce time
enough allowed me to say how much I am, Sir,

Your very faithful Servant.

### 3.23. 23. The lover to his deliberating Mistriss.

My onely Ioy,

WHy should strange fancies, and indigested hu­niours create a breach in that
affection which hath been so often, and so firmly knit between you and I? If I
have offered any occasion for your dislike, let me be unpardonable; but if you
will give me slights and neglects for my real love, it is you must be unjust:
for shame let not any dispute be raised now, just now that we are travelling
in the way to our felicity. From whence come these suggestions of yours, that
things will look hereafter with a worser face, and that you fear your
condition will have an ill change? Do you hold intelligence with heaven? Or
can you divine, or dive into the hidden mysteries, or secret cabinet of a
Deity? Pray recollect your thoughts, and remember what affectionate promises,
nay firm protestations, did not long since pass between us, then, when we
called the little Birds, and the listning silent Streams to be witnesses to
our Oaths: Remember those silver drops which I so often courted to catch as
they then glided from your eyes; if all this shall seem as musick too harsh
for your ears, I must take the liberty to exclaim: But I dare not show so much
[...]igour towards you, you whom I so much love and honor, I will rather
accuse my own merits, or my  [...]ortune, since my onely happi­ness is taking
wing, and the Life of my Life thinks me [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=22) unworthy to be
beloved; However, my resolution is fixed, do you study to be unkinde, my heart
shall ne­vertheless continue either

Your Servant, Or, your Sacrifice.

### 3.24. 24. Civil Complements from one Friend to another.

Sir,

TO be Civil is to be Noble, and both these Quali­ties excel in you, it is
therefore needless for me to give you thanks, or acknowledgements for your
favors to me, since your generosity will never make me a deb­tor, for what you
paid to your own inclination and vertue: I received your Letter in such a time
of soli­tude, that my heart bade it most freely welcome; for your lines did
not onely pleasure me, but engage me, insomuch that I am hugely desirous to
have more such Visitants, after they have taken leave of onely your hand; for
by those marks I shall be able to give a shrewd guess at your condition,
whether in health or not: Since then it will be such a satisfaction to me to
hear from you, I beg of you to engage me once more, that I may use my
endeavors to contribute somewhat to your content, for it is the chiefest
aspiring hopes of, Sir,

Your eternal Friend.

### 3.25. 25. A Gentlemen to his Lady, whom he fears would make a New Choice.

Dear Soul,

WHat Melody can be sweeter Musick, than the simpathizing of our Loves, I am
not able to divine, and am apt to believe the point may puzzle your wit,
although it be a pregnant one. Then since (at least) I esteem my self in
Paradise whilest I am in your favour, wherefore, Oh wherefore doth report
whisper to me, that you (whom I ever took to be firm as truth) should now
begin to waver in your thoughts to me? Dear Heart, let me not be forgotten in
a mo­ment, [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=23) let not me whom
your Beauty and your Vertues have ravished with admiration, become so vainly
ex­pensive of my time, as to loose that Jewel, dear to me as my life. I will
not, nor dare I believe you can be so unkinde, but shall hereafter tell the
erring world you are all goodness, and that there are those Ladies even in
this our age, that will not forget their Vows, and know how to be constant in
the best, or worst of times, as well as, Most worthy Lady,

Yours, in the bonds of true affection.

### 3.26. 26. A rich old Gentleman, to a fair young Virgin.

Young Lady,

LEt not my years be an obstacle to your love, since I have those gifts of
fortune, that will not onely maintain our affections, and keep the fire of
love in a continual flame, but will also afford you all those Or­naments which
Art hath designed for the adorning such tender and beautiful Buds of Nature:
Besides, though I come not to you with a powdred Lock, or in the mode of a
young Gallant, yet know my Girl, my zeal for you can be as hot, and as
sincere, as the sprucest Pretenders in the world: and if age doth make me seem
in your apprehension, as a withering tree, yet I have Gold will keep its
colour, and it is that which in this world is ones best friend. Pray have me
in your thoughts, and I shall watch for an opportune season, wherein I may
make my self farther known to be, Fairest Lady,

Your most affectionate Servant.

### 3.27. The Answer. 27. A beautiful young Virgin, to a decrepit, rich, old
Gentleman.

Grave Sir,

YOu are too far distant from me in years, to be ad­mitted into my affections,
since you are arrived [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=23) to the pitch of
Dotage, and I yet ignorant of what is Love; However, I must do you so much
justice as to commend your discretion, for fishing with a Golden Bait; for
believe me, next to Beauty, I cannot imagine any thing to be more taking among
mortals, than the glorious name of Wealth: I could be content to keep my
Coaches, my Pages, Lackeys, and Maids, but I confess I could never endure the
society of a bald pate; How can you think, Reverend Sir, that I should love
you, when by the temptations which you offer, you clearly manifest your
opinion, that if I should marry, it must be to your Gold, rather than to you:
I con­fess a Silver Myne is a pretty toy for a thing of my years to dote on,
but I have a childish humour pecu­liar to my self▪ that is, never to humble my
affections so, as that they suffer Treasure, as a Load-stone, to draw them to
its beck. 'Tis true, wealth will be well­come to me, to maintain my Train, but
the Person of that more lovely creature, Man, will ever be more welcome to a
Maids Embraces. Can you think me so weak, as to exchange the Flower of my
Youth, for a bundle of Snow, or rotten Dirt? No Sir, Gold with a man is good,
admirably good, but it is Man that in the School of Love, passes for the
principal Verb; for my own part, rather than joyn my self to a meer wedge of
Gold, I shall choose to accept of a bundle of Rags, so they have any affinity
to a Man.

Old men are grey, Old men are grey,

I'm a lusty bonny young Lass,

And I prithee Old man away.

By this time, good old man, you know my minde; be wise, and wed your self to
heaven, and I shall thank you, if in your death, you remember to bequeathe
your Gold to

Your young Adviser.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=24)

### 3.28. 28. A Letter of Courtesie from Friend to Friend.

Sir,

I Have no kindness for this Letter, for I heartily wish it lost, that you may
finde me before it perform the service it was sent for: But you may perceive
by its contents (for they are short) that I hope it will not be long ere you
make me happy in your company. I am the more easily perswaded it will be
suddenly, since I am informed you are about the Equinoctial of your return to
Town, and my earnest desire to see you, may convince you that I hold you to be
as it were a Sun in my Hemisphere. My occasions compel me to forsake my usual
road of being tedious, and must con­clude with that real truth of being, Sir,

Yours undivided, though at distance.

### 3.29. 29. One Gentlewoman to another in behalf of a Friend.

Sir,

ERe I had so much good fortune, as to thank you for your former kindnesses, I
am opportuned by an honest friend to recommend him to your favor; He hath an
humble suit to you, and as he assures me, a very just one, and hath omitted
other opportunities, onely that it might pass your hands. Sir, if you have any
good will left for me, pray bestow part of it on him, and let the rest plead
my excuse for this fresh presump­tion, which if you please to interpret as a
desire I have to serve you, you will judge aright of

Your debtor, and humble servant.

### 3.30. 30. The forsaken Maid, to her treacherous Friend.

Most unkinde Man,

IT is my exceeding wonder that you should be one, to make up the number of
those that dare to be wicked; Now do I see my folly, when I hugg'd you in my
bosom, and believed those Oaths and Protesta­tions, [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=24) which you have
most villanously broke: Now can I call to minde the advice my experienced
friends gave me, never to trust to the pretensious of your Sex; Oh! can you
see me on my knees, with wet and swoln eyes, and yet not learn to love me, nor
hate your self! Or have you no regard to that innocent lamb, as yet but in my
womb, which though of a small Volumn, yet it is but your self in a lesser
Frame: if you believe, or but think it is not yours, let me be ript up, and
then you will perceive each member to bear the true image of your own, and
your name is likewise near it, for since you told me it should be called, I
wrote it in my very heart. I have nothing more to say, but one­ly to desire
you to be so true to your self and me, as to remember and perform your Vow; if
not, be so mer­ciful as to rid me of a loathsom life, for if you do nei­ther,
my disgrace will be publick, and rather than live your Strumpet, I should
esteem it a greater happi­ness (since my misfortunes have brought me to the
mi­sery) to die

Your Sacrifice.

### 3.31. 31. The Lady to her importunate Lover.

Sir,

SInce you are resolved to be troublesom, I shall likewise resolve to be
impatient; let me not be any more perplexed with your impertinent pretences,
or assure your self, if my advice be flighted; and you con­tinue as vain as
formerly, I have so much interest in those that have worth and honor, as to
engage them to correct your insolency, and that not with Fist or Cane, but
Weapons less vulgar, and more dangerous, therefore be advised before it be too
late, since I am designed for another, and not likely however to be

Yours.

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=25)

### 3.32. The Answer. 32. The Lover to his Threatning Lady.

Worthy Lady,

CAn you think I can live, and want your love? Or can you imagine I can fear
Death it self, when I am inspired by the thoughts of you? I will not be so
uncivil as to tax you with cruelty, or say your heart is made of Adamant, but
be assured who ever dares be so vainly proud as to assault me, I have a Sword
sharp as his, and a Pistol that barks as loud as his; but if I chance to fall
in so fair a Quarrel, my Soul is so entirely fixt to your vertues, that if any
chance afterward to in­jure you, or defile your honor, it will appear in your
defence, for I have made it my resolution to be, Dear Madam,

Yours living▪ or in death.

### 3.33. 33. A Letter of Enquiry, from friend to friend.

My good Friend,

I Am designed now to be troubl [...]som to you, but it is onely that I may be
satisfied in two points, first I am to tell you, I live as a thing without
rest or pati­ence, and shall continue so, till I hear how you esca­ped in the
late accident; for I hold my self concerned in all your dangers, and shall
readily enlarge mine, so I may contract yours. But if I may suppose (as well
as hope) that you are safe, the next happiness that my ambition aims at, is
your society; which if I can ob­tain, I may perhaps recover my understanding,
and shall thereby be the more enabled to render all acknow­ledgements due from

Your Friend, so love and serve you.

### 3.34. 34. Comfortable Advice to a Friend on the death of a Son, or other
near Relation.

Dear Sir,

I Am hugely sensible of your great loss, and as great grief, and that is it
that hath given wing to my [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=25) affections, thus
to advise you, as you are a Christian, not to afflict your self too much,
since it was the plea­sure of Almighty God to summon his servant to him­s
[...]lf, cast your self into the arms of his Mercy, and he will certainly give
you a full measure of Comfort; for it is that is the Fountain of Consolation,
nor doth any thing in this poor world happen by chance, but accord­ing to his
divine Pleasure and Counsel, sin onely excep­ted; nor is any thing accidental
to him, though they seem so to us, for his wisdom hath ordained all things
from all eternity: And if a little Sparrow, or a hair of our Head have a share
in his Providence, consider then, how such an infinite Power, which is vested
with such an infinite wisdom and goodness, can possibly let any thing arrive
to any such creature, as for whom he died, which shall not be absolutely good
and necessary for him. For Jesus sake, Sir, be your self, or rather petition
to him, that in this urgent occasion you may be more than so: God make, and
keep you ever hap­py, or make you less miserable than I fear you are now
making your self. This is, and shall be the desires and prayer of, Sir,

Your cordial well-wisher, and very humble servant.

### 3.35. 35. A Tender of Service to a Mistriss.

Divine Lady,

YOu are the first to whom I ever became bound in the bonds of Love, and hold
it as well my du­ty as my interest, no longer to conceal how much I honor and
admire you. I had thoughts, Madam, di­vers times to acquaint you herewith
before, since it hath been my great happiness to be admitted into your fair
presence, but durst not take the confidence till now; if my affections have
been too powerful for my discretion, and so compelled me to commit an er­ror,
[[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=26) I doubt
not your goodness will excuse it, since it was purely out of a sincere zeal to
do you service; nor could I dissemble my ambition any longer. Let it suf­fice,
Dear Lady, that I am now a prisoner to your Beauty, and from the Bar of Love
do make it my suit, that you please to honor me with a favorable answer to
these Lines, that you may enable me to make a happy Reply, or otherwise such a
one as may be too late esteemed unhappy, as bearing the doleful tidings of his
fate, that vows to be

Yours, though in death.

### 3.36. The Answer. 36. A disdainful Lady to her Servant.

Sir,

I Received your amorous Epistle, and cannot, as I am a Woman, and a Christian,
but have so much charity as to pity, though I cannot love you, since it is a
duty I confess I conceive to be due to all persons either Sick or Lunatick:
but I confess my nature is of another constitution, for you are the first, to
my re­membrance, that I ever hated, which now at length I thought good to let
you know, because indeed I do not apprehend how you deserve my dissimulation;
Let it suffice, I shall study to revenge this insolency, but yet so, as not to
honor you with the knowledge of how, or wherein: And as for the felicity which
you think you have, in being able to make a Reply, either happy or unhappy,
you may choose whether it shall be made, or not: but if it comes to my hands,
it shall then be at my choice, whether to be burned, or read, for the sake of
a little laughter. But my advice is, that you spare the pains, for it will be
but lost labor upon

Your Friend, if you will be your own.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=26)

### 3.37. 37. A sick Lady to a Gentleman.

Sir,

THough I want strength to express my self so amply as I would, yet this may
serve to let you  [...]ee I do not forget you, though I am indisposed to
[...]hink of any: but there is no thanks due from you for this civility, since
I do it for my own advantage, for I always finde such a satisfaction in all
the respects which I pay you, as that I expect, if not an amend­ment, yet a
contentment at the least from the honor which I give my self of saying with
abundance of truth, that I am

Exceedingly yours.

### 3.38. The Answer. 38. A Gentleman to a sick Lady.

Madam,

IF I were able to express the Joy which I received from your late Letter, I am
confident you would not be ill pleased with mine; yet though the Letter was
most freely welcome, as being your Ambassador, I confess when its Errand was
delivered, whereby I understood the condition you were in, I could not forbear
some passionate incivilities to the poor Paper, but I do not despair of
obtaining your pardon for it; for, you ever profess to love kindness, and I am
very believing, that you cannot finde more in the heart of any creature than
mine. That I may conclude, you may in time be brought to think so, be pleased
to follow my Advice; be extream careful to preserve your self this Winter, for
the season will not easily assist you towards a speedy Recovery▪ but I hope
the prayers of all your friends will, and I want not the consolation of
believing that some use may be made of his, who is Madam,

Infinitely yours, to serve you.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=27)

### 3.39. 39. The Lover to his unbelieving Mistress.

Fairest Lady,

IT is my unhappiness to love, and not to be belie­ved, what assurance shall I
render to satisfie your credulity, if death or danger may convince you, but
your commands, and then let your experience be the Judge. Is there that wretch
that hath offended you, name him, and make me your scourge, or shall I combat
with some furious Lion, or try my strength against an angry Bear? These, or
what may seem more dreadful shall be eagerly performed, since for­tune must
needs favour those whom your love in­spires; let me but once obtain that, and
I shall fear nothing but a surfeit of Joy and Happiness, as being mortal, yet
Bright Goddess,

Your humble Votary.

### 3.40. The Answer. 40. The Lady to her Lover.

Dear Sir,

I Received your late Epistle, which was not with me before I wished it; but
give me leave to tell you, I do observe your affection to be but luke­warm▪
for (though I do not delight in great Titles, yet) I know it hath been usual,
and is still, for Lo­vers when they have an occasion to express their zeal for
a Lady, to give all their adornment [...] that the Art of Words or Memory can
adde to a deserving Beauty. This I say onely to inform you, that I can notifie
your neglect in this par­ticular, But I will conclude it was either your
bash­fulness, or else your subtelty to try my simplicity and love; But for the
future pray remove all doubts and assume no more a Counterfeit for liberty of
try­ing my patience, when you know I would pull out my own heart did it
entertain a thought of alterati­on; fear not me, but do you your self remember
[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=27) those
protestations you have so solemnly and devoutly made, and thereby enflamed my
affection. Let Ver­tue and constant Love be still your inseparable
Com­panions, so may you conclude, I shall esteem you my treasure, and will be
no less

Yours, to perpetuity.

### 3.41. 41. The Lover to his Mistress, having gained her affection.

Life of my Love.

BEing overjoyed for the great treasure I am lately blessed with, I could not
contain my self till I had wrote to thee, to assure thee once more of the
great felicity I enjoy since the happy Contract be­tween thy dear self, and
me; I never was really hap­py till now, I had before but a meer glance of
Pa­radise, but now an absolute possession; now all my joyes are become
acquainted with my sense, before I was onely made up of Fancies and Airy
imaginations; I had then but a glimps of those fair flowers, the Roses and
Lillies of thy cheeks, but am now happily arrived to the unimaginable pleasure
of gathering. My senses are much too narrow to entertain their bounteous
flowings, they have fed even to a surfeit, and I have nothing more to fear,
than my happi­ness, lest excess swell me till I burst: Then will Cupid be more
cruel than before, since when I was out sick of love, and dangers were not so
great as  [...]ow; But why do I talk of danger? I will fear no­  [...]hing
whilst I have thy love to guard me, for by the  [...]orce of that, I dare
promise my self not onely happi­  [...]ess and safety, but all the blessings
that can attend  [...] zealous Lover, as I have been and will be, while I
[...]ave power to be (my Dear)

Thine onely, and for ever.

[[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=28)

### 3.42. 42. A Gentleman to his Lady, upon his urgent occasions of taking, a
Iourney.

Honored and dear Lady,

HAd not Christianity tyed me to a stricter rule, I could even curse the
severity of my fate, since necessity compels me to be banished from you, and
consequ [...]ntly from my self; for let me go never so far distant, my heart
will be always in your cu­stody, and the thoughts of your dear Self, shall be
my onely consolation. But that I should be thus enjoyned to remove my person
from you, in whom consisteth all my comfort and delight, is no small grief to
me, especially considering the life I appre­hended in your favour, the Heaven
that I discovered in your Smiles, and all those Elizium Joys that a­dorned
your countenance; yet since it must be so, be assured, my Dear, Dear, I shall
not forget the Vows of my Devotion, and I will be proud to publish your
Vertues to the ignorant world, till I become com­pleatly happy in an
Experience of your Constancy; nor shall I move in any other Sphere than what
your influence doth govern, and will sooner languish to the worst of Deaths,
than love any but your Divine self. Thus my (onely Joy) leaving my heart in
your tuition, I onely beseech you to be tender of it, for its own, for yours,
or for my sake, and in expectation of my happy return, I rest

Your faithful humble servant.

### 3.43. The Answer. 43. A Lady to her Lover, upon his taking a Iourney.

Dear Sir,

I Would pour forth as many Curses on my fate as you can invent for yours, but
that I have an am­bition to be like you in all things, especially in what
[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=28) becomes a
Christian, and a Lover. But since, as you say, necessity doth compel you to
take a Journey, (and I dare not doubt the least account of your lips) I must
study to be content, and to exercise all that patience Heaven will be pleased
to afford my Pray­ers; and since you have honored me with the custody of so
great a charge as is your most noble Heart, be confident I shall cherish it as
the Apple of mine own Eye, and as a Hostage for my fidelity and your
secu­rity, I assign you mine, be equally careful of it, as you honor your
self, or me, and I shall be no less stu­di [...]us to declare your worth, than
to preserve my own fame, which never can be tainted while I remain, as I have
resolved,

Yours ever, in constancy and service.

### 3.44. 44. A crack't Virgin to her deceitful Friend, who hath forsook her
for the love of a Strumpet.

Base Man,

NOw you appear so foul, that nothing can be more monstrous; is this the fruit
of your Pro­mises, and Vows, was it for this that you so often swore you never
spoke to me without th [...] thoughts of a pure love, and ambition to be mine,
and that you never let fly an Oath in my presence, but when your heart was
enflamed by a fire of Vertue, and that in all your actions, worth was the
Load-stone that attract­ed your industry; how comes it then to pass, that you
forsake me, ruine my Reputation, and leave me to become the Map of Shame and
Ignominy; and not onely so, but with a wretch [...]d confidence glory in your
impiety, and think to wipe off all your  [...]njurious actions with a slight
or careless humor; and this reproach that is like to befal to you as well as
me, is occasioned through a lascivious love which you bear to an impud [...]nt
Woman; nay, a known [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=29) Strumpet, whose
eyes discover in sparkles the de­ceitfulness of her heart, and whose very
smiles are more ominous than the tears of a dissembling Cro­codile; for shame
consider, if not for my sake, for your own. What delight or conversation can
you enjoy in the company of a lude Whore, wo loves another as well and better
than she doth you, or one indeed that hath no real affection for any? I fear
the custome of your sinning, hath taken away the sense of your own good, and
you are grown deaf, and de­sperate, otherwise you durst not provoke the divine
Vengeance, or expose your self to Vertues Curs [...]s, and the scorn of all
good men, for the notorious in­juries you have done (perhaps to others but too
soon) to

Wicked Wretch,

Your friend, till you abused her.

### 3.45. 45. The Lady to her slandered Servant.

Sir,

WHen you were last with me, there passed some circumstance of affection
between us both, but having considered the great affair that we th [...]n had
under consultation, I must desire your par­don, if I crave leave to recal my
forward fondness, since my fortunes and my happiness lie at stake; not that I
do utterly determine to abandon all manner of good will for you; but onely
that little time may sa­tisfie me concerning some reports of you that have
lately reached my ears. Sir, I hope they are false, and in that confidence, I
gave neither credit nor countenance to the former, but till I may be convin
[...] they are so, 'Tis my request that you shew your love by abstaining from
any further visits to

Sir,

Your Friend and Servant.

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=29)

### 3.46. The Answer. 46. The slandered Lover to his Lady.

Most worthy Lady,

I Know not how to render you sufficient thanks for that Noble favour, so
glorious, and therefore like your self, neither to countenance my accuser, nor
condemn me till you had heard my answers; Ho­nour'd Lady, it is not unknown to
you, that I dare not do any thing of justice to you, and that I have been
ready, and will be so, to lay my life at the feet of your service, so far I am
from fastning a falshhood on your fair Honour, that the proudest he that durst
do it, shall know I will be ambitious to justifie you, and correct him; and
that I speak truth, there need no greater argument than my zeal for you, when
I would not allow of the least whispering against you, even then when you were
most unkinde to me; therefore Good Madam, continue your wonted worth, and
those good thoughts you once had of m [...], and be assured, if I cannot be so
happy as to thrive in your estimation, yet through a glory I have to be seen
in your service, I will never suffer any to traduce your fame, and if I cannot
obtain the Honour of be­ing your servant, I shall be happy in the Title of

Madam,

Your slave, or vassal.

### 3.47. 47. The Iealous Lover to his beloved.

Dear heart,

YOu cannot but understand the extream per­plexities that persecutes the whole
frame of my minde; it is occasioned through a cordial love, which I bare to
you, to you sweet Lady, why th [...]n will you be so severe to expose me to
the hazards of desperation, if you have any love, pity, or reason, give some
assurance, at least encouragement, that in time [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=30) I may be happy,
otherwise while I consider your ex­cellent Vertues, the incomparable
Endowments of the Divine Soul, I mistrust my own merits, and you thereby
become cruel in setting me upon the tor­ments of suspition; O think not that I
can retain the Idaea of your Beauty without the hopes of enjoy­ing you, or the
absolute ruine and desolation of my self: Dear Soul, it is not the frownings
of a Father, or Brother, that I value, but if you frown, or storm, or seem
angry, you shoot a dart into my bosom; since your sorrow is my suffering, and
your complaints are to me an Agony worse than death; therefore Divine Lady, be
like your self, vertuous, constant, and re­solved; give some life to my hopes,
remove my jea­lousie, that I may expect to call you mine, and be Master of my
own senses, that I may be convinced there shall not need any further
expostulation, since I discourse with an understanding Lady, and dare assure
the world there are Women in it of worth, vertue, and sincerity, that scorn to
be disloyal, as much as doth, My onely Joy,

Yours onely, to be commanded.

### 3.48. The Answer. 48. A Lady to her Iealous Lover.

Suspitious Sir,

WHat occasion have I given you to retain any evil or doubtful thoughts of my
love or mode­sty? it is true, and probably you have heard it, a Gen­tleman
lately was pleased to bestow a visit on me, nor could I do less than afford
him a civil salutation. Sir, I am not ignorant of the severity of the Italians
exer­cise, but we are now in England, where the practice of humanity acquaints
us with the true use of con­versation; I know too, that Love is always
season­ed with a smack of Jealousie, however your own wis­dom, [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=30) and the
confidence I thought you had of me,  [...]ight inform you, that an uncorrupted
heart is Can­  [...]on proof against temptations as well as slanders: But to
satisfie you, if you dare rely on my word, here passed not a Syllable between
us, which a Di­vine, or you your self might not have heard, other­wise be
confident, if there had been no limits to the bands of respecting you, I
should yet have had a re­gard to my own credit, and neither have given ear to
immodest parley, or any undecent carriage. Be from henceforth confident of my
Loyalty, for in a little time it shall convince you, that I love you truly,
and with so sincere a resolution, as to be, Sir,

Yours, not to live without you.

### 3.49. 49. Civilities from one Lady to another.

Dear Madam,

MY Ambition is still to continue in your favor, yet that may prove as
importunate as it is un­just, because I never could deserve it, yet I have no
power to frustrate the effect of that whereof you war­rant the Cause which
occasions my admiring of your worth. And since you have been pleased to assure
me of your friendship, and your favour, I can do no less than offer my
service, which shall ever be in readiness to attend your Commands: I have had
some young Gallants with me of late, who promise more Visits, and have sent
some Complements; by the next I hope to be better furnished with somewhat new,
to accom­pany what I have so often said, and shall perpetually, that I am,
Madam,

Yours, wholly at your Command.

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=31)

### 3.50. 50. A Gentlemans request (for a sum of Money) to his Friend:

Sir,

ACcuse me not for my Ambition to be still in your favour, since by that I
freely beg what I would not ask, nor care to receive from any body whom I do
not onely affect, but extreamly honour; The urgency of my occasions have
prevailed with me, to send this messenger to you for the sum of, &c. onely for
one moneths time, at the expiration of which, you shall be certainly paid.
Sir, you may well wonder, how I that deserved so little, can so con
[...]i­dently desire so much; but my unwillingness to for­feit my word with
one Friend, hath put me to en­gage it to another. This suit if you will please
to grant, you will infinitely oblige me, however if you deny me, I should be
ungrate [...]ul and unworthy should I disown those engagements which have
otherwise made me sufficiently

Your Debtor, and your Servant.

### 3.51. 51. A Lady to a Gentleman, on his Recovery from a Fit of Sickness.

Noble Sir,

BY your favour, which is a great one, I have met with the good News I hoped
for; I mean your Recovery from those dangers your late Sickness was said to
threaten. I had the unhappy intelligence from one whom I knew to be just in
his reports, and I was therefore bound in Honour as well as Consci­ence to
believe him: But now you are well, I am safe, and not in so much danger of
being frighted by the mis-reports of others. Here are now so many [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=31) about me, and
they cha [...]ting at all once, that I can with difficulty write one word of
sense, however my heart like a Carryers horse, trots in the old path and pace,
and cannot be distracted from resolving, nor my hand from expressing that I
am, and shall be ever

Your very Friend, and Servant.

### 3.52. 52. The Recovered Gentleman, to the afore­said Lady.

Madam,

MY indisposition hath been double, the want of health and your good company,
which hath been most particularly desired; since my inclination invites me to
take a pleasure in your Society, your Letter was extreamly welcome, you may
believe me, Madam, for you cannot but know with what respect I have
continually adored your favours, in recom­pence for all I have received, and
what I may not de­spair to hope for, I will serve you Madam, if I can not
onely from one end of the world to the other, but from this very day, to the
last of my life, and shall de­fie all your commands, if they shall dare to
exceed my inclination and resolution to obey. I will not crave your pardon for
not writing till now, since the King, if he will be just, cannot punish me for
not performing impossibilities; nor will you, I know, be so unmerciful now I
want the use of my own hand, to deny me an­other mans. But though I have been
his Debtor for it hitherto, I will make hard shift to subscribe my self now,
and ever, Madam,

Your obsequious Servant.

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=32)

### 3.53. 53. The Lover to his Mistriss, upon his fear of her entertaining a
new Servant.

Fairest Lady,

WHat can there be to compose an accomplish­ed minde, that you want? Beauty,
Generosi­ty, a Noble Birth, solid Wisdom, affable Demeanor, insomuch Lady,
that you are truely the Center where all the Graces meet, and you do not onely
approach absolute Perfection, but enjoyn all others to a high and fervent
Observation; nor can I boast of any respects I do you, since your Vertues
command more than I am able to wish, and it is my glory, and I e­steem it the
pride of my life to justifie my souls de­sire to serve you, and an honour to
my Bondage, that I may be accepted for your slave. Command me then most
Excellent Lady, but withal remember that your Commands be love; for without
love I can have no life, nor do I value death so I may bear your love with me
to the grave; Yet, my Dearest Lady, let me not be mistook, though I am happy
in being your subject, yet, like a Soveraign Prince, I cannot endure a
Competitor; The feud being much alike between Rivals for Love, and those for
Kingdoms; I have more of man in me, to brook anothers Claim, especially any
presumptuous hand to seize my right. Let me beseech you then, for Humanity
sake, and Vertues, for yours and mine, to use a circumspection, lest you
betray your Vertue to Corruption, or my small stock of Valour to irrecoverable
dangers. For be assured, if my hopes are frustrated either by your will, or
ignorance, I will defie the world, you, all women for your sake, and my self;
but if any daring Arm shall stretch it self out in violence to your Ho­nor, I
will in duty force it to retire, or make it pe­rish in the extension, and be
extreamly happy if my best bloud may be expended in the service, since I
[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=32) have
vowed to entertain the Resolution of being, Madam,

Nons but yours, and Yours till death.

### 3.54. 54. A Fair young Virgin, to an old Rich Miser, whom her Guardian did
design should Wed her.

Honorable Sir,

FOr I must ever acknowledge the truth of that old Proverb, that says Age is
honorable; for all that, give me leave to tell you, though I am under the
tui­tion of another, yet I am Mistriss of my own affecti­ons; and in truth,
neither your wisdom, your gravi­ty, no nor your riches can charm me to affect
you; Sir, be so much your self as to desist from your suit to me; be in
charity with the world, and in love with Heaven; build Hospitals, that you may
merit the prayers of the poor, and spend not your precious time in dotage upon
a Woman; for to be plain with you, I will sooner wed my self to a Nunnery, or
some loath­som Goal, than become your Bed-fellow, and shall ever have a
greater estimation for a Wiseman in Rags, than a Fool in his Richest
Trappings; if you visit me, or send to me any more, I shall conclude you
trouble­som and frantick; be advised then, since you know the minde and
resolution of, Sir,

Yours in the way of Friendship.

### 3.55. 55. The Ingratiating Gentleman to his angry Mistriss.

Excellent Lady,

I Beseech you to consider, I cannot live unless you love, then be so merciful
as to save what your frowns are able to destroy; if you imagine my Hus­bandry
will be pro [...]use, your love will teach me to be frugal: Do you mistrust
Incontinency? love will quench those flames; Do you fear I may be guilty of
[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=33)
extravagancies, love will teach me to be solid; Are you afraid of want? love
is content with a little, and stu­dies things that are impossible, it
overcomes all doubts and intricacies, and facilitates things that are most
dif­ficult. Be not then so credulous to the whispers of Calumniators, though
these suggestions are buzzed into your ears, yet consider whether there be any
ground for such like Jealousies, or the ends of those that raise them, onely
to poison my Reputation and my Happiness; let my honest and real Assertions be
weigh­ed in the ballance of your serene Judgement, that I may be admitted into
your favour, or else know my doom, and die quickly, that Fame may do me so
much honor and justice, as to Record me, Divine Lady,

Your abused Martyr.

### 3.56. 56. A Gentleman of good Birth, but small Fortune, to a worthy Lady,
after she had given a d [...]ial.

Worthily Honored Lady,

HAd I not apprehended some small spark of en­couragement, as it seemed to
issue from your gracious acceptance of my affections, I had certainly
[...]orborn to have put you to this second trouble, or my self to a fresh
presumption, as knowing such Divine Stars of Beauty are to be beheld with more
than an ordinary Veneration. Excellent Lady, I humbly beg of you, nor to
reflect upon my Confidence, nor star­tle me with my inequality of Birth, lest
the sense of losing you, send me to Hell with terror. My pre­sumption hath
this Apology, it is more ease to reach to the lofty Bough, than to stoop to
the humble straw; and when a man attempts things Noble, though he fail in his
designs, it is a glory to under­take them. And though, Madam, you are truly
great as well as good; yet Histories will tell you, there have [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=33) been Queens, and
Persons of highest Honor have cast their smiles on such whose accomplis
[...]ments might claim respect. For my own part, I may and dare say it without
ostentation, my Birth is not base nor mean, and my affection nobly loyal: Oh
let not my fears sug­gest to me that some other by an intrusion will deprive
me of my Souls Treasure, your love, a Happiness that I would purchase with any
thing more dear than liber­ty or life; Oh be not then so severe as to say,
Honor forbids you to affect me, though you could like my person, there is
death in every accent of such a sound; But if you do resolve for a servant
more meritorious than my self, you will ease my torments by giving me to
understand so much, since I intend not to trouble you with any more lines, but
resolutely to fall, Ce­lestial Lady,

A Sacrifice to Love, and you.

### 3.57. 57. A Lover to his Mistriss, who had lately entertain­ed another
Servant to her bosom, and her bed.

Madam,

I Am now arrived to that pitch of Learning, as to understand the Vanity of
your Se [...], you have in­comparably well proved, that though men can put a
bridle into the nostrils of wilde Beasts, out-do the Craft of Serpents, and
dive into the most hidden se­crets of Nature, yet the industrious thing called
Wo­man can out-do him, and confound his noble under­standing. From henceforth
therefore I will shun your Sex as the infectious poison of a Pestilence; Now
could I curse my Credulity, my self, and all Women for your sake; was I not
fore-warned by the example of a wicked Helen, that occasioned the deso­lation
of famous Troy, by that of Eryphile, Cleopatra, Messelia, Panthea, Rhodopis,
and many others? but why [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=34) should I trouble
my brain to sum up Examples, when each woman is a Plague her self to all but
those Adul­terous Lechers that bear Hot-houses in their bodies, and Stoves in
their boyling blouds. I perceive my love was not sufficiently immodest for
you, I have been too cold in my Amours, therefore it is you slight me, and
entertain some Monster of a more able back; whom (not unlikely) your roving
wanton eyes have discover­ed from your window to bear some heavy weight, and
not shrink his well-made Joynts under his ponderous load; may you enjoy him,
but may you receive the rewards due to your Adultery and Perjury; for be
assured Heaven hath continual supplies of Vengeance for such abominable
offenders; And that it will be just to you, and your deserts, is not onely the
desire, but the belief of

Your most abused Friend.

### 3.58. The Answer. 58. The Lady to her Lover, in defence of her own
Innocency.

Vnkinde Sir,

I Do not a little wonder at the frenzie of your crackt brain, since you dare
thus confidently to call my love and modesty in question, and onely for the
civil Entertainment which in honor I was obliged to afford a Friend; whence
come all those dreadful and satyrical Expressions that you imagine are now too
good for one that but lately you pretended to love entirely, and spared not
Vows and Imprecations to create a credulity in me? Certainly the Furies were
your Dictators when you wrote; I will grant you that a Lover may be allowed to
be a little jealous, it is but the overflowings of his affection, but I hold
it not sit he would be mad, ranging mad, as I fear you are. Sir, believe me,
your intelligence is false, and [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=34) innocency can
with safety stand all the Assaults of a slanderous Tongue: P [...]ay recollect
your thoughts, and punish my Accuser, that my worth may not lie longer under
the burthen of a Calumny: Be less suspi­cious, and assure your self I shall be
ever loyal, though now I write in passion, so far I dare engage, since I
al­ready finde it is my chief content and happiness to be thought worthy of
being, Sir,

Yours, though hugely wronged.

### 3.59. 59. A Lady to him whom she affects.

Sir,

I Should have been happy if Heaven had given me merits to deserve your
affections, since I hold it no great difficulty to afford you mine: But that
we may discourse with a little freedom, I will borrow so much time from my
other Affairs, as to meet you at, &c. onely I shall give you this Caution,
that as I am a Virgin, you will shew your self so far a Gentleman as not to
offer any thing that may savour of incivility; pardon me, that I lay such an
Injunction on you, it is not that I question you are otherwise Noble, but
onely what is commonly expected from a Maiden, that hath a respect to her own
modesty and credit, and may therefore very well become, Sir,

Your Friend and Servant.

### 3.60. The Answer. 60. A Lover to his Amorous Lady.

Dear Madam,

I Do so well understand my respects to you, that (pardon my boldness if I say)
your care was some­what needless. Lady, it is you that I adore, and can you
then imagine I would injure you, you that I would gladly make my own, and be
proud of such a Pur­chase? Again, my Birth is not so base, as to tyrannize
[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=35) over
Ladies, especially you, the best of Ladies; when the Skie puts on her
bespangled Garments, th [...] glittering Stars, I will expect you with all the
reve­rence and submission due to your noble Merits, from, Divine Lady,

Yours, if you think me worthy.

### 3.61. 61. The Affected Lover to his Mistriss.

Glorious Lady,

WE read and understand by the industrious help of History, how stones have
danced after Am­phion to the Theban Walls, that the Mountainous Ossa, and the
lofty Pa [...]chaya likewise danced to the Odris­sion Lyre, that Dolphins
forsook their wilde Natures, when they heard the melody of Arions Harp,
hum­bling their backs of scales, to bear him from the vio­lence of Neptune,
and his angry waves. It is the [...] be­neath a wonder, if the world stand
amazed at your voice; should the fierce Tyger, or the raging Boar but hear you
speak, they would change their unbridled natures into the modesty of devout
Adorers: One accent from your delicate and incomparable lips, are sufficient
to give life to a dying man, and to revive into Childe-hood the chil and cold
clods of Age. One smile of yours can work more miracles, than Esons Experience
found in Medeas Bath. How happy am I then in your love! I am nothing beneath
the great Monarch of the greatest Empire, and may I fall from all Fortunes, to
my absolute ruine, when I forget to be, Most Honored Lady,

Your Beauties slave.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=35)

### 3.62. The Answer. 62. A Lady to her Affected Lover.

My Happiness and Ioy,

YOur large Commendations, and liberal Expressi­ons towards me, do certainly
assure me that your affection to me is real; yet though I cannot requi [...]e
your courtesies with a reprehension, I think I ought in justice to give you
this Cautionary Information, that though you may think as you say, others may
be of another minde; and some Critick may chance to finde those faults in your
Rhetorick, which you that see with the Multiplying-glass of Love cannot
perceive; Therefore lest you forfeit your wisdom, forbear these Hyperbolies
hereafter, since the reciprocal tryals that have passed between us, do
sufficiently declare the mutual coherency of our affections: Let me implore
you to be more reserved in this point, if you respect my love, or me, for what
need such lofty lines, that sa­vour so much of flattery, when you know I hyve
made it my resolution to be

Yours, and onely yours.

### 3.63. 63. A Lady to her despairing Lover, who had deserted his suit at the
first Repulse.

Sir,

I Have expected either to have seen or heard farther from you, but I perceive
you are but a raw Soul­dier, and but lately engaged under Cupids banner,
o­therwise you would not have given over the Skir­mish for a small Repulse;
For though I can afford you a room in my heart, and all th [...] love that is
there is for you and your worth, yet you might well tax me with lenity, or
suppose me extream forward, should I yield at the first summous, without
having the least experience either of your love, or loyalty; But be confident
(for I dare write more than I durst speak, [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=36) since this Paper
cannot blu [...]h, though I may) I have had a very high respect and honor for
you, since the first moment that made me happy with your presence; I suppose a
word to the wise may be sufficient, if you have a kindness for me, you
perceive I am ready to go out of the road of a Maidens modesty, onely to meet
with you: Be not so much like your Sex, as to slight me, now you have that
thrown upon you, which with so much ardency you seemed to court before; for I
can judge of Justice as well as Love: but if you will favor me with your
company, or at least a line or two, you will not onely give me abundance of
satisfaction, but engage me to be Sir,

Yours for ever.

### 3.64. 64. A Gentleman to a fair Lady, whom he acciden­tally discovered at
a Window.

Lovely Lady,

JUstice and Honor kiss your Hands, and so far plead my Cause as to tell you,
you are obliged to shew me favor, since for your sake I have undergone the
vehement tortures of an expecting Lover, but now being grown impatient, I have
taken a resolution to be rather importunate than bashful; for my nature is too
high to suffer me to stoop to, or flie from any at­tempt that hath the
countenance of what is Noble: Fairest Lady, my Ambition is to visit you, if my
love may prevail with you to afford me so great an honor, and I question not
(since Heaven delights to be lo­ved, and you like one of its Inhabitants
journeyed here for a small space, appear Angelical) but you will be in
condition as in beauty; For if the Divinity of your Person lay a charm upon my
senses, it is but Ju­stice that you endeavor to recover me before my
Di­stemper render▪ me incapable of any remedy; how­ever [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=36) it shall be my
glory, if I cannot live your ser­vant, that I can die, Lovely Creature,

Your Devout Admirer.

### 3.65. 65. A sick Lady to her Lover, enjoyning him to forbear his Visits,
she being infected with the Small-Fox, or some other Malignant Distemper.

Sir,

I Am now become a Prisoner to my Chamber, and though it were charity in you to
bestow your Visits, yet my own sense of justice informs me I ought to
con­tinue close, since that fate that hath befallen me, may else be so
spightful as to seize on you: it is a Distem­per that hath used a violence to
my whole body, and hath not spared my face; lest therefore I become your
wonder, I conjure you by all the love you have, or ever had for me, to absent
your self for some time, till you may see me with more safety and convenience;
for if you should venture your person, now mine is in some danger▪ my grief
would be augmented, since I know it is more wisdom to hazard the one half of
my Estate, than all, and if I must lose my self, I would not have Death to be
so triumphant as to possess my second self, and to glory in his Conquests so
far as to make me a Bankrupt: You will do well to let me hear from you, at
least send your Prayers in my behalf to the Heavenly Throne, for so it becomes
a Christian and a Friend, and you will therein do justice to your self, and
Sir,

> Yours in sickness, or in health.

### 3.66. 66. The fearful Lover, to his supposed un­constant Mistriss.

Madam,

IT is now most apparent to me, that there is no credit to be given to a Woman,
have not you and I [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=37) confirmed so
strong a League of Love and Friend­ship as was possible to be done, yet you
can forget all your Promises, your Vows, and sober Protestations, as if they
were but as so much winde, and might be broken as soon as made. This you have
most perfidi­ously done, and under the pretence of fear that your Misfortunes
are drawing nigh, as if you had discreti­on enough to chalk to your self the
way to your Feli­city, or as if you held a Correspondence with Wi­zards that
could divine what the effects of our loves should be; if I must be slighted
now at last, when I thought to be most happy, yet at least pray let me not be
forgotten, that you may justly say you were once loved by a real Friend, and
if it be my Misfor­tune to be deprived of you, may you meet with one whose
affections may be sincere as mine, that would be, Madam,

Yours, if you please.

### 3.67. The Answer. 67. A Lady to her fearful Lover.

Worthy Sir,

YOur downright railing against our Sex, seems to me, onely as the heat of your
passion, which I will favour with the construction of your love. But I cannot
but extreamly admire what Devil it should be should enflame you with so much
fear and Jea­lousie: I Remember all those Vows and Protestations that passed
between us, and you shall know, I dare not to be so wicked as to tempt Heaven
and Venge­ance, so as to break my least promise to any soul alive, especially
with you; Be therefore wise, and more resolved, you might have forborn your
taint­ing language of my chalking out a way to my felici­ties, or holding a
correspondence with Witches, or of Taxing me point blank with perfidiousness
be­fore [[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=37)
you heard my answer; such usage would tempt many a Young Maiden to scorn and
forger love: when I see you next we may discourse farther on this Sub­ject;
tell then and ever be confident, I am

Yours, if you think fit.

### 3.68. 68. A Wife to her Extavagant Husband.

Vain and Miserable man,

CAnst thou open thy eyes and not fear lest every one that sees thee should
revenge those Adulte­ries and lascivious actions of thine, wherewith thou hast
brought upon thee the Curses of a chaste Wife, with her dear and innocent
Babes? doth not thy Conscience tell thee there is an everlasting Law-giver
fits in triumph against the day of Vengeance, to Judge such perverie sinners
as thee? Or dost, thou imagine that those strict duties (commanded from the
beginning) were but matters of Policy, or that position of Man and Wife being
one flesh, was meerly breath and Exhalation? surely it is so esteemed by
Atheists and prophane Livers, but I fear to the Eter­nal horror of thy Soul,
thou wilt  [...]oar in the pit of everlasting perdition, from whence it is
difficult to get Redemption; Therefore be no more foolish, but call to minde
how thou hast mispended thy most pre­cious time, endeavour to redeem it, and
open the eyes of thy understanding; that thou mayest repent, and sin no more,
lest a worse th [...]ng happen unto thee; Consider the lips of a whore are
sweet as Ho­ney to the taste of fools, but in her heart is the sting of
Scorpions; yea, the Poyson of Aspes lie under her lips; wilt thou then
adventure the stinging, when there is no Cataplasm for the sore? wilt thou
forget the Vertuous Wife of thy bosome, for a Strumpet that is not onely
disloyal, but impudent? darest thou de­  [...]pise thy Children, those gifts
of the Almighty Pro­vidence, [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=38) resembling Olive
Branches about thy Table, those Buds of the Divine Blessings promised to the
good man; wilt thou run and wallow in the loathsom sink of Lust, and carnal
Bruitality? thou that mayest trace the fair Walks of Contentment with honest
and chaste Embracings! Oh, be more advised, Let the Contract of your Nuptial
Vows prevail with thee, I conjure thee return to the pleasant Springs of our
A­mity, that I may wash thee clean again with the tears and kisses of a loving
Wife, that thou mayest see thy children flourish, and that I may no longer be
as my present condition renders me,

Thy sorrowful and miserable Wife.

### 3.69. The Answer. 69. A Lover to his Distempered Lady.

My Ioy,

YOu are now more cruel in your Sickness, than I ever found you in your Health,
it was a severe Command you sent to me; what though you are sick, if I do not
see you, I shall be so too, and perhaps may go out of the world before you: I
understand your indisposition to be great, and that your Disease hath abused
you to your face, but I hope you understand me so well, as to conclude my love
doth not consist in outward forms, I have reason to command my pas­sion, and
by that I am perswaded it was a Vertuous Cassandra, not a Fair Hellen that I
courted, a spirit that was truely noble, not the thin skin of a fair fea­ture;
however I am confident the beauty of your Person, as well as that of your
Minde, cannot be sub­ject to a ruine by any sinister Accident: Time that
undertakes to wrestle with all things mortal, may give it a trip hereafter,
and then our souls shall enjoy a blissful Union to Eternity: Dear Soul, recal
your Mandate, and give me leave to be happy once [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=38) more, for till I
see you, I am in continual pain, how­ever I have this consolation, that I can
be

Yours languishing.

### 3.70. 70. A Lady to her Servant, that for some private reasons concealed
his Birth and Fortunes.

Honored Sir,

MY Ambition hath been of so long a growth, that now it is become too big to be
conceal­ed; therefore I beseech you, if you have any respect for a young Lady,
satisfie my request, which is onely that I may better know you, and be better
known to you. You seem to be a Gentleman every way com­pleat, if I may receive
your Character, though from your own mouth, I shall believe it as an Oracle,
for I perswade my self you are truely Noble; if your in­tentions are as I have
reason to believe, and that you bear any kindness towards me, you will not
deny this reasonable civility; nor can it be thought discretion, but rather a
strange extravagancy in me, to receive your affections, or to pledge my own,
unless I can have  [...]ome account of your worth, more than what I have
[...]ead in your visage, which I confess is sufficient (if our  [...]onditions
may correspond) to entitle me, Sir,

Yours, as you shall please.

### 3.71. 71. The absent Lover, to his supposed uncon­stant Mistriss.

Madam,

I Dare not rashly condemn you, but pardon my love, if I take upon me to inform
and to advise  [...]u; There are those that whisper strange things
[...]ncerning you, as that you afford your self more li­  [...]rty than is
consistant with the modes [...]y of your  [...]; and that at unseasonable
times you have been [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=39) seen to
accompany such persons, whose conversation is sufficient to render you weak
and scandalous: I know, Madam, report is commonly a Tatler and a Li­ar, nor
dare I entertain a lose thought of one whom I so dearly love, I cannot think
my self lost to your Me­mory, but my fears make me apt to hearken to any
thing, wherein there is any use made of your name  [...] impute it as I do, to
my distraction, not your defects, but withal be so circumspect, that the
mouths of slan­derous people may be stopped, that envy it self may by seeing
your Vertuous disposition, arrive to the same happiness that I enjoy, which
is, to love and admire you, which I shall ever do while you have vertue, or I
have power to be

Yours.

### 3.72. 72. A Gentlemans advice to his Mistriss, how she should blinde the
eyes of her watchful friends.

My Lifes life,

I Perceive thy Guardian, who is no Friend of mine [...] doth not onely watch
me, and all my words an [...] actions, but hath his Emissaries to do the like,
an [...] there are those that do assure me, the Servants an [...] charged to
slip behinde the Hangings, and to watc [...] who they are that shall visit
thee; my advice there [...]fore is, that always in his presence we seem as
strangers and counterfeit our looks, that we may thereby per [...]haps allay
the heat of his Jealousie, but remember when thou seest my brow full of
frowns, as if I had resolution to be angry, it is but a Copy of my coun
[...]tenance, and that originally I am as I shall be ever  [...] happy, and
therefore thy most pleasant friend, belie [...] it for a play, not a truth,
and if thou dost but act t [...] part as well as I, it shall not be long ere
Hymen sha [...] draw the Curtain, and discover to all the world, th [...] in
spight of either their care or envy, thou art min [...] [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=39) in the interim
be assured, I shall in Love and Loyalty continue as an unmoved Rock,

My dearest Dear,

thy affectionate Servitor.

### 3.73. 73. A Gentleman to his new Mistress, upon his re­linquishing an old
one.

Lovely Lady,

HAving lately had the happiness to see you, I am now withdrawn from my designs
of marrying with another, I cannot deny but some treaty was had concerning
that affair with, &c. but your excellent beauty hath put a stop to my career,
and hath made me ambitious of meriting your favour, and that you may not think
me wavering, since I have left one that I might finde a better; be assured,
Madam, I will never enter into the bonds of Matrimony with any but your
incomparable self. I had not perhaps took this pre­sumption upon me, if I had
not had some encourage­ments, or if I had not at least fancied as much, when I
was lately where you were. I beseech you, Dear Lady, pardon this rudeness, and
give me the oppor­tunity to wait upon you, that I may verbally and really give
you a farther testimony of the love and honour I  [...]ave had for you, since
I made it my resolution to live and die

Yours.

### 3.74. 74. A Captious Lover to his Vertuous Lady.

Mistress, &c.

I Did perswade my self that you were absolutely re­solved to be mine, and that
no perswasions or al­  [...]urements could prevail with you to vary from your
[...]orm [...]r thoughts, but I now finde you are as change­  [...]ble as your
Sex, and it is easier to hold a slippery  [...]el by the tail, than to finde a
Woman that is true and  [...]onstant. Had I given you any occasion, you might
[...]ave had some pretence for your frequenting the com­pany of the young
Gallant, or admitting him into [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=40) your Society,
but my affections have been unspotted, and never had so much as a small flaw,
or mote in them till now. Now, that you like an unjust, and wanton, if not
lascivious piece of Vanity, have given occasion to no small number that
observed your be­haviour, to talk and besmear that fair reputation that you
before enjoyed, which was the main motive that spurred me on to conclude our
Contract. And since that time I have took you to be mine, and therefore may
with the more freedom reprove you, and advise you. I shall now say no more,
but expect you should satisfie my disturbed thoughts, by giving me an ac­count
of what passed between you, and then hoping you will be more reserved for the
future, you may still conclude me as bfeore,

Your affectionate real Friend.

### 3.75. The Answer. 75. A Vertuous Lady to her Captious Lover.

Sir,

I Am apt to believe it for a certain truth, that Cupi [...] and Iealousie are
inseparable Companions, and tru [...] love is oftentimes mixed with suspitious
fears, but  [...] is my wonder, that you who are a man of reaso [...] should
so flatly condemn me before you hear what m [...] offence hath been. Sir, give
me leave to tell you, have now a fair occasion to mistrust your demean [...]
hereafter. The Gentleman that was in my compa [...] deserves rather your
acknowledgements for his nob [...] deportment, than your extravagant censure:
but pe [...]haps you will absolutely conclude me idle, for bei [...] so much
as seen with any man, since I was design to be yours onely, however you may do
me the  [...]stice to consider there were others of my Sex  [...] me, nor had
I been in his company, had not the i [...]portunate intreaties of the rest
prevailed with  [...] [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=40) Besides, though
I am in election to be your wife, I hope you do not intend to make me your
Slave, but will  [...]llow me a reasonable conversation with persons a­bove
the reach of a Calumny; I beseech you Sir, be  [...]atisfied with this
account, and take this for a certain  [...]ruth, I will hence forward forget
the hopes of being a  [...]ride, before I will cast you into such another hell
of  [...]ormenting Jealousies, but shall study to render my  [...]elf as shall
become, Sir,

Yours, if it may be.

### 3.76. 76. A Lover in Commendation of his Mistriss.

My Bliss,

I Was sufficiently amazed when I beheld your per­son, and the beauty of your
outward shape, inso­much that I concluded Nature de [...]igned you for her
Store-house, wherein all her Rarities and Novelties were dispersed and
intrusted; I looked, and as I looked, I admired, but having afterwards
attained to under­  [...]and the vertues of your minde, I could not then but
[...]early perceive what a rich treasure of precious Jewels were inclosed
within the fair Casket. Since which  [...]ime, I have been proud of mine own
judgement, and think the better of my self for fixing upon so glorious  [...]
object. This is not flattery, but justice; and as you have set my affections
on a flame, it is as just that you should study some way for satisfaction,
since I am  [...] thought, word, and deed,

Madam,

yours, wholly at your devotion.

### 3.77. 77. A Ladies thanks to a Gentleman for a civility lately received.

Worthy Sir,

I Should be a stranger to Worth and Honour, should I be so far unacquainted
with the Generosity of our Nature, as not to understand it to be truly Noble
[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=41) in all
things, it studies to do courtesies, and hates to receive acknowledgements,
yet I must be so upright to my self, as to own your late civility for a most
noble favor, which I confess I received with some kinde of amazement, as being
my self so much undeserving; and lest my services should be beneath my wishes,
if I can have your acceptance, my endeavors cannot be unrewarded, for that
alone will render them con [...]iderable; And if I can be happy in any thing,
it must be in proclaiming to the world how much I am, Noble Sir,

Your Honorer, and most humble Servant.

### 3.78. 78. A Gentleman to a sick Lady.

Madam,

I Am so happy as to sympathize with you in your want of Health, my minde
assures me, you cannot be distempered by any bold Disease, but I must be so
too, you have this evidence for it, since I have had an extream fit of
discontentment from the time I last saw you: Now I am somewhat amended, my
indis­position is a little qualified, which gives me encou­ragement to hope,
as I do desire, that your condition is the same, otherwise, rather than you
should want a Companion in your misery, I would choose to be ill again; That I
may therefore be fore-warned of my own Misfortunes, be pleased I bes [...]ech
you to let me understand how you do, and withal make me happy by receiving
some Commands from you, since it is the glory of my life to appear, Madam,

Yours, in all occasions.

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=41)

### 3.79. The Answer. 79. A sick Lady to a Gentleman.

Noble Sir,

MY distemper leaves me, but all in vain, since I cannot be throughly well till
I see that you are so, I could once willingly have dyed, because I cannot live
to requite your kindness: but now I begin to be past all hope of dying, for
death came towards me so fast, that the very joy thereof, hath wrought in me a
recovery. Sir, my health consists onely in the ability which I hope suddenly
to have, that I may visit you; since you will not be so favorable as to
prevent me by coming hither, but whether to come to me, or I to you, I hope
you will not deny me the honor to own what I have hitherto profest, to be
still, what I was be­fore, and will continue, Sir,

Yours, to serve and honor you.

### 3.80. 80. A Husband to his Lasc [...]vious Wife.

Wicked and wretched Woman,

HAst thou forgot all goodness, that thou da [...]est lift up thy adulterous
eyes to behold the Chri­stal light? Hast thou no sense of thy own filthy
de­formity? Dost thou not know the world brands thee for a Whore, a notorious
Strumpet? Art thou not sensible how thou hast made me become a scorn and by-
word to all that know me? Not that the cre­dit of an honest man can be dashed
by the infidelity of a Strumpet: but so it is, that the corruption of the
times have created a custom, to set the Wives sins upon the Husbands forehead;
thy children are either hated or pityed by all, and I my self dare not look
upon them, lest I permit my fears to whisper to me  [...]hy Whoredoms, and
their Bastardy. Our Relations,  [...]nd those that were formerly our bosom
Friends, do  [...]ow forsake us, crying, they will not accompany [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=42) themselves with
such as belong to the house of shame, or that tread the paths of incontinency,
consider these things and  [...]epent, lest thy impenitency do farther
pro­voke Divine Justice, and Heaven pour forth Venge­ance as a reward for all
thy impieties, and withal re­member, this is the advice of, Monstrous Woman,

Thy sad, and much injured Husband.

### 3.81. 81. A Gentleman to his Friend, returning thanks for sending him a
Book.

Worthily Honored Sir,

I Would have rejoyced to have had an opportunity to serve you before you sent
me that ingenious Piece, Entituled, The Lives of the Statesmen and Fa­vorites
of England since the Reformation: But I am now bound to make it the business
of my life to render for all an humble and hearty acknowledgement, both for
your own sake, and for the Gifts; for though nothing could be unwelcome to me
that you should send, yet I know not what could have been more welcome,
ex­cept your self, who I know not how to requite, but must proclaim you a
Noble Friend, and a charitable Gentleman, and shall multiply my wishes for
your prosperity, since you have without merit of mine, bound me for ever, Sir,

Your thankful Servant.

### 3.82. 82. A Gentlemans request to his Friend for a sum of Money.

Sir,

LEt me not be held no Friend, because I send to borrow money, I had rather
want that, than lose your love; but Sir, if you shall think fit to par­don my
boldness, I desire your patience so far, as to measure the length of your
Purse-strings, since a pre­sent and urgent occasion puts me on this strange
ad­venture: [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=42) The sum is but
five pounds, which shall be paid within a moneth, if you dare take my credit;
for the assurance, and for interest you shall have my thankful
acknowledgements. Thus not doubting of your civility in this case, I rest as
ever,

Your Friend and Servant.

### 3.83. The Answer, 83. A Gentleman to his Friend that sent to bor­row
Money.

Sir,

OUr Friendship would be held by a slender thread if a five pound weight could
snap it. I have not thought fit to pardon any bolddess, but do esteem my self
happy in that I have a Purse or strings to serve you, your credit is
sufficient, and therefore I have sent you the sum required, and shall expect
no other interest, than the like courtesie (if you think it one) when you
shall be troubled by

Your hearty real Friend.

### 3.84. 84. A Lover to his Mistriss.

Bright Lady,

I Am now in love with my own eyes, and wit, for were not the first exceeding
good, they could not endure the lustre of your Beauty, and I am apt to believe
the latter may be sharp, since it hath so exact a Character of your worth. Be
more just to your self and me, than to think I flatter you, look into your
self, and then you will wrong neither, and when you finde I have done you
right, call not my affection in question for making the discovery, since it is
my duty to serve you and truth in all things honorable; But if by commending
my own services, I am so presumptuous as to exceed your pleasure, let your
pity seal my pardon, since my default was onely the [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=43) effect of love,
and I shall doubly be engaged to be Madam,

Yours now, and ever.

### 3.85. The Answer. 85. A Lady to her Lover.

Sir,

YOu do well to love your own eyes, and wit, and I will own the first to be
good, and the latter sharp, but if they both w [...]nt together as you place
them, your brains might be on the out-side of your head, and then if you prove
mistaken, blame your self, your eyes, your wit, and not me: But that I may be
just to you, where there is no fault, there is no need of pardon, though the
worth of ones affection oftentimes appeares more in words than in reality,
however if you will take the liberty and trouble to commend me, I must and
will claim the priviledge to subscribe my self, Sir,

Your obliged Servant.

### 3.86. 86. A Gentleman to his Rival.

Sir,

IF you understood what an Honor I have for the accomplished Lady, you are
pleased to a [...]ord your Courtships too, and what a reciprocal return I have
for my affections, you would either out of civility or judgement cease to be
so ridiculous, as to endeavor to rob me of her, whom her Parents and her self
hath blessed me with; And though perhaps she out of a Maiden modesty, will
assure you it is not so, yet I can justifie as much, and make it apparent to
your own judgement; besides the time is drawing near when our wishes will be
consummated, and then, you, and that part of the world that know her, may
learn whether what I have now said be a truth or [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=43) fable; Couzen
not your self, she hath a notable waggish wit, and uses it onely to make you
her sport: Sir, be wise, and think not with ease to attain to a happiness that
I have tugged for; you are a Gentle­man whom I have known, nor are your
Relations strangers to me, were it not for that reason, I should not have
brooked your visits to her hitherto, to the disturbance of my quiet: But from
this time re­member I have desired and warned you to forbear, as you cherish
your safety and reputation, that so we may continue friends, for be assured
you cannot finde out a more ready way to provoke my wrath, than your
perseverance, which will occasion me to proclaim my self, Sir,

Your incensed Enemy.

### 3.87. 87. A Virgin to her Parents, that would have her matched to one whom
she cannot love.

Most Dear Parents,

I Beseech you, let the Rules of Nature be so preva­lent with you, as not to
marry me to the man whom you design, but if you do resolve that I shall marry,
let it be to one that I shall love, or to my grave: be not over-ruled by the
thought of Avarice, lest you become inhumane to your own bloud, and make me

Your sad, sorrowful, and afflicted Daughter.

### 3.88. 88. A Gentlemans first Address to his Mistriss.

Beauteous Lady,

YOur feature is so glorious, that I must needs ac­knowledge I do verily
believe Nature hath not one Piece of Art that she can more boast of, nor is
there any Lady under Heaven to whom I owe a greater reverence, were your
affections but corre­spondent to mine, I would vie for happiness with the
proudest Prince under the bright Canopy of the Ce­lestial [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=44) Orb, but without
your love, I cannot live, which will be a sufficient evidence, that you are
the efficient cause of my ruine: Madam, I humbly implore your favor, make me
your adopted servant, and use me, and what is mine, as yours, for I account no
glory greater than that of being, Lovely Lady,

Your obedient Vassal.

### 3.89. 8 [...]. Another to the same effect.

Mirror of Women,

PArdon the presumption of a stranger, that having lately lost his heart, makes
an enquiry for it of one who is composed of nothing but what consists of
In­nocence and Vertue, and from thence I have this con­solation, that knowing
it is in your possession, I que­stion not but you will be noble to it, either
for love or pities sake [...]: Dear Lady, give me leave to pay my vi­sits to
it, and if I may be so happy, let me accompany it, by being registred among
the chief of your adorers. I confess my encouragements are small, having
attem­pted nothing yet that might make me capable of your smiles, and being
acquainted onely with your worth; yet such is the over-ruling power of your
Beauty, that though my eyes were but once blessed with a sight of your
peerless Perfections, my soul immediately be­came a Captive to your Vertues;
and being now at your disposal, I shall hope to finde you merciful, that I may
not languish in an adverse fortune, since you are naturally tender, and I am,
fair Nymph,

Yours wholly, in the bonds of firm affection.

### 3.90. 90. A Courteous Lass to her Paramour, who had gotten her with
Childe.

Dear Sir,

I Am now constrained to con [...]ine my self to a reti­red life, such is the
fruit of our late daliance, that [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=44) I am become
obvious (and without your company shall be odious) to all that see me, and
like your self, the Babe in my womb is continually exercising it self in an
activity that affords me but little rest. You cannot forget your promises to
marry me, ere you could prevail with me to satisfie your pleasures; Sweet Sir,
let your stay be short, for prolixity is dan­gerous to both our Reputations, I
languish till you come, and till then, and ever shall remain, My Dear Soul,

Yours, to love, and live with you.

### 3.91. 91. A Gentleman to his (once scornful, but now) Affectionate
Mistress.

Madam,

YOur sighs and flatteries are not prevalent enough, since I have now disposed
of my resolutions so firmly, as that they are beyond the power of either of us
to recal. Nor am I one of those puny Lovers, that think it reasonable to lay
my love at your feet, after it hath so inhumanely received your slights. I
once loved you too well, but now have so opened the eyes of my understanding,
that I can more plainly see my own worth, and your frailty. You are now so
kinde as to make vows of love to me, and I am so little an infidel as to
believe you, and therefore since you have a love for me, I conjure you by that
love you bear me, that you trouble me no more, but henceforth study to for­get
that I ever was so much as.

Your loving Friend.

### 3.92. 9 [...]. A Kinde-hearted Gentlewoman to her boasting Favorite.

Vngrateful man,

HAth my love to you deserved no better than your scorns? did I receive you to
my embraces through my weak belief of your treacherous Vows, [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=45) and do you
requite me with the ruine of my Reputa­tion: Degenerate Monster, can you be so
sottish as to think you do not wound your own fame, when you strike at me,
will not all men abhor you? and though they permit you a hearing, yet esteem
of you as one of Natures Prodigies. But to be more plain with you, be so wise
as to forbear your foul reproaches, lest you receive a Pistol, or a Ponyard,
from some one or other that may be sensible of your unworthy usage to, Base
Wretch,

Your mortal Enemy.

### 3.93. 93. The Lover to his inconstant Mistriss.

Lady,

YOur love was once my Paradise, nor did I e­steem my self happy in ought else,
but now per­ceiving your Ambition hath betrayed your Honor, and corrupted your
affection towards me, give me leave to tell you, since you can forget to love,
I can as easily forget to sigh, and from this minute shall disown you for
being the object of my delight, since I think it not at  [...]l difficult to
finde a Mistriss of more worth and constancy. May you possess a Hus­band equal
to your deserts, I wish you no greater Plague.

> Farewel.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=45)

## 4\. Songs Alamode, Composed by the most Refined Wits of this Age.

### 4.1. Song 1.

AS in those Nations, where they yet adore

Marble and Cedar, and their aid implore,

'Tis not the workman, nor the preciou [...] wood,

But 'tis the worshipper that makes the God;

So cruel Fair, though Heaven has giv'n thee all,

We mortals Vertue, or (can) Beauty call,

'Tis we that give the thunder to your frowns,

Darts to your eyes, and to our selves the wounds;

Without our love which proudly you deride,

Vain were your Beauty, and more vain your Pride.

All envy'd beings that the world can show,

Still to some meaner thing their greatness ow.

Subjects make Kings, and we the numerous Train

Of humble Lovers constitute thy Reign,

Onely this dif [...]erence Beauties Realm can boast,

Where most it favors, it enslaves the most;

And those to whom 'tis most indulgent found,

Are ever in the surest fetters bound.

No Tyrant yet but thee was ever known,

Cruel to them that serv'd to make him one▪

Valor's a Vice, if not with Honor joyn'd,

And Beauty a Disease when 'tis not kinde.

### 4.2. Song 2.

FAirest Nymph my delay

Shames me, a Lover

Which I will now repay,

Since I discover

Those Beauties and Graces

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=46)Which so
adorn thee,

And makes thee grow proud,

That it hath born thee,

At the Wakes and the Fairs,

And ev'ry Meeting,

He's onely happy can

Dance with my Sweeting▪

Where all that stand about,

Still gaze upon her,

And those the Crow'd ke [...]p out,

Are talking on her.

As she walks through the Meads

With other Lasses,

All Flowers bend their heads

Still as she passes.

Striving to offer them-

Selves to be gather'd,

That she might Garlands wear,

E're they were wither'd.

As she at Ball in the

Cool ev'ning play'd

For little Victories

And Wagers layd;

As the Ball, so their hearts

When they came nigh her,

Leapt for joy equally,

As they stood by her.

Ask the Rose why so red,

She said, she kist it,

The Lilly why so pale,

'Cause her lips mist it.

The blushing Cherry said

'Twould be her debt [...]r,

'Cause one soft touch of hers

Did ripen't better.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=46)

### 4.3. Song 3.

BReak, break, distracted heart, there is no Cure

For this thy Souls most desperate Calenture,

Sighs which in others passion vent,

And give them ease when they lament,

Are but the billows to my hot desire,

And tears in me me not quench, but nourish fire:

Nothing can mollifie my grief,

Or give me passion, or relief.

Love's flames when smother'd always do devour,

And when oppos'd have the same fatal power.

Then welcome Death, let thy blest hands apply

A Medicine to my grief, I'le die, I'le die.

### 4.4. Song 4.

WElcome blest hand, whose white out-vies

The Lillies, or the Milky way,

Nor can the spacious azure Skies,

Cloath'd in the glories of the Day,

Reveal so great a brightness as that hand,

Compar'd to which the Snow it self is tann'd.

Welcome blest hand, whose ev'ry touch

Is able to recal a Soul

Fled hence, whose sov'raign Pow'r is such,

That it no mortal can controul;

My brest with as much joy that touch receives,

As condemn'd Pris'ners do their wisht Reprieves.

But prithee Celia, what design

Led thy fair hands unto my bre [...]t,

Was it a love to thine own shrine,

Or pity to a thing opprest?

For thou mightst feel't swoln with those griefs which love

At first begets, and cruelties improve.

Thou couldst not think to finde my heart

Within its wonted place of rest,

That's turn'd recluse, and set apart,

To the fair Cloyster of thy Brest,

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=47)There 'tis
confin'd, but to a liberty,

To be imprison'd there, is to be free.

Therefore if thou my pulse wouldst feel,

Or would my constitution know,

Touch thine own cruel breast of Steel,

And that will tell thee how I do;

For in that happy Treasury doth lie,

The sacred power to bid me live, or die.

### 4.5. Song 5.

LEt Votaries rearing up Altar and Shrine,

Court streight-lac'd Religion till they be weary.

I nought will offer but full Cups of wine,

As a sacrifice to th' fat god of Canary.

What pretenders call holy,

Is dull Melancholly,

'Tis onely rich Wine,

Has the Power Divine,

When they sigh and sob to make us all merry.

Let crack-brain'd Students with Volumes devour,

And let the starch'd Puritan minde Revelations,

While themselves do pine, and their faces look sowre,

And Quacks kill themselvs with inventing Purgations.

Come give us more Sack,

While our brains do crack,

We'l steep our dry souls

In liberal Bowls,

And cherish our hearts with diviner Potations.

Let Adventurers sail, till they plough up the Main,

Of stones they call precious, let 'em bring home a Mine

The light of our Noses their Rubies shall stain,

And our Carbuncled Faces their Diamonds out-shine.

With peril and pain,

Those trifles they gain,

They wander and rome,

Whilest we sit at home,

And think w'have the Indies, if we have but good wine.

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=47)Yet sure
the Leviathan happy would be,

Who's made to tipple and frolick i'th deep,

If Bacchus, not Neptun [...], were god of the Sea,

And the Ocean Sack his senses to steep:

Nor would any man fear

To be ship wracked there,

Since if he were drown'd,

By th' Jury 'twould be found

That he was but dead drunk, and so fell asleep.

### 4.6. Song 6.

BEyond the malice of abusive Fate,

I now am grown,

And in that state

My heart shall mourn

The loss it has receiv'd,

When of its onely joy it was bereav'd;

The Woods with Ecchoes do abound,

And each of them return the sound

Of my Amintor's name▪ Alas, he's dead,

And with him all my joys are fled,

Willow, willow, willow, must I wear,

For sweet Amintor's dead, who was my dear.

### 4.7. Song 7.

WHen Phillis watch'd her harmless sheep,

Not one poor Lamb was made a prey;

Yet she had cause enough to weep,

Her silly heart did go astray,

Then flying to the Neighboring Grove,

She left the tender Flock to rove,

And to the windes did breathe her love.

She sought in vain,

To ease her pain,

The heedless windes did fan her fire,

Venting her grief,

Gave no relief,

But rather did encrease desire.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=48)Then
sitting with her arms across,

Her sorrows streaming from each eye,

She fix'd her thoughts upon her loss,

And in despair resolv'd to die.

### 4.8. Mock Song 8.

ON yonder Hill a Beacon stands,

My Gloves will hardly fit your hands.

I think 'twill freeze to night,

Tobacco is an Indian weed,

Ieffory can neither write nor read,

I'm sure some Dogs will bite.

Pease-porridge is a Lenten dish,

Pudding is neither flesh, nor fish,

Some Cheese will choak a Daw,

The Mayor of Quinborogh's but a Clown,

The Lawyer wears a dagled Gown,

Wat Tyl [...]r and Iack Straw.

The Sun sets alway in the West,

Is not the Popes Religion b [...]st?

Yes, when the Devil's bind.

Room for my Lord Mayor and his horse,

The Spaniard took Breda by force,

With butter'd fish he din'd.

Hark how my Hostess puffs and blows,

Maids ha' any Corns on your feet or toes,

Let's play a Game at Bowls.

The Courtier leads a merry life,

The Parson loves a handsom wife,

Duke Humphrey din'd in Powls.

### 4.9. Song 9.

WHen cold Winters withered brow

Wax'd sad and pale with sorrow,

Had overcome the darksom night,

And coming was the morrow,

I heard a Lad with Buglet clear,

A Jubet, and a Hollow,

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=48)Cry, Come
away,

'Tis almost day,

Forsake your Beds and follow.

Then with a Troop well arm'd for spo [...],

Upon their Coursers mounted,

Such as Venus Joys withstood,

When she the wilde Boar hunted,

We on the Downs

With a Pack of Hounds

Whom Nature had befriended,

Pursu'd poor Wat,

New rais'd from squat,

Her first sleep scarcely ended.

Then over Hills, and over Dales,

And over craggy Mountains,

Through the Woods and shadowed  [...]ro [...]s

Enrich'd with Christal Fountains,

The little Brooks with murmurs sweet,

And pretty Birds with wonders,

Sing careless Notes,

Through their well tun'd throats,

And fill the Air with thunders;

Ecchoes shrill,

From the Vaults of the Hill,

The Selvages and Satyrs,

Elves and Fairies do awake,

And Sea-Nymphs from the waters,

They listen to our larger strain,

Attentively delighted,

Courting the day

For a longer stay,

That we might not be benighted.

### 4.10. Song 10.

TEll me gentle S [...]rephon, why

You from my embraces fly?

Do's my love thy love destroy?

Tell me, I will yet be coy.

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=49)Stay, O
stay, and I will feign

(Though I break my heart) disdain:

But lest I too unkinde appear,

For ev'ry frown, I'le shed a  [...]ear.

And if in vain I court thy love,

Let mine at least thy pity move,

Ah! while I scorn, vouchsafe to wooe,

Methinks you may dissemble too▪

Ah! Phillis that you would contrive

A way to keep my love alive,

But all your other chdrms must fail,

When kindness ceases to prevail.

Alas! No more than you I grieve,

My dying flame hath no reprieve;

For I can never hope to  [...]inde,

Shou'd all the Nymphs I court be kinde,

One Beauty able to renew

Those pleasures I enjoy'd by you,

When Love and Youth did both conspire,

To fill our breasts and veins with fire.

### 4.11. Song 11.

AMarillis told her Swam,

Amarillis told her Swain,

That in love he should be plain,

And not think to deceive her,

Still be protesting on his truth,

That he would never leave her.

If thou dost keep thy vow, quoth she,

If thou dost keep thy vow, quoth she,

And that thou ne'r dost leave me,

There's ne'r a Swain in all this plain,

That ever shall come near thee

For Garlands and embroyder'd Scrips,

For I do love thee dearly.

But Colin, if thou change thy love,

But Colin, if thou change thy love,

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=49)A Tygress
then I'le to thee prove,

If e're thou dost come near me.

Amarillis fear not that,

For I do love thee dearly.

### 4.12. Song 12.

WHen Celadon gave up his heart

A Tribute to Astr [...]a's eyes,

She smil'd to see so fair a prize,

Which Beauty had obtained more than Art▪

But Jealousie did seemingly destroy

Her chiefest comfort, and her chiefest joy.

Base Jealousie, that still dost move

In opposition to all bliss,

And teachest those that do amiss,

Who think by thee, they tokens give of love:

But if a Lover ever will gain me,

Let him love much, but fly all jealousie.

### 4.13. Song 13.

SWeetest Bud of Beauty, may

No untimely Frost decay

Th' early Glories which we trace,

Blooming in thy matchless Face.

But kindely opening like the Rose,

Fresh Beauties every day disclose,

Such as by Nature are not shown,

In all the blossoms he has blown,

And then what Conquest shall you make,

Who hearts already daily take,

Scorcht in the morning with thy beams,

How shall we bear those sad extreams,

Which must attend thy threatning eyes

When thou shalt to thy noon arise?

### 4.14. Song 14.

'TIs not ith' pow'r of all thy scorn,

Or unrelenting hate,

To quench my flames, or make them burn

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=50)With heat
more temperate,

Still do I struggle with despair,

And ever court disdain,

And though you ne'r prove less severe,

I'le dote upon my pain.

Yet meaner Beauties cannot dain

In Love this tyranny,

They must pretend an equal flame,

Or else our passions die.

You fair Clarinda, you alone

Are priz'd at such a rate,

To have a Votary of one

Whom you do Reprobate.

### 4.15. Song 15.

CAll for the Master, O! this is sine

For you that have Londons brave Liquors of wine

For us the Cocks of the Hectors

Wine wherein Flies were drown'd the last Summer,

Hang't let it pass, here's a Glass in a Rummer,

Hang't let it, &c.

Bold Hectors we are of London, New Troy,

Fill us more wine: Hark here, Sirrah Boy,

Speak in the Dolphin, speak in the Swan,

Drawer, Anon Sir, Anon.

Ralph, George, speak in the Star,

The Reckoning's unpaid; we'l pay at the Bar,

The Reckoning's unpaid, &c.

A Quart of Clarret in the Mytre, score:

The Hectors are Ranting, Tom shut the door;

A Skirmish begins, beware Pates and Shins,

The Piss-pots are down, the Candles are out,

The Glasses are broke, and the Pots flie about.

Ralph, Ralph, speak in the Checquer. By and by,

Robin is wounded, and the Hectors do  [...]ie,

Call for the Constable, let in the Watch,

The Hectors of Holborn shall meet with their match,

The Hectors, &c.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=50)At
Midnight you bring your Justice among us,

But all the day long you do us the wrong;

When for Verrinus you bring us Mundungus:

Your Reckonings are large, your Bottles are small,

Still changing our Wine, as fast as we call;

Your Canary has Lime in't, your Clarret has Stum,

Tell the Constable this, and then let him come,

Tell the Constable, &c.

### 4.16. Song 16.

YOur merry Poets, old Boy [...]

Of Aganippes Well,

Full many Tales have told Boys,

Whose Liquor doth excel;

And how that place was haunted

By those that lov'd good Wine,

Who tippl'd there, and chaunted

Among the Muses Nine;

Where still they cry'd, Drink clear boys;

And you shall quickly know it,

That 'tis not lousie Beer, boys,

But Wine that makes a Poet.

### 4.17. Song 17.

THe thir [...]ty Earth drinks up the Rain,

And drinks, and gapes for drink again;

The Plants suck in the Earth, and are

With constant drinking fresh and fair.

The Sea it self, (which one would think

Should have but little need to drink,)

Drinks ten thousand Rivers up,

[...]o fill'd that they o'reflow the Cup.

[...]he busie Sun, and one would guess

[...]y's drunken fiery face, no less

Drinks up the Sea, and when that's done,

[...]he Moon and Stars drink up the Sun.

[...]hey drink, and dance by their own light,

[...]hey drink and Revel all the night;

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=51)Nothing in
Nature's sober found,

But an Eternal Health goes round,

Fill up the Bowl, and fill it high,

Fill all the Glasses here, for why

Should every creature drink but I?

Why, man of morals, tell me why.

### 4.18. Song 18.

FIne young folly, though wear

That fair Beauty, I do swear,

Yet you ne'r could reach my heart;

For we Courtiers learn at School,

Onely with your Sex to fool,

Y'are not worth our serious part.

### 4.19. Song 19.

BE thou that art my better part,

A Seal impress'd upon my heart;

May I thy fingers Signet prove,

For Death is not more strong than Love,

The Grave's not so insatiate,

As Jealousies enflame debate.

Should falling clouds with floods conspire,

Their waters would not quench Loves fire;

Nor in all Natures Treasury,

The freedom of affection buy.

### 4.20. Song 20.

TO friend and to foe,

To all that I know,

That to Marriage Estate do prepare,

Remember your days

In several ways,

Are troubled with sorrow and care:

For he that doth look

In the married mans book,

And read but his Items all over,

Shall finde them to come,

At length to a Sum,

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=51)Shall
empty Purse, Pocket, and Coffer.

In the pastimes of love,

When their labors do prove,

And the Fruit beginneth to kick,

For this, and for that,

And I know not for what,

The woman must have, or be fick.

There's Item set down,

For a Loose-bodied Gown,

In her longing you must not deceive her▪

For a Bodkin, a Ring,

Or the other fine thing,

For a Whisk, a Scarf, or a Beaver.

Deliver'd and well,

Who ist cannot tell,

Thus while the Childe lies at the Nipple,

There's Item for wine,

And Gossips so fine,

And Sugar to sweeten their Tipple▪

There's Item I hope,

For Water and Sope,

There's Item for Fire and Candle,

For better for worse,

There's Item for Nurse,

[...]he Babe to dress and to dandle.

When swadled in lap,

There's Item for Pap,

[...]nd Item for Pot, Pan, and Ladle;

A Corral with Bells,

Which custom compells,

[...]nd Item ten Groats for a Cradle;

With twenty odd Knacks,

Which the little one lacks,

[...]nd thus doth thy pleasure bewray thee:

But this is the sport,

In Countr [...]y and Court,

[...] let not these pastimes betray thee.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=52)

### 4.21. Song 21.

I Dote, I dote,

But am a Sot to show it,

I was a very fool to let her know it,

For now she doth so cunning grow,

She proves a friend worse than a foe,

She will not hold me fast, nor let me go:

She tells me I cannot forsake her,

Then strait I endeavor to leave her,

But to make me stay,

Throws a Kiss in my way,

Oh then I could tarry for ever.

Thus I retire,

Salute, and sit down by her,

There do I sry in frost, and freeze in fire;

Now Nectar from her lips I sup,

And though I cannot drink all up,

Yet I am fox'd with kissing of the Cup;

For her Lips are two brimmers of Clarret,

Where first I began to miscarry,

Her brests of delight,

Are two bottles of White,

And her eyes are two cups of Canary.

Drunk as I live,

Dead drunk beyond reprieve,

And all my senses driven through a sieve;

About my neck her arms she layeth,

Now all is Gospel that she saith,

Which I lay hold on with my sudled faith:

I finde a fond Lover's a Drunkard,

And dangerous is when he flies out,

With hips, and with lips,

With black eyes, and white thighs,

Blinde Cupid sure tipled his eyes out.

She bids me rise,

Tells me I must be wise,

[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=52)Like her,
for she is not in love, she cries;

This makes me fret, and fling, and throw,

Shall I be fetter'd to my foe?

I begin to run, but cannot go:

I prethee Sweet use me more kindly,

You were better to hold me fast,

If you once disengage

Your Bird from his Cage,

Believe it he'l leave you at last.

Like Sot I sit,

That  [...]ill'd the Town with wit,

But now confess I have most need of it;

I have been fox'd with Duck and Dear,

Above a quarter of a year,

Beyond the Cure of sleeping, or small Beer,

I think I can number the moneths too,

Iuly, August, September, October,

Thus goes my account,

A mischief light on't,

But sure I shall go when I'm sober.

My legs are lam'd,

My courage is quite tam'd,

My heart and all my body is enflam'd,

As by experience I can prove,

And swear by all the Powers above,

'Tis better to be drunk with wine than love;

For 'tis Sack makes us merry and witty,

Our fore-heads with Jewels adorning,

Although we do grope,

Yet there is some hope

That a man may be sober next morning.

Thus with command,

She throws me from her hand,

And bids me go, yet knows I cannot stand;

I measure all the ground by trips,

Was ever Sot so drunk with sips,

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=53)Or can a
man be over-seen with lips?

I pray Madam fickle be faithful,

And leave offy our damnable dodging,

Then do not deceive me,

Either love me, or leave me,

And let me go home to my lodging.

I have too much,

And yet my folly's such,

I cannot hold but must have t'other touch;

Here's a health to the King; How now?

I'me drunk, and could chatter I vow,

Lovers and fools say any thing you know;

I fear I have tyred your patience,

But I'me sure 'tis I have the wrong on't;

My wit hath berest me,

And all that is left me,

Is but enough to make a Song on't:

My Mistriss and I

Shall never comply

And ther's the short and the long on't.

### 4.22. Song. 22.

WHy should we not laugh and be jolly,

Since all the world is mad?

And lull'd in a dull melancholy;

He that wallows in store,

Is still gaping for more,

And that makes him as poor,

As the wretch that ne'r any thing had.

How mad is that damn'd Money-monge [...]

That to purchase to him and his heirs,

Grows shrivl'd with thirst and hunger;

While we that are bonny,

Buy Sack with ready money,

And ne'r trouble the Scrivners, nor Lawyers.

Those Guts that by scraping and toiling,

Do swell their Revenues so fast▪

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=53)Get
nothing by all their tormoiling,

But are marks of each tax,

While they load their own backs,

With the heavier packs,

And lie down gall'd and weary at last.

While we that do traffick in Tipple,

Can baffle the Gown and the Sword,

Whose jaws are so hungry and gripple;

We ne'r trouble our heads,

With Indentures or Deeds,

And our Wills are compos'd in a word.

Our money shall never indite us,

Nor drag our free mindes to thral,

Nor Pyrates nor Wracks can as [...]right us;

We that have no Estates,

Fear no plunder nor rates;

We can sleep with open gat [...],

He that lies on the ground cannot fall.

We laugh at those fools whose endeavours

Do but  [...]it them for Prisons and Fines,

When we that spend all are the savers;

For if thieves do break in,

They go out empty agen,

And the plunderers lose their designs.

Then let us not think on to morrow,

But tipple and laugh while we may,

To wash from our hearts all sorrow;

Those Cormorants which,

Are troubled with an Itch,

To be mighty and rich,

Do but toil for the wealth which they borrow.

The Mayor of the Towu with his Ruff on,

What a pox is he better than we?

He must vail to the man with his Buff on;

Though he Custard may eat,

And such lubbarly meat,

Yet our Sack makes us merrier then he.

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=54)

### 4.23. Song 23.

NEver more will I protest

To love a Woman, but in jest;

For as they cannot be true,

So to give each man his due,

When the wooing sit is past,

Their affections cannot last.

Therefore if I chance to meet

With a Mistriss fair and sweet,

She my service shall obtain,

Loving her for love again:

Thus much liberty I crave,

No [...] to be a constant slave.

For when we have try'd each other,

If she better like another,

Let her quickly change for me,

Then to change am I as free:

He or she that loves too long▪

Sell their freedom for a Song.

### 4.24. Song 24.

NOw fie on foolish love, it not befits,

Or man or woman know it;

Love was not meant for people in their wits,

And they that fondly show it,

Betray the straw and feathers in their brain,

And shall have Bedlam for their pain:

If single love be such a Curse,

To marry is to make it ten times worse.

### 4.25. Song 25.

TUrn Amarillis to thy Swain,

Thy Damon calls thee back again,

Here is a pretty Arbor by,

Where Apollo, where Apollo,

Where Apollo cannot spy,

There lets fit, and whilst I play,

Sing to my Pipe a Roundelay.

[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=54)

### 4.26. Song 26.

COurtiers, Courtiers, think it no scorn,

That silly poor Swains in love should be;

There is as much love in rent and torn,

As there is in Silks and Bravery;

The Beggar he loves his Lass as dear,

As he that hath Thousands, Thousands, Thousands,

He that hath Thousands Pounds a year.

### 4.27. Song 27.

TAke a pound of Butter made in May,

Clap it to her Arse in a Summers day,

And ever as it melts, then lick it clean away;

'Tis a Med'cine for the Tooth-ach, old wives say.

### 4.28. Song 28.

BEss black as Charcoal,

Was found in a dark hole

With Kit at the Cat and the Fiddle;

But what they did there,

None safely can swear,

Yet Gentlemen, Riddle my Riddle.

Troth I would be loath,

Were I put to my Oath,

To swear Kit with Bess did ingender;

Yet it would tempt a man,

Bridle all that he can,

His present well-wishes to tender.

But 't was found at last,

E're a twelve-month was past,

That Christopher Bess had o're-master'd,

For her belly betray'd her,

And so she down laid her,

And brought him a jolly brown Bastard.

### 4.29. Song 19.

THe Glories of our Birth and State

Are shadows, not substantial things;

There is no Armor 'gainst our Fate,

[[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=55)Death
lay's his Icy hands on Kings:

Scepter and Crown

Must tumble down,

And in the dust be equal laid,

With the poor crooked Scithe and Spade.

Some men with Swords may reap the field,

And plant fresh Laurels where they kill;

But their strong Nerves at last must yield;

They tame but one another still.

Early or late,

They bend to fate,

And must give up their murmuring breath,

While the pale captive creeps to Death,

The Garland wither's on your brow,

Then boast no more your mighty deeds,

Upon Death's purple Altar now,

See where the Victor Victim bleeds.

All heads must come,

To the cold Tomb;

Only the Actions of the just

Smell sweet, and blossom in the dust.

### 4.30. Song. 30.

SWeet Iane, sweet Iane,

I love thee wondrous well,

But am afraid,

Thou't die a Maid,

And so lead Apes in Hell.

For why my dear, 'tis pity it should be so,

Thou't better then to take a man

And keep thee from the foc,

Thou art so pretty, and fine,

And wondrous handsome too,

Then be not coy,

Let's get a boy,

Alas what should we do.

I see thy brow,

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=55)And I
know

What colour it is below,

Then do nor jeast,

But smile the rest

E'faith I know what I know.

### 4.31. Song 31.

VIctorious Beauty though your eyes,

Are able to subdue an Hoast,

And therefore are unlike to boast;

The taking of a little prize,

Do not a single heart despise.

### 4.32. Song 32.

CHloris, it is not in your power

To say how long our love will last,

It may be we within this hour

May loose those joys we now may taste

The blessed that Immortal be

From change in Love are only free.

And though you now immortal seem,

Such is th' exactness of your fame;

Those that your Beauty so esteem,

Will finde it cannot last the same

Love from my eyes has stoln my fire,

As apt to waste, and to expire.

Then since we mortal Lovers are,

Let's question not how long 'twil last,

But while we love let us take care,

Each minute be with pleasure past:

It were a madness to deny

To live, because w'are sure to die.

Fear not though love and beauty fail,

My Reason shall my heart direct;

Your kindness now will then prevail,

And passion turn into respect:

Chloris, at worst, you'l in the end

But change your Lover for a Friend.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=56)

### 4.33. Song 33.

CElemana, of my heart

None shall e're bereave you;

If with your good leave I may

Quarrel with you once a day,

I will never leave you.

Celemana.

Passion's but an empty name,

Where respect is wanting:

Damon, you mistake your aim,

Hang your heart, and burn your flame,

If you must be ranting.

Damon.

Love as pale and muddy is,

As decaying Liquor,

Anger sets it on the Lees,

And refines it by degrees,

Till it works it quicker.

Celemana.

Love by quarrel to beget

Wisely you endeavor,

With a grave Physicians wit,

Who to cure an Ague Fit,

Puts me in a Feaver.

Damon.

Anger rouses Love to fight,

And his onely bait is,

'Tis the spur to vain delight,

And is but an eager bite,

When desire at height is.

Celemana.

If such drops of heat can fall

In our wooing weather,

If such drops of heat can fall,

We shall have the devil and all,

When we come together.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=56)

### 4.34. Song 34

TWelve sorts of meat my wife provides,

And bates me not a dish;

Of which, four flesh, four fruit there are,

The other four of fish.

For the first Course, she serves me in

Four Birds that Dainties are;

The first a Quail, the next a Rail,

A Bitter, and a Jar.

Mine appetite being cloy'd with these,

With Fish she makes it sharp,

And brings me next a Lamp, a Po [...]t,

A Gudgeon, and a Carp.

The second is of Fruit well serv'd,

Fitting well the season;

A Medlar, and a Hartichoak,

A Crab, and a small Reason.

What's he that having such a wife,

That on her would not dote?

Who daily does provide such fa [...]e,

Which costs him never a groat.

### 4.35. Song 35.

BE gone, be gone, thou perjur'd man,

And never more return,

For know that thy inconstancy,

Hath chang'd my love to scorn;

Thou hast awak't me, and I can

See clearly there's no truth in man.

Thou may'st perhaps prevail upon

Some other to believe thee.

And since thou canst love more than one,

Ne'r think that it shall grieve me.

For th' hast awak't me, and I can

See clearly there's no truth in man.

By thy Apostacy I finde,

That love is plac'd amiss,

And can't continue in the minde,

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=57)Where
Vertue wanting is.

I'm now resolv'd, and know there can,

No constant thought remain in man.

### 4.36. Song 36.

STrait my green Gown into Breeches I'le make,

And long yellow Locks, much shorter I'le take,

With a Hey Down, Down, a Down, Down a.

Then I'le cut me a Switch, and on that ride about;

And wander, and wander, till I finde him out,

With a Hey Down, Down, a Down, Down a.

And when Phylander shall be dead,

I'le bury him, I'le bury him,

And I'le bury him in a Primrose bed,

Then I'le sweetly ring his Knell,

With a pretty Cowslip Bell,

Ding Dong Bell, Ding Dong Bell.

### 4.37. Song 37.

LOok, see how unregarded now

That piece of beauty passes,

There was a time when I did vow

To that alone, but mark the fate of faces:

That red and white works now no more on me,

Than if it could not charm, nor I not see.

And yet the face continues good,

And I have still desires.

And still the self same flesh and blood,

A [...] apt to melt, and suffer from such fires:

Oh some kinde power unriddle where it lies,

Whether my heart be faulty, or my eyes.

She every day her man doth kill,

And I as often die,

Neither her power then, nor my will,

Can quest'onabl [...] be, what is the Mystery:

Sure Beauty's Empire, like the greatest States,

Have certain Periods set, and hidden Dates.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=57)

### 4.38. Song. 38.

DEar give me a thousand kisses,

Pay the Debt thy lips do owe;

Let the number of those blisses,

To ten thousand thousands grow,

Till to infinites they flow:

Let the sweet perfumed treasure

Of thy breath, my spirits fill;

So enjoying endless pleasure,

Breaths rebreathing, let us still

Breath one breath, and wish one will.

### 4.39. Song 39.

LIttle love serves my turn,

'Tis so enflaming,

Rather than I will burn,

I'le leave my gaming;

For when I think upon't,

Oh 'tis so painful,

'Cause Ladies have a trick,

To be disdainful.

Beauty shall court it self,

'Tis not worth speaking,

I'le no more Amorous pangs,

No more heart-breaking.

Those that ne'r felt the smart,

Let them go try it,

I have redeem'd my heart,

Now I defie it.

### 4.40. Song 40.

NO more, no more,

I must give o're,

For Beauty is so sweet,

It makes me pine,

Distrust my mind.

And surfet when I see't.

Forgive me love,

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=58)If I
remove

Unto some other sphear,

Where I may keep

A Flock of Sheep,

And know no other care.

### 4.41. Song 41.

CHloris farewel, I now must go;

For if with thee I here do stay,

Thy eyes prevail upon me so,

I shall grow blinde, and lose my way.

Fame of thy beauty, and thy youth,

Amongst the rest me hither brought;

Finding this Fame fall short of truth,

Made me stay longer than I thought.

For I'm engag'd by word and oath,

A servant to anothers will;

Yet for thy love would forfeit both,

Could I be sure to keep it still.

But what assurance can I take,

When thou fore-knowing this abuse,

For some more worthy Lovers sake,

Mayst leave me with so just excuse.

For thou may'st say 'twas not my fault,

That thou didst thus unconstant prove,

Thou wert by my example taught

To break thy oath, to mend thy love.

No Chloris, no, I will return,

And raise thy story to that height,

That strangers shall at distance burn,

And she distrust me reprobate

Then shall my Love this doubt displace,

And gain such trust, that I may come

And banquet sometimes on thy face,

But make my constant Meals at home.

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=58)

### 4.42. Song, 42.

TO little or no purpose I spent many days

In ranging the Park, th' Exchange, and th' Plays.

For ne'r in my Rambles till now did I prove

So lucky to meet with the man I could love.

For oh, how I am pleas'd when I think of this man

That I finde I must love, let me do what I can.

How long I shall love him I can no more tell,

Than had I Feavor when I should be well,

My passion shall kill me before I will show it,

And yet I would give all the world he did know it,

But oh, how I sigh when I think he should woo me,

I cannot deny what I know would undo me.

### 4.43. Song. 43.

SHall I lie wasting in despair,

Die because a womans fair?

Or my cheeks make pale with care,

'Cause anothers Rosie are?

Be she fairer than the day,

Or the flowery Meads in May,

If she be not so to me,

What care I how fair she be.

Shall I mine affections slack,

'Cause I see a woman black,

Or my self with care cast down,

'Cause I see a woman brown,

Be she blacker than the night,

Or the blackest Jet in sight,

If she be not so to me,

What care I how black she be.

Shall my foolish heart be pin'd,

'Cause I see a woman kinde,

Or a well disposed Nature,

Joyned in a comely feature?

Be she kinde or meeker than

Turtle-dove, or Pellican,

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=59)If she be
not so to me,

What care I how kinde she be.

Shall my foolish heart be burst,

'Cause I see a woman curst,

Or a thwarting hoggish natu

Joyned in as bad a feature,

Be she curst or fiercer then

Brutish beasts, or savage men,

If she be not so to me,

What care I how curst she be.

Shall a womans Vertues make,

Me to perish for her sake,

Or her merits value known,

Make me quite forget my own,

Be she with that goodness blest,

That may merit name of best,

If she seem not so to me,

What care I how good she be.

Shall a womans Vices make,

Me her Vertues quite forsake,

Or hsr faults to me made known,

Make me think that I have none,

Be she of the most accurst,

And deserve the name of worst,

If she be not so to me,.

What care I how bad she be.

'Cause her Fortunes seem too high,

Should I play the fool and die?

He that bears a noble minde,

If not outward help he finde,

Think what with them he would do,

That without them dares to woo,

And unless that minde I see,

What care I how great she be.

'Cause her Fortunes seem too low,

Shall I therefore let her go,

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=59)He that
bears an humble minde,

And with Riches can be kinde,

Think how kinde a heart he'd have,

If he were some servile slave,

And if that same minde I see,

What care I how poor she be.

Great, or good, or kinde, or fair,

I will ne'r the more despair,

If she love, then believe,

I can die, e'r she shall grieve;

If she slight me when I woo,

I can slight and bid her go,

If she be not fit for me.

What care I for whom she be.

Poor, or bad, or curst, or black,

I will ne'r the more be slack,

If she hate me, then believe,

She shall die e're I will grieve,

If she like me when I woo,

I can like and love her too,

For if she be fit for me,

What care I what others be.

### 4.44. Song 44.

OH Chloris 'twas unkindely done,

First to invade me with your eyes;

And when my yielding heart was won,

Then to begin your Tyrannies;

The generous Lion streight grows meek,

And gently spares the fawning chase,

But the submissive wretch may seek

In vain for pity from that face;

Where while inchanting Syrens sing,

Th' allured Mariner is wrack't;

So whirling gulphs destruction bring,

And overwhelm what they attract,

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=60)

### 4.45. Song 45.

HElp, help, O help, Divinity of Love,

Or Neptune will commit a rape

Upon my Chloris, she's on his bosome,

And without a wonder cannot scape.

See, see, the winds grow drunk with joy, and throngs

So fast to see love's Argo, and the wealth it bears,

That now the tackling, and the sails they tear,

They fight, they fight, who shall convey

Amintor's love into a bay,

And hurl whole Sea's at one another,

As if they would the welkin smoother?

Hold Bor [...]as, hold, he will not hear,

The Rudder cracks, the Main-mast falls,

The Pilot swears, the Skipper bawls,

A shore of Clouds in darkness fall,

To put out Chloris light withal;

Ye Gods, where are ye, are ye all asleep,

Or drunk with Nector? why do you not keep

A watch upon your Ministers of fate?

Tie up the winds, or they will blow the Sea's

To heaven, and drown your Deities.

A calm, a calm, Miracle of love,

The Sea-born Queen that sits above,

Hath heard Ami [...]tor's cryes,

And Neptune now must lose his prize.

Welcome, welcome, Chloris to the shore,

Thou shalt go to Sea no more;

We to Tempes Groves will go,

Where the calmer winds do blow,

And embark our hearts together,

Fearing neither Rocks, nor weather,

But out-ride the storms of love,

And for ever constant prove.

[[Page 115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=60)

### 4.46. Song. 46.

NOw, now, Lucatia, now make haste,

If thou wilt see how strong thou art,

There needs but one frown more, to waste

The whole remainder of my heart.

Alas undone, to fate I bow my head,

Ready to die, now die,

And now, now, now, am dead.

You look to have an Age of tryal,

E're you a Lover will repay,

But my state brooks no more denyal;

I cannot this one minute stay.

Alas undone, to fate I bow my head▪

Ready to die, now die,

And now, now, now, am dead.

Look in my wound, and see how cold,

How pale and gasping my soul lies,

Which Nature strives in vain to hold,

Whilst wing'd with sighs, away it flies.

Alas undone, to fate I bow my head.

Ready to die, now die,

And now, now, now, am dead.

See, see, already Charons Boat,

Who grimly asks why all this stay?

Hark how the Fatal Sisters shout,

And now they call, Away, away;

Alas Undone, to fate I bow my head,

Ready to die, now die,

And now, oh now, am dead.

### 4.47. Song. 47.

WHen as Leander young, was drown'd,

No heart by love receiv'd a wound,

But on a rock himself sat by,

There weeping superabundantly.

His head upon his hand he laid,

And sighing deeply, thus he said;

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=61)Ah cruel
Fate, and looking on't,

Wept as he'd drown the Hellespont,

And sure his tongue had more exprest,

Had not his Tears, Had not his Tears,

Had not his Tears forbad the rest.

### 4.48. Song 48.

OH! how I hate thee now,

And my self too,

For loving such a false,

False thing as thee,

Who hourly canst depart,

From heart to heart,

To take new habor, as thou didst in me;

But when the world shall spie,

And know thy shifts as well as I,

They'l shut their hearts, and take thee in no more.

They that can dwell with none must out of door.

Thy pride hath overgrown,

All this great Town,

Which stoops, and bows, as low

As I to you,

Thy falshood might support,

All the new Court,

Which shifts, and turns almost as oft as thou.

But to express thee by,

There's not an object low, or high,

For 'twill be found when ere the measure's tride,

Nothing can reach thy falshood, but thy pride.

### 4.49. Song 49.

YOnder he goes,

Takes Corns from your Toes,

Cures the Gout,

And all Woes;

Call him hither,

His skill I will try,

Before I pass by,

[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=61)Or sure I
shall die

This weather:

The reports of your fame Sir,

Call you again Sir,

Shew your skill, or shame your face ever.

### 4.50. Song 50.

HAng sorrow cast, away care.

Come l [...]t us drink up our Sack;

They say it is good,

To cherish the blood,

And eke to strengthen the Back;

'Tis wine that makes the thoughts aspire,

And fiills the body with heat,

Besides 'tis good,

If well understood,

To fit a man for the Feat:

Then call,

And drink up all,

The Drawer is ready to fill,

A pox of Care,

What need we to spare,

My Father hath made his Will.

### 4.51. Song 51.

HAve you any work for a Tinker Mistriss,

Old Brass, old Pots, or Kettles,

I'le mend them all with a Tink, Terry-tink,

And never hurt your Mettles.

First let me have but a touch of your Ale,

'Twill steel me 'gainst cold weather,

Or Tinkers Freeze,

Or Vintners, Lees,

Or Tobacco chuse you whether:

But of your Ale,

Your Nappy Ale,

I would I had a Ferkin.

But I am old,

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=62)And very
very cold,

And never wear a Jerkin.

### 4.52. Song. 52.

HAve you observ'd the Wench in the street,

Sh'as scarce any Hose or Shooes to her feet,

Yet she is very merry, and when she cries, she sings,

I ha hot Codlings, hot Codlings.

Or have you ever seen or heard

The Mortal with a Lyon Tawny beard,

He lives as merrily as any heart can wish,

And still he cries buy a Brish, by a Brish.

Since these are so merry, why should we take care?

Musitians, like Camelions must live by the air:

Then lets be blith and bonny,

And no good meeting balk,

For when we have no money,

We shall finde chalk.

### 4.53. Song. 53.

IF any so wise is,

That Sack he dispises,

Let him drink his small Beer and be sober,

Whilst we drink Sack, and sing

As if it were Spring,

He shall droop like the trees in October.

But be sure over-night,

If this Dog do you bit [...],

You take it henceforth for a warning,

Soon as out of your bed,

To settle your head,

Take a hair of his tail in the morning.

And be not so silly,

To follow old Lilly,

For theres nothing but Sack that can tune us;

Let his Ne-assurseus,

Be put in his Cap-case,

And sing Bi-bi-to-vi-num Ie-ju-nus.

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=62)

### 4.54. Song 54.

GOod Simon, how comes it your Nose looks so red,

And your cheeks, and lips, look so pale?

Sure the heat of your Toast,

Your Nose did so Roast,

When they were both sous'd in Ale:

It shews like the spire,

Of Pauls Steeple on fire,

Each Ruby darts forth (such Lightning) slashes,

While your face looks as dead,

As if it were lead,

And cover'd all o're with Ashes.

Now to heighten his colour,

Yet fiill his pot fuller,

And nick it not so with froth;

Gramercy mine Host,

It shall save thee a Toast:

Sup Simon, for here is good broth.

### 4.55. Song 55.

HOw merrily looks

The man that hath Gold;

He seemeth but twenty,

Though threescore year old?

How nimble the Bee,

That flyeth about,

And gathereth Honey,

Within and without:

But men without Money,

And Boes without Honey,

Are nothing better than Droans, Droans, &c.

### 4.56. Song 56.

GOod Susan be as secret as you can,

You know your Master is a Jealous man,

Though thou and I do mean no hurt or ill,

[...]et men take women in the worst sense still;

[[Page 120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=63)And fear
of Horns more grief in hearts hath bred,

Than wearing Horns doth hurt a Cuckolds head.

### 4.57. Song 57.

THe wise men were but seven,

Ne'r more shall be for me:

The Muses were but nine,

The Worthies three times three:

And three merry Boys, and three merry Boys,

And three merry Boys are we.

The Vertues were but seven,

And three the greater be,

The Caesars they were twelve,

And the fatal sisters three;

And three merry Girls, and three merry Girls,

And three merry Girls are we.

### 4.58. Song 58.

A Womans Rule should be in such a fashion,

Onely to guide her Houshold, and her passion;

And her obedience never out of season,

So long as either Husband lasts or Reason.

Ill fares the hapless Family that shows

A Cock that's silent, and a Hen that Crows.

I know not which live more unnatural lives,

Obedient Husbands, or commanding Wives.

### 4.59. Song 59.

A Pox on the Gaoler, and on his fat Jowl;

There's liberty lies in the bottom o'th' Bowl.

A fig for what ever the Rascal can do,

Our Dung'on is deep but our cups are so too.

Then drink we around in despight of our Foes,

And make our cold Iron cry clink in the close.

### 4.60. Song 60.

WHen Wives do hate the Husbands Friends,

As Jealous of some  [...]earless ends,

And still an Angry look she settles,

As if of late sh'ad piss'd on Nettles;

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=63)Ware ho,
ware ho, for then of force

The Mare will prove the better Horse.

When women will be ever nice,

Foolish, proud, and manly wise,

And their wanton Humour itches,

To wear their Husbands widest Breeches:

Ware ho, ware ho, for then of force

The Mare will prove the better Horse.

### 4.61. Song 61.

IF she be not kinde as fair,

But peevish and unhandy,

Leave her, she's onely worth the care

Of some spruce Jack-a-dandy.

I would not have thee such an Ass,

Hadst thou nere so much leasure,

To sigh and whine for such a Lass,

Who [...]e pride's above her pleasure.

Make much of ev'ry buxom Girl,

Which needs but little courting;

Her value is above the pearl,

That takes delight in sporting.

### 4.62. A Catch 62.

HE that will win a widdows heart,

Must bear up briskly to her;

She loves the Lad that's free and smart,

But hates the formal Wooer.

### 4.63. Song 63.

LAdies, though to your conqu'ring eyes

Love owes his chiefest Victori [...]s,

And borrows those bright Arms from you,

With which he does the world subdue;

Yet you your selves are not above

The Empire, nor the gri [...]fs of Love.

Then wrack not Lovers with disdain,

Lest Love on you revenge her pain;

You are not free, because y'are fai [...],

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=64)The Boy
did not his Mother spare.

Beauty's but an offensive Dart,

It is no Armour for the Heart.

### 4.64. Song 64

PHillis, though your powerful charms

Have forc'd me from my Caelia's Arms,

That sure defence against all Pow'rs,

But those resistless eyes of yours.

Think not your Conquest to maintain

By rigour or unjust disdain,

In vain fair Nymph, in vain you strive,

For Love do's seldom hope survive.

My heart may languish for a time,

While all your glories in their prime,

May justifie their cruelty,

By the same force that conquer'd me.

When Age shall come, at whose command

Those Troops of Beauty's must disband:

A Tyrants strength once took away,

What slave's so dull as to obey?

Those threatning dangers to remove,

Make me believe (at least) you love;

Dissemble well, and by that art

Preserve and govern still my heart.

But if you'l choose another way,

To save your Empire from decay,

Oh then for ever fix your throne,

Be kinde, but kinde to me alone.

### 4.65. Song 65.

A Myntas he once went astray,

But now again hath found his way,

Mad Lovers oft do please themselves,

With noise and janglings of the Bells,

And fancie there some warbling Note,

As Ecchoing from a Mistriss throat,

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=64)And why
disturb'd then should they be,

Since Love on Earth's our Diety?

But those who reason do preserve,

Make all things to their purpose serve,

Taught then by that example, I

Loves power now will soon defie,

Although fond Cupid once prevail'd

His passions not on me entail'd,

No Son of his, I'le boldly say,

I'm made of Steel and not of Clay.

Hold, let me not this God despise,

For fear he rob me of my eyes,

His pow'r subjects, and can destroy,

I'le therefore stoop unto the Boy,

By yielding to his moderate fire

I may an easier way expire,

So sweet a death gives us no pain,

Whilst dying we revive again.

### 4.66. Song 66.

FAir Phydelia tempt no more,

I can thy Beauty now no more adore,

Nor offer to thy shrine,

I serve a more Divine

And great [...]r far than you,

Hark the Trumpet calls away,

We must go,

Lest the foe,

Get the field, and win the day.

Then march bravely on,

Charge them in the Van.

Our cause Gods is,

Though the odd's is

Ten times ten to one.

Tempt no more, I may not yield,

Although thine eyes

A Kingdom may surprize,

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=65)Leave off
thy wanton tales,

The High-born Prince of Wales

Is mounted in the field,

Where the Loyal Gentry flock,

Though forlorn,

Nobly born,

Of a ne'r decaying Stock;

Cavaliers be bold,

Bravely keep your hold,

He that loyters,

Is by Traytors

Meerly bought and sold.

One Kiss more, and so farewel,

Fie, no more,

I prethee fool give o're,

Why cloudst thou thus thy beams?

I see by these extreams,

A woman's heaven or hell:

Pray the King enjoy his own,

That the Queen

May be seen,

With her Babes on Englands Throne,

Rally up your men,

One shall vanquish ten,

Victory, we come to try

Our Valour once agen.

### 4.67. Song 67.

WEre Celia but as chaste as fair,

How could I kiss the Snare,

And never be

Weary of my Captivity!

But shee's a whore, that cools my blood;

Oh that she were less handsom, or more good.

Would you believe that there can rest

Deceit within that brest?

Or that those eyes,

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=65)Which
look like friends, are onely spies?

But shee's a whore, yet sure I lie,

May there not be degrees of chastity?

No no, what means that wanton smile,

But, onely to beguile?

Thus did the first

Of women make all men accurst:

I for their fakes give women o're,

The first was false, the fairest was a whore.

### 4.68. Song 68.

THe morning doth waste,

To the Meadows let's haste,

For the Sun doth with glory shine on them;

The Maidens must rake,

Whilest the Haycocks we make,

Then merrily tumble upon them.

The envy of Court,

Ne'r aims at our sport,

For we live both honest and meanly▪

Their Ladies are fine,

But to Venus encline,

And our Lasses are harmless and cleanly.

Then let us advance

Our selves in a Dance,

And afterwards fall to our labor;

No measure we meet,

Nor Musick so sweet

To us, as a Pipe and a Tabor.

### 4.69. Song 69.

IN the merry moneth of May,

On a morn by break of day,

Forth I walked the Woods so wide,

When as May was in her pride,

There I spied all alone,

Philliday and Coridon.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=66)Much ado
there was I wot,

He could love, but she could not,

His love he said was ever true,

Nor was mine e're false to you.

He said he had lov'd her long,

She said love should do no wrong.

Coridon would kiss her then,

She said maids must kiss no men,

Till they kiss for good and all,

Then she made the shepherds call

All the Gods to witness south,

Ne'r was lov'd a fairer youth.

Then with many a pretty Oath,

As yea, and nay, and faith and troath,

Such as silly shepherds use

When they will not love abuse.

Love that had been long deluded,

Was with kisses sweet concluded.

And Philliday with Garlands gay

Was crown'd the Lady of the May.

### 4.70. Song 70.

DOwn in a Garden sate my dearest love,

Her skin more soft than doun of Swan,

More tender hearted than the Turtle Dove,

And far more kinde then bleeding Pellican;

I courted her, she rose, and blushing said,

Why was I born to live, and die a Maid▪

With that I pluckt a pretty Marygold,

Whose dewy leaves shut up when day is done,

Sweeting (I said) arise, look, and behold,

A pretty Riddle I'le to thee unfold.

These leaves shut in as close as cloyster'd Nun,

Yet will they open when they see the Sun.

What mean you by this Riddle Sir, she said,

I pray expound it: Then I thus began,

Are not men made for Maids, and Maids for men?

[[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=66)With that
she chang'd her colour, and grew wan,

Since now this Riddle you so well unfold,

Be you the Sun, I'le be the Marygold.

### 4.71. Song 71.

THe Pot, and the Pipe,

The Cup, and the Can

Have quite undone, quite undone,

Many a Man.

The Hawk, and the Hound,

The Dice, and the Whore,

Have quite undone, quite undone,

Many a Score.

### 4.72. Song 72.

LOve is a sowre delight, and sugred grief,

A Sea of fears, and everlasting strife,

A breach of Reasons Laws, a secret thief,

A living death, a never dying life:

A bane for souls, a scourge for noble wits,

A deadly wound, a shaft that never hits.

A Labyrinth of doubts, and idle lust,

A raving Bird, a Tyrant most unjust;

Yet mighty Love, regard not what I say,

But blame the light that led my eyes astray;

Yet hurt her not, lest I sustain the smart,

Which am content to lodge in her my heart.

### 4.73. Song 73.

THen our Musick is in prime,

When our teeth keep triple time;

Hungry notes are fit for Knels,

May frankness be,

No quest to me,

The bag-pipe sounds, when that is swels.

A mooting night brings wholsom smiles,

When Iohn an Oaks and Iohn a Styles,

Do grease the Lawyers Sati [...].

A Reading day,

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=67)Frights
French away,

The Benchers dare speak Latin;

He that's full doth Verse compose,

Hunger deals in sullen Prose,

Take notice and discard h [...]r.

The empty Sp [...]t,

Ne'r cherisht wit,

Minerva loves the Larder.

First to Breakfast, then to Dine,

Is to conquer Bellarmine;

Distinctions then are budding,

Old Suckliffs wit,

Did never hit,

But after his Bag-pudding.

### 4.74. Song 74.

WHy should I not dally (my Dear) in thine eye,

And chase the dull hours away?

He that lets such a fair opportunity fly,

He loses his aim by delay,

And its pity he ever should sip,

Electar and Nectar that flows from thy lip.

Upon thy fair Tresses (which Phoebus excel)

My diligent fingers I'le tw [...]st;

O there's my desire for ever to dwell,

And I hope thou wilt never resist:

And e're and anon I will sip,

Electar and Nectar that flows from thy lip.

Upon thy fair Breasts I'le be mounted aloft,

And there in my Chariot I'le feel

The grain of thy Body more precious and soft

Than the web of Arachne's wheel:

And e're and anon I will sip,

Electar and Nectar that flows from thy lip.

I'le wander abroad in thy veins, and I'le seck

The Mazes of pleasure and love,

The Garden of Venus it is in thy che [...]k,

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=67)And
thither my fancy shall move:

And e're and anon I will sip,

Electar and Nectar that flows from thy lip.

There upon the Lillies and Roses I'le light,

And gather my sweets like the Bee:

And I will not go far for a lodging at night,

For surely the Hive shall be thee:

And e're and anon I will sip,

Electar and Nectar that flows from thy lip.

Where when I am hurl'd, my nest I will build,

Of Honey-combs all in a rank;

I'le buz in each corner until it be fill'd,

And make thee more full in the flank:

And e're and anon I will sip,

Electar and Nectar that flows from thy lip.

Come then with a Cornish let us combine,

(I know thou canst easily do't)

Thou shalt take my heart, and I will take thine,

And I'le give thee my hand to boot:

And e're and anon I will sip,

Electar and Nectar that flows from thy lip.

### 4.75. Song 75.

ALL in vain,

Turn again,

Why should I love her?

Since she can

Love no man,

I will give over.

I'le not stay

To obey,

But will retire.

Why should I

Thither fly,

And not enjoy her?

Let her still

Please her will,

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=68)With a
denial;

She shall be

Unto me,

As a Sun-Dial.

Let her blood

Raise the mud,

All in good season;

I'le not gaze

On her face,

Till I have reason.

### 4.76. Song 76.

HOw happy and free is the plunder,

When we care not for Iove, nor his thunder,

Having entred a Town,

The Lasses go down,

And to their O're-comers lie under.

Why then should we study to love, and look pale,

And make long Addresses to what will grow stale?

If her fingers be soft, long, and slender,

When once we have made her to render,

She will handle a Flute,

Better far than a Lute,

And make what was hard, to grow tender.

Then why should we study to love, and look pale,

And make long Addresses to what will grow stale?

If her hair of the delicate brown is,

And her belly as soft as the Doun is,

She will fire your heart,

In performing her part,

With a flame that more hot than the Town is.

Why then should we study to love, and looke pale,

And make long Addresses to what will grow stale?

When the houses with flashes do glitter,

We can sever our sweets from the bitter,

And in that bright night,

We can take our delight,

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=68)No Damsel
shall scape but we'l hit her.

Why then should we study to love and look pale,

And make long Addresses, but never prevail?

### 4.77. Song 77.

I'Me sick of love, Oh let me lie

Under your shades to sleep, or die;

Either is welcome so I may have,

Or here my bed, or here my grave.

Why do you sigh, and sob, and keep

Time to my tears, whilst I do weep;

Can you have sense, or do you prove,

What crucifixions are in love?

I know you do, and that's the why,

Y'are weeping sick of love as I.

### 4.78. Catch 78.

THere was three Cooks of Colebrook,

And they fell out with our Cook,

And all was for a Pudding they took,

From one of the Cooks of Colebrook.

Slash Cook,

Swash Cook,

And thou maist kiss mine Arse Cook,

And all was for a Pudding they took,

From one of the Cooks of Colebrook.

And they fell all on our Cook.

And beat him sore that he did look,

As black as did the Pudding he took,

From one of the Cooks of Colebrook.

### 4.79. Song 79.

LAst night I dreamed of my love,

When sleep did overtake her,

It was a pretty drowsie Rogue,

She slept I durst not wake her.

Her lips were like to Coral red,

A thousand times I kiss'd 'um,

And a thousand more I might hare stoll'n,

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=69)For she
had ne'r a miss'd 'um.

Her crisped Locks like threads of Gold,

Hung dangling o're the Pillow,

Great pity 'twas, that one so fair,

Should wear the Rainbow willow.

I folded down the Holland sheet,

A little below her belly,

But what I did, you ne'r shall know,

Nor is it meet to tell ye.

Her Belly's like to yonder Hill,

Some call it Mount of Pleasure,

And underneath there springs a Well,

Which no mans depth can measure.

### 4.80. Song 80.

I Feed a flame within,

Which so torments me,

That it both pains my heart,

And yet contents me;

'Tis such a pleasing smart,

And I so love it,

That I had rather die,

Than once remove it;

Yet he for whom I grieve,

Shall never know it,

My tongue does not betray,

Nor my eyes show it:

Not a sigh, nor a tear,

My pain discloses,

But they fall silently,

Like Dew of Roses.

But to prevent my Love

From being cruel,

My Heart's the Sacrifice,

As 'tis the Fuel;

And while I suffer this,

To give him quiet,

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=69)My faith
rewards my love,

Though he deny it.

On his eyes I will gaze,

There to delight me,

Whilst I conceal my love,

No frowns can fright me;

Nor to be more happy

I dare not aspire,

Nor can I fall more low,

Mounting no higher.

### 4.81. Song 81.

FLy, Oh fly, sad sighs, and hear

These few words into her ear,

Blest where e're thou dost remain,

Worthier of a softer chain,

Still I live, if it be true,

The turtle lives, that's cleft in two,

Tears and sorrows I have store,

But, Oh thine, do grieve me more;

Die I would, but that I do

Fear my fate would kill thee too.

### 4.82. Song 82.

ALl the materials are the same

Of Beauty and Desire,

In a fair woman's goodly frame,

No Beauty is without a flame,

No flame without a fire.

Then tell me what those creatures are,

That would be thought both chaste & fair.

If modesty it self appear,

With blushes in her face,

Think then the blood that danceth there,

Must revel in some other where,

To warm some other place.

Then tell me, &c.

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=70)If on her
neck her hair be spread,

With many a curious Ring;

Why sure that heat that curles the head,

Will make her mad to be in bed,

And do the other thing.

Then tell me, &c.

Go ask but the Philosopher,

What gives her lips the Balm;

What spirit gives motion to her eye,

Which makes her brest to swell so high,

And gives moisture to her Palm.

Then tell me what those Creatures are.

That would be thought both chaste and fair.

### 4.83. Song 83.

'TIs true, fair Celia, that by thee I live,

That ev'ry kiss, and ev'ry fond embrace,

Forms a new Soul within me, and doth give

A Balsom to the wound, made by thy face;

Yet still methinks I miss

That Bliss,

Which Lovers dare not name,

And onely then described is,

When flame doth meet with flame.

Those favors which do bless me ev'ry day,

Are yet but empty and Platonical;

Think not to please your servants with half pay,

Good Gamesters never stick to throw at all.

Who can endure to miss

That Bliss,

Which Lovers dare not name,

And onely then described is,

When flame doth meet with flame.

If all those sweets within you must remain,

Unknown and ne'r enjoy'd, like hidden treasure▪

Nature as well as I will lose her name,

And you as well as I your youthful pleasure.

[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=70)We wrong
our selves to miss

That Bliss,

Which Lovers dare not name,

And onely then described is,

When flame doth meet with flame.

Our souls which long have peep'd at one another,

Out of the narrow Casements of our eyes,

Shall now by love conducted meet together,

And in their mutual pleasures sympathize.

Then, then we shall not miss

That Bliss,

Which Lovers dare not name,

And onely then described is,

When flame doth meet with flame.

### 4.84. Song 84.

I Keep my Horse, I keep my Whore,

I take no Rents, yet am not poor;

I travel all the Land about,

And yet was born to never a foot:

With Partridge plump, and Woodcock fine,

I do at midnight often dine,

And if my whore be not in case,

My Hostess Daughter has her place.

The maids sit up and watch their turns,

If I stay long the Tapster mourns.

The Cook-maid has no minde to sin,

Though tempted by the Chamberlin;

But when I knock, Oh how they bustle!

The Hostler yawns, the Geldings justle;

If maid but sleep, Oh how they curse her,

And all this come of, deliver your Purse Sir.

### 4.85. Song 85.

I Wo' not go to't, I mun not go to 't,

For love, not yet for see,

For I am a maid, and will be a maid,

And a good one till I dee;

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=71)Yet mine
intent I could repent,

For one mans Company.

### 4.86. Song 86.

HE that marries a merry Lass,

He has most cause to be sad;

For let her go free in her merry tricks,

She'l work his patience mad.

But he that marries a scold, a scold,

He has most cause to be merry;

For when she's in her fits,

He may cherish his wits,

With singing heigh down derry.

He that weds a roaring Girl,

That will both scratch and fight;

Though he study all day,

To make her away

Will be glad to please her at night.

And he that copes with a sullen wench,

That scarce will speak at all;

Her doggedness more,

Than a Scold or a Whore,

Will penetrate his gall.

He that's matcht with a Turtle Dove,

That has no spleen about her;

Shall waste so much life,

In love of his wife,

He had better be without her.

### 4.87. Catch 87.

THe parch't earth drinks the rain,

Tree's drink off that again;

Rivers the Sea's do quaff,

Sol drinks the Ocean off,

And when that health is done,

Pale Cynthia drinks the Sun.

Friends, why do ye chide,

And stern my drinking tide?

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=71)Thinking
to make me sad,

I will, I will be mad.

### 4.88. Song 88.

COmmit thy ship unto the winde,

But not thy faith to woman-kinde;

There is more safety in the wave,

Than in the trust that women have.

There is none good; yet if it fall

Some one proove good among them all,

Some strange intents the Fates have had,

To make a good thing of a bad.

### 4.89. Song 89.

LIke to the falling of a star,

Or as the flight of Eagles are,

Or like the fresh Springs gaudy hue,

Or silver Drops of Morning dew;

Or like a winde that chaffes the flood,

Or Bubbles which on water stood;

Even such is man whose borrowed light,

Is straight calld in, and paid to Night:

The Winde blows out, the Bubble dies,

The Spring entomb'd in Autumn lies:

The Dew's dry'd up, the Star is shot,

The Flight is past, and man forgot.

### 4.90. Song 90.

LIke a Ring without a finger,

Or a Bell without a Ringer,

Like a Horse was never ridden,

Or a feast and no Guest bidden;

Like a well without a Bucket,

Or a Rose, if no man pluck it:

Just such as these may she be said,

That lives, ne'r loves, but dies a maid.

The Ring, if worn, the finger decks,

The Bell pull'd by the Ringer speaks.

[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=72)The Horse
doth ease, if he be ridden,

The Feast doth please, if Guest be bidden;

The Bucket draws the water forth,

The Rose when pluckt, is still more worth:

Such is the Virgin in my eyes,

That lives, loves, marries, e're she dies.

Like to a Stock not grafted on,

Or like a Lute not play'd upon.

Like a Jack without a weight,

Or a Barque without a fraight;

Like a Lock without a Key,

Or a Candle in the day:

Just such as these may she be said,

That lives, ne're loves, but dies a maid.

The graffed Stock doth bear best fruit,

There's musick in the finger'd Lute.

The Weight doth make the Jack go ready,

The Fraight doth make the Barque go steady;

The Key the Lock doth open right,

The Candle's useful in the night:

Such is the Virgin in my eyes,

That lives, loves, marries, e're she dies.

Like a Call without Anon Sir,

Or a Question and no Answer.

Like a Ship was never rigg'd,

Or a Myne was never digg'd;

Like a Wound without a Tent,

Or Silver Box without a Scent:

Just such us these may she be said,

That lives, ne're loves, but dies a maid.

Th' Anon Sir, doth obey the Call,

The civil Answer pleaseth all;

Who rig's a Ship, sayls with the winde,

Who digs a Myne doth Treasure finde;

The Wound by wholesom Tent hath ease,

The Box perfum'd, the senses please:

[[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=72)Such is
the Virgin in my eyes,

That lives, loves, marries, e're she dies.

Like Marrow-bone was never broken,

Or Commendations, and no Token;

Like a Fort, and none to win it,

Or like the Moon, and no man in it;

Like a School, without a Teacher,

Or like a Pulpit, and no Preacher:

Just such as these may she be said,

That lives, ne'r loves, but dies a maid.

The broken Marrow-bone is sweet,

The Token doth adorn the Greet;

There's Triumph in the Fort, being won,

The man rides glorious in the Moon;

The School is by the Teacher still'd,

The Pulpit by the Preacher filld;

Such is the Virgin in my eyes,

That lives, loves, marries, e're she dies.

Like a Cage without a Bird,

Or a thing too long deferr'd;

Like the Gold was never tryed,

Or the Ground unoccupied;

Like a House that's not possessed,

Or the Book was never pressed:

Just such as these may she be said,

That lives, ne'r loves, but dies a maid.

The Bird in Cage doth sweetly sing,

Due season sweetens every thing;

The Gold that's try'd from dross is pur'd,

There's profit in the Ground manur'd;

The House is by possession graced,

The Book well press'd is most embraced:

Such is the Virgin in my eyes,

That lives, loves, marries, e're she dies.

[[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=73)

### 4.91. Song 91.

THe Wit hath long b [...]holden been

Unto the Cap to keep it in;

Let now the Wit  [...]lie out amain,

In praise, to quit the Cap again.

The Cap that ow [...] the highest part,

Obtain'd that place by due desert.

For every Cap (whatever it be)

Is still the sign of some degree.

The Cap doth stand (each Head can show)

Above the Crown, the King's below;

The Cap is nearer Heav'n than we,

A sign of greater Majesty:

When off the Cap we chance to take,

The Head and Feet obeysance make;

For ev'ry Cap (whatever it be)

Is still the sign of some degree.

The Munmouth Cap, the Saylors Thrum,

And that wherein the Tradesmen come,

The Physick, Law, the Cap Divine,

And that which crow [...]s the Muses Nine,

The Caps that fools do countenance,

The goodly Cap of Maintenance,

And ev'ry Cap, &c,

The sickly Cap both plain and wrought,

The Fudling Cap, however bought,

The quilted, furr'd, the Velvet, Satin,

For which so many fools learn Latin:

The Cruel Cap, the  [...]ustian Fate,

The Perriwig, a Cap of late,

And ev'ry Cap, &c.

The Souldier that the Munmouth wear,

On Castle-tops their Ensigns rear;

The Sea-man with his Thrum doth stand

On higher parts than all the land;

The Tradesmans Cap aloft is born,

[[Page 141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=73)By
vantage of (some say) a Horn

And ev [...]ry Cap, &c.

The Physick Cap to dust can bring,

Without controul, the greatest King;

The Lawyers Cap hath heav'nly might,

To make a crooked Action right,

Which being round and endless knows

To make as endless any Cause.

Thus ev'ry Cap, &c.

Both east and west, both north and south,

Where e're the Gospel findes a mouth,

The Cap Divine doth thither look;

Tis square like Scholars and their Book,

The rest are round, but this is square,

To shew their heads, more stable are.

Thus ev'ry Cap, &c,

The Mortly Cap a man may wear,

Which makes him f [...]llow for a Peer,

And 'tis no slender part of wit,

To act a fool where great men fit.

But oh the Cap of London Town,

I wis 'tis like a Gyants Crown.

Thus ev'ry Cap, &c.

The sickly Cap not wrought with silk,

Is like Repentance white as milk;

When Hats in Church drop off in haste,

This never leaves the Head uncas'd;

The sick mans Cap that's wrought can tell,

Though he be sick, his state is well.

Thus ev'ry Cap, &c.

The Fudling cap by Bacchus might,

Turns night to day, and day to night;

It Jove-like makes proud heads to bend,

And lowly facts makes to asend;

It makes men higher than before,

By seeing double all their store.

Thus ev'ry Cap, &c.

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=74)This
rounds the world within the brain,

And makes a Monarch of a Swain;

When it is on our heads, we be

Compleatly Armed Cap-a-pee:

The fur'd and quilted Cap of Age,

Can make a mouldy Proverb sage.

Thus ev'ry Cap, &c.

The Sattin and the Velvet Hive,

Unto a Bishoprick doth drive;

Nay when a File of Capsy are seen in,

A square, then th [...]s, and next a linnen.

This triple Cap may raise some hope

(If fortune smile) to be a Pope.

Thus ev'ry Cap, &c.

Though Fustian Caps be slender wear,

The head is of no better gear;

The Cruel Cap is knit, like Hose,

For them whose zeal takes cold i'th Nose,

Whose Purity doth think it meet,

To cloath alike th [...] head and feet.

This Cap would fain, but cannot be

The onely sign of no degree.

The Perriwig, oh, that declares

The rise of Flesh, but fall of Hairs;

And none but Grandees can proceed

So far in sin, that this they need,

Before their Prince, which cover'd are,

And onely to themselves go bare.

This Cap of all the Caps that be,

Is now the sign of high degree.

### 4.92. Song 91.

CAst our Caps and Care away,

This is Beggars Holiday,

In the world look out and see,

Where's so happy a King as he?

At the Crowning of our King,

Thus we ever dance and sing,

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=74)Wher'es
the Nat'on lives so free,

And so merry as do we?

Be it Peace, or be it War,

Here at liberty we are,

Hang all Officers, we cry,

And the Magistrates too by.

We enjoy our ease and rest,

To the fields we are not prest.

When the Subsidy's encreast,

We are not a penny ceast;

Nor are call'd into the Town,

To be troubled with a Gown;

Nor will any go to law

With a Beggar for a straw.

All which happiness he brags,

He doth owe unto his rags.

### 4.93. Song 93.

I Lov'd a Lass a fair one,

As fair as e're was seen,

She was indeed a rare one,

Another Sheba Queen.

But fool as then I was,

I thought she lov'd me too,

But now alas sh'as l [...]ft me,

Falero, lero, loo.

Her hair like gold did glister,

Each eye was like a star,

She did surpass her sister,

Which past all others far,

[...]he would me Honey call,

[...]he'd, oh, she'd kiss me too,

[...]ut now alas sh'as left me,

Falero, lero, loo.

[...] summer time to Medley

[...]y love and I would go,

[...]he Boat-man he stood ready,

[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=75)My Love
and I to rowe;

For Cream there would we call.

For Wine and Cheese-cakes too,

But now alas, &c.

Many a merry Meeting

My Love and I have had;

She was my onely Sweeting,

She made my heart full glad,

The tears stood in her eyes,

Like to the Morning-dew,

But now alas, &c.

And when abroad we walked,

As Lovers fashion is,

Oft as we sweetly talked,

The sun would steal a Kiss;

The winde upon her lips

Likewise most sweetly blew,

But now alas, &c.

Her cheeks were like the Cherry,

Her Skin as white as snow,

When she was blythe and merry,

She Angle-like did show:

Her Waste exceeding small,

The Fives did fit her shooe,

But now alas, &c.

In Summer time, or Winter,

She had her hearts desire,

I still did scorn to stint her,

From Sugar, Sack, or Fire;

The world went round about,

No cares we ever knew,

But now alas, &c.

As we walked home together,

At midnight through the town,

To keep away the weather,

O're her I'de cast my Gown,

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=75)No cold
my Love should feel,

What e're the Heavens could do,

But now alas, &c.

Like Doves we would be billing,

And clip and kiss so fast;

Yet she would be unwilling,

That I should kiss the last,

They're Judas Kisses now,

Since she hath prov'd untrue,

For now alas, &c.

To Maidens Vows and Swearing,

Henceforth no credit give,

You may give them the hearing,

But never them believe;

They are as false as fair,

Unconstant, frail, untrue,

For mine alas, &c.

If ever Madam Nature,

For this false Lovers sake,

Another loving creature,

Like unto her would make,

Let her remember this,

To make the other true,

For this alas, &c.

No riches now can raise me,

No want makes me despair,

No misery amaze me,

Nor yet for want I care:

I have lost a world it self.

My Earthly Heaven adieu,

Since she alas hath left me,

Falero, lero, loo.

### 4.94. Song 94.

BE not proud, pretty one, for I must love thee,

Thou art fair, but unkinde, yet dost thou move me,

Red are thy lips and checks like rosie blushes,

[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=76)The flame
that's from thine eyes, burns me to ashes.

And on thy breast, the place of Love's abiding,

Sits Cupid now enthron'd, my pains deriding.

### 4.95. Song 95.

THe silver Swan, who living had no note

Till death approach'd and lockt her silent throat,

Leaning her brest against a  [...]eedy shore

She sung her first and last, and sung no more.

Farewel all joys, oh Death come close my eyes,

More geese than swans now live, more fools than wise.

### 4.96. Song 96\. On Cupid.

CVpid's no God, a wanton Childe,

His Art's too weak, his Powr's too milde;

No active heat, nor noble fire,

Feathers his Arrows with desire.

'Tis not his Bow or Shaft, 'tis Venus Eye,

Makes him ado [...]'d, and crowns his Deity.

### 4.97. Song 97.

MY Lodging it is on the cold ground,

And very hard is my fare,

But that which troubles me most, is

The unkindness of my Dear,

Yet still I cry, O turn Love,

And I prethee Love turn to me,

For thou art the man that I long for,

And alack what remedy.

I'le crown thee with Garlands of straw then,

And I'le marry thee with a Rush Ring.

My frozen hopes shall thaw then,

And merrily we will sing,

Oh turn to me my dear Love,

And I prethee Love turn to me,

For thou art the man that alone canst,

Procure my liberty.

But if thou wil harden thy heart still,

And be deaf to my pit ful moan,

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=76)Then I
must endure the smart still,

And tumble in straw all alone,

Yet still I cry, Oh turn Love,

And I prethee Love turn to me,

For thou art the man that alone art

The cause of my misery.

### 4.98. Song 98.

AMong Rose-buds slept a Bee,

Wak'd by Love who could not see,

His soft finger that was stung,

Then away poor Cupid flung;

First he ran, then flew about,

And to Venus thus cry'd out:

Help, Mother help, Oh I'm undone,

A Scorpion hath stung her Son.

'Twas a serpent, it could flie,

For't had wings as well as I;

Countrey swains call this a Bee,

But oh this hath mu [...]thered me.

Son, said Venus, if the sting,

Of a Flie such torment bring,

Think, oh think on all those hearts,

Pierced by thy burning darts.

### 4.99. Song 96.

HE deserved much better than so,

In the thick Woods to be lost,

Where the Nut-trees grew so low,

As if they had been nipt with the Frost,

Oh whither, whither, my Love dost thou go?

### 4.100. Song 100.

ABout the sweet bag of a Bee,

Two Cupids fell at ods;

And whose the pretty prize should be

They vow'd to ask the Gods:

Which Venus hearing thither came,

And for their boldness stript them,

[[Page 148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=77)And
taking thence from each his flame,

With rods of Mirtle whipt them;

Which done, to still their wanton cryes,

And quiet grown sh' had seen them,

She kist and dry'd their Dove-like eyes,

And gave the Bag between them.

### 4.101. Song 101.

See, See,

CHloris, my Chloris, comes in yonder bark,

Blow gently winds, for if ye sink that Ark,

You'l drown the world with tears, and at one breath,

Give to us all an universal death:

Hark, hark, how Arion on a Dolphin plays,

To my sweet Shepherdess his Roundelayes:

See how the Syreus flock to wait upon her,

As Queen of Love, and they her Maids of Honor.

Behold great Neptune's risen from the deep,

With all his Tritons, and begins to sweep

The rugged waves into a smoother form,

Not leaving one small wrinckle of a storm.

Mark how the winds stand still, and on her gaze,

See how her beauty doth the fish amaze;

The Whales have beg'd this boon of winde and wea­ther,

That on their backs they may convey her thither.

And see she Lands just like the rising Sun,

That leaves the bryny lake when night is done:

Fly, fly, Amintor to thy envy'd bliss,

And let not th' earth rob thee of her greeting Kiss.

### 4.102. Song 102.

ALas poor Cupid art thou blind?

Canst not thy bow and Arrows find?

Thy Mother sure the wanton plays,

And lays 'em up for Holy days.

Then Cupid mark how kind I'le be,

Because thou once wert so to me;

I'le arm thee with such powerful darts,

[[Page 149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=77)Shall
make thee once more God of hearts.

My Chloris arms shall be thy Bow,

Wh [...]h none but Love can bend you know;

He [...] precious hairs shall make the string,

Which of themselves wound every thing.

Then take but arrows from her eyes,

And all you shoot at surely dies.

### 4.103. Song 103.

BRing back my comfort, and return;

For well th [...]u know'st that I, that I,

In such a vigorous passion burn.

That missing thee, I die;

Return, return, insult no more,

Return, return, and me restore,

To those sequestred joys I had before.

### 4.104. Song 104.

I Love thee for thy fickleness,

And grant inconstancy;

For hadst thou been a constant Lass,

Then thou hadst ner lov'd me.

I love thee for thy wantonness,

And for thy Drollery;

For if thou hadst not lov'd sport,

Then thou hadst ne'r lov'd me.

I love thee for thy Poverty,

And for thy want of Coin;

For if thou hadst been worth a Groat,

Then thou hadst ne r been mine.

I love thee for thy ugliness,

And for thy foolery;

For if thou hadst been fair, or wise,

Then thou hadst ne'r lov'd me.

Then let me have thy heart a while,

And thou shalt have my money,

I'le part with all the wealth I have,

T' enjoy a Lass so bonny.

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=78)

### 4.105. Song 105.

THy love is cha [...]te, they tell thee so,

But how young Souldier shalt thou know?

Do by her,

As by thy Sword,

Take no friends word,

But try her;

'Twill raise her Honor one step higher,

Fame has her tryal at Loves bar,

Deisy'd Venus from a Star,

Shoots her lustre;

She had never been Goddess't,

If Mars had been modest:

Try and trust her.

### 4.106. Song 106.

DRink to me Boy,

Here's to thee Boy,

A Health t' our Master,

A nobler never obey'd I;

Couple him with my Lady,

Never man had a chaster;

Match the Vice-Roy as even,

With his Royal Creator,

To the King bless him Heav'n,

And a Pox take the Traitor.

### 4.107. Song 107\. A Dialogue between the Evening and a Boy.

Evening I Am the Ev'ning dark as night,

Jack-with-the-lanthorn, bring a light,

Iack Whither? Whither? Whither?

Even [...]ng, Hither, hither, hither.

Iack. Thou art some pratling eccho of my making.

Evening. Thou art a foolish fire by thy mistaking.

I am the Ev'ning that creates thee,

Iack. My Lanthorn and my Candle waits thee.

[[Page 151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=78) Evening.
Those Flajolets which we hear play,

Are Reapers who have lost their way,

They play, they sing, they dance a round,

Lead them up, heres Fairy ground.

Chorus

Let the men ware the Ditches,

Maids look to your Breeches;

We'l scratch them with Briars and Thistles,

When the Flajolets cry

We are a dry,

Pond-water shall wet their whistles.

### 4.108. Song 108.

THis is not the Elysian Grove,

Nor can I meet my slaughter'd love

Within these shades, come death and be

At last as merciful to me,

As in my dearest Dear loves fall,

Thou shewdst thy self Tyrannical.

Then did I die when he was slain,

But kill me now, I live again;

And shall go meet him in a Grove,

[...]airer than any here above.

Oh let this woful life expire,

Why should I wish Evadne's fire,

Sad Portia's Doals, or Lucrece Knife,

To rid me of a loathed life?

'Tis shame enough, that grief alone,

Kill me not now, when thou art gone,

But life since thou art slow to go,

I'le punish thee for lasting so,

And make thee piece-meal every day,

Dissolve to tears and melt away.

### 4.109. Song 109.

CHloris when e're you do intend,

To venture at a bosom friend,

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=79)Be sure
you know your servant well,

Before your liberty you sell,

For loves a feavour in young or old,

Is sometimes hot, and sometimes cold,

And men you know when e're they please,

Can soon be sick of this disease;

Then wisely chuse a friend that may,

Last for  [...]n Age, not for a day,

That loves thee not for lip or eye,

But for a mutual Sympathy:

To such a friend thy heart engage,

For he will court thee in old age,

And kiss thy hollow wrinckled brow,

With as much joy as he does know.

### 4.110. Song 110.

THe Master, the Swabber, the Boatswain, and I,

The Gunner and his Mate,

Lov'd Mall, Meg, and Marina and Margery,

But none of us care'd for Kate,

For she has a tongue with a tang,

Would cry to a Saylor go hang,

She lov'd not the savor of Tar, nor of Pitch,

Yet a Saylor might scratch her where e're she did itch▪

Then to Sea boys, and let her go hang.

### 4.111. Song 111.

BRight Aurel a, I do owe

All the Woe,

I can know,

To those glorious looks alone,

Though you are unrelenting stone:

The quick lightning from your eyes,

Did sacrifice,

My unwise,

My unweary harmless heart,

And now you glory in my smart.

How unjustly you do blame,

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=79)That pure
flame.

From you came?

Vext with what your self may burn

Your scorns to tinder did it turn.

The least spark now love can call,

That does fall,

On the small

Scorcht remainder of my heart,

Will make it burn in every part.

### 4.112. Song 112.

BEauty and Love once fell at odds,

And thus revil'd each other;

Quoth Love, I am one of the Gods,

And you wait on my Mother;

Thou hast no power o're men at all,

But what I gave to thee;

Nor art thou longer fair or sweet,

Than men acknowledge me.

Away fond Boy, then Beauty said,

We see that thou art blind;

But men have knowing eyes, and can

My graces better find;

'Twas I begot thee, mortals know,

And call'd thee Blind desire;

I made the Arrows and thy Bow,

And wings to kindle fire.

Love here in anger flew away,

And streight to Vulcan pray'd,

That he would tip his shafts with scorn,

To punish this proud maid;

So Beauty ever since hath bin

But courted for an hour.

To love a day, is now a sin,

'Gainst Cupid and his power.

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=80)

### 4.113. Song 112.

BRightest, since your pitying eye,

Saves whom it once condemn'd to die;

Whom lingring time did long dismay,

You have reliev'd in this short day.

Propitious Gods themselves can do no more,

Slow to destroy, but active to restore.

From your fair, but absent look,

Cold death her pale Artillery took,

Till gentle Love that dart supprest

And lodg'd a milder in your brest;

Like fam'd Achillis mistick spear, thus you,

Both scatter wounds, and scatter balsam too.

### 4.114. Song 113.

LOve and wenching are toys,

And at best but vain joys,

Fit to please beardless boys,

That sigh and pule till they are weary;

When they visit their misses,

And boast of their kisses,

I'le not envy their blisses,

While Vertue consists in Canary.

### 4.115. Song 114.

DIsputes daily arise, and errors grow bolder▪

Philosophers prattle and so does the sizer,

The more we should know then by being the older,

But plainly't appears there's no body wiser:

He that spends what he has, and wisely drinks all,

'Tis he is the man Ma-the-ma-ti-cal.

### 4.116. Song 115.

WHere the Bee sucks, there suck I,

In a Cowslips Bell I lie;

There I croutch when Owls do cry,

On the Bats back I do fly,

After Summer merrily.

[[Page 155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=80)Merrily,
merrily, shall I live now,

Under the blossom that hangs on the bow.

### 4.117. Song 116.

WHo is Silvia? What is she?

That all our Swains commend her?

Holy, fair, and wise is she,

The Heav'n such g [...]ce did lend her,

That she might admired be.

Is she kinde, as she is fair?

For beauty lives with kindness,

Love doth to her eyes repair,

To help him of his blindness,

And being helpd inhabits there:

Then to Silvia let us sing,

That Silvia is excelling;

She surmounts each mortal thing,

Upon the dull earth dwelling,

To her let us garlands bring.

### 4.118. A Drinking Catch, or Song 117.

HE that will look for a Swallows nest,

A swallows nest, a swallows nest,

Must look in the Chimney high,

And he that would look for a minikin Lass:

And a trimmikin Lass, and a tinnikin Lass:

Must chuse her by her black eye,

And he that will fish for frogs,

Must fish all in this well,

And all those,

That will fuddle their nose,

That will fuddle their nose,

Must come where good Alo's to sell.

### 4.119. Song 118.

YOu spotted Snakes with double tongue,

Thorny Hedge-hogs be not seen;

Newts and Blind-worms do no wrong,

Come not near our fairy Queen.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=81)
Philomele with melody,

Sing in your sweet lullaby;

Never harm,

Nor spell, nor charm,

Come our lovely Lady nigh,

So good night with lullaby.

Weaving Spiders come not here,

Hence you long-leg'd Spiders hence,

Beetles black approach not near;

Worm nor Snail, do no offence.

Philomele with melody, &c.

Hence away, now all is well,

One aloof, stand Sentinel.

### 4.120. Song 119.

TEll me, where is Fancy bred,

Or in the heart, or in the head?

How begot? how nourished?

It is ingendred in the eyes,

With gazing fed, and Fancy dies

In the Cradle where it lies:

Let us all ring Fancy's Knell,

Ding, Dong, Bell, Ding, Dong, Bell.

### 4.121. Song 120.

YOu that chuse not by the view,

Chance as fair, and chuse as true;

Since this fortune falls to you,

Be content, and seek no new▪

If you be well pleas'd with this,

And hold your fortune for your bliss;

Turn you where your Lady is,

And claim her with a loving Kiss.

### 4.122. Song 121.

UNder the Green-wood tree,

Who love [...] to lie with me,

And turn his merry Note,

Unto the sweet Birds throat;

[[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=81)Come
hither, come hither, come hither,

Here shall he see

No enemy,

But Winter and rough weather.

Who doth Ambition shun,

And loves to live i'th Sun,

Seeking the food he eats,

And pleas'd with what he gets;

Come hither, come hither, come hither,

Here shall he see

No enemy,

But Winter and rough weather.

### 4.123. Song 122.

WHat shall he have that kill'd the Deer?

His Leather-skin and Horns to wear,

Then sing him home, the rest shall bear this burthen,

Take thou no scorn,

To wear the Horn,

It was a Crest e're thou wast born,

Thy Fathers Father wore it,

And thy Father bore it:

The Horn, the Horn, the lusty Horn,

Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.

### 4.124. Song 123.

WEdding is great Iuno's Crown,

O blessed bond of boord and bed;

'Tis Hymen peoples every Town,

High Wedlock then be honored:

Honor, high Honor and Renown,

To Hymen God of every Town.

### 4.125. Song 124.

A Tripe well broil'd cannot be ill,

Broil her hot, burn her not,

Turn the Tripe Gill,

For a Tripe well broil'd cannot be ill.

[[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=82)

### 4.126. Song 125.

HOw long shall I pine for love?

How long shall I sue in vain?

How long like the Turtle-Dove,

Shall I heavily thus complain?

Shall the sails of my love stand still?

Shall the grifts of my hope be unground?

Oh fie, oh fie, oh fie,

Let the mill, let the mill go round,

Think me still,

In my Fathers mill,

Where I have oft been found-a,

Thrown on my back,

On a well fill'd sack,

While the mill has still gone round-a:

Prethee Sirrah try thy skill,

And again let the mill go round-a.

The young one, the old one,

The fearful, the bold one,

The lame one, though ne'r so unsound-a,

The Jew, and the Turk,

Have leave for to work,

The whilst that the mill goes round-a.

### 4.127. Song 126.

TAke her and hug her,

Then turn her and tug her,

And turn her again Boy, again;

Then if she mumble,

Or if her tail grumble,

Kiss her amain Boy, amain:

Do thy endeavour,

To take off her feavour,

Then her disease no longer will raign.

If nothing will serve her,

Then thus to preserve her,

Swinge her amain Boy, amain;

[[Page 159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=82)Give her
cold Jelly,

To take up her belly,

And once a day Swinge her again,

If she stand all these pains,

Then knock out her brains,

Her disease no longer will raign.

### 4.128. Song 127.

COme fill with wine this lusty bowl,

'Twil scatter sorrows from my soul,

'Twil stif [...]le care that inward foe,

'Tis the Antipodes to woe,

'Twil rescue old age from the grave,

'Twil make a Fr [...]eman of a Slave,

'Twil vigour and ripe fancie bring,

▪Twil hoise a Beggar to a King.

Lo how it glows and sparkles there,

Brighter than a spangled sphear,

And how it bubles from the deep,

Leaping to surprize my lip,

Rich juice, since thou dost court my taste,

I'le meet a kiss with equal haste,

Go then, go mingle with my blood,

Thus swallow I thy wealthy flood,

'Tis vanish't, and I see the shore,

Not wasted thither by an Oar;

Oh fill't again, and  [...]ill it high,

Oh let me be but drunk and die.

Seas heapt on Seas cannot asswage

This eager thirst, this violent rage;

Were half the Globe fill'd to the top,

I'de drink't, and eat the earth for sop,

But hah by all the Gods  [...]reel,

My Brain is Traytor to my will;

My Vitals stop, my spirits sink,

Come then I'le sleep, and dream of drink.

We that Bacchus do adore,

[[Page 160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=83) Chor.
Envy not the Misers store;

Nor the charms, nor sweets of Love,

Nor the state of Gods above.

### 4.129. Song 128.

'TIs late and cold, stir up the fire,

Sit close and draw the Table nigher;

Be merry, and drink wine that's old,

A hearty Medicine 'gainst a Cold:

Your Beds of wanton Doun the best,

Where you shall tumble to your rest;

I could wish you Wenches too,

But I am dead, and cannot do:

Call for the best, the House may ring,

Sack, White, and Clarret let them bring;

And drink apace while breath you have,

Youl'l finde but cold drink in the Grave:

Plover, Partridge for your Dinner,

And a Capon for the sinner,

You shall finde ready when you are up,

And your Horse shall have his sup▪

Welcome, welcome, are ye all,

From Master high, to servant small.

### 4.130. Song 129.

COme let us be friends, and most friendly agree,

For the Pimp, the Punck, & the Doctor are three,

Which cannot but thrive when united they be.

The Pimp brings in custom, the Punk she gets treasure,

Of which the Physician is sure of his measure,

For work which she makes him in sale of her pleasure;

For which when she fails by Diseases and Pain,

The Doctor new Vamps, and Upsets her again.

### 4.131. Song 130.

FEar not (Dear Love) that I'le reveal

Those hours of pleasure we two steal,

No eye shall see, nor yet the Sun

Descry what thou and I have done;

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=83)No ear
shall hear our love, but we

Silent as the night will be.

The God of Love himself (whose Dart

Did first wound mine, and then thy heart)

Shall never know that we can tell,

What sweets in stoln embraces dwell.

This onely means may finde it out,

If when I die, Physicians doubt

What caus'd my death, and there to view,

Of all their Judgements which was true;

Rip up my heart, Oh then I fear

The world will see thy Picture there.

### 4.132. Song 131.

ARm, arm, arm, arm, the Scouts are all come in,

Keep your Ranks close, & now your Honors win;

Behold from yonder Hill the Foe appears,

Bowes, Bills, Glaves, Arrows, Shields, Swords, Pikes, and Spears,

Like a dark Wood he comes, or Tempest pouring,

O view the Wings of Horse the Meadows scouring:

The Vant-guard marches bravely, hark the Drums-Dub-dub,

They meet, they meet, and now the Battel comes:

See how the Arrows flie,

That darken all the Skie,

Hark how the Trumpets sound,

Hark how the Hills abound,—Tara—tara—tara.

Hark how the Horses charge, In boys, In boys, in Tara—tara.

The Battel totters; Now the wounds begin,

O how they cry, O how they die▪

Room for the valiant Memnon arm'd with thunder,

See how he breaks the Ranks asunder!

They flie, they flie, Eumenes has the Chase,

And brave Polibius makes good his place,

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=84)To the
Plains, to the Woods.

To to the Rocks, to the Floods

They flie for succor, follow, follow, follow.—Hey, hey,

Hark how the Souldiers hollow,

Brave Diocles is dead,

And all his souldiers fled,

The Battel's won, and lost,

That many a life hath cost.

### 4.133. Song 131.

A Curse upon thee for a slave,

Art thou here, and heardst me rave?

Fly not sparkles from mine eye,

To shew my indignation nigh?

Am I not all foam and fire?

With voice as hoarse as a Town cryer;

How my back opes and shuts together,

With fury, as old mens with weather,

Couldst thou not hear my teeth knack hither,

Thou nasty, scurvy, mungril Toad,

Mischief on thee, light upon thee,

All the plagues that can confound thee,

Or did ever raign abroad:

Better a thousand lives it cost,

Than have brave Anger spilt or lost.

### 4.134. Song 133.

PEace and silence be the guide

To the Man, and to the Bride:

If there be a Joy yet new

In marriage, let it fall on you,

That all the world may wonder▪

If we should stay, we should do worse,

And turn our blessings to a curse,

By keeping you asunder.

### 4.135. Another 134.

JO Hymen, Jo Hymen, Jo Hymen,

Was wont to be still the old Song,

[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=84)At high
Nuptial Feasts,

Where the merry merry merry Guests

With joy and good and wishes did throng:

But to this new Wedding, new notes do I bring,

To rail at thee Hymen, while sadly I sing.

Fie ô Hymen, fie ô Hymen, fie ô Hymen,

What hands and what hearts dost thou knit?

A widow that's poor,

And a very very whore,

To an Heir that wants nothing but wit?

Yet thus far ô Hymen, thy answer is made,

When his means are spent, they may live by her trade.

### 4.136. Song 135.

GIve me more love, or more disdain,

The torrid, or the frozen Zone,

Bring equal case unto my pain,

The temperate afford me none;

Either extream of love, or hate,

Is sweeter than a calm estate.

Give me a storm: if it be love,

Like Danae in a golden showre,

I swim in pleasure; if it prove

Disdain, that torrent will devour

My Vulture hopes; And he's possest

Of heaven, that's but from hell releast;

Then crown my Joys, or cure my pain,

Give me more love, or more disdain.

### 4.137. Song 136.

TEll me prithee, faithless Swain,

Tell me prithee, faithless Swain,

Why you did such passion feign,

On purpose to deceive me,

I no sooner lov'd again,

But you again to leave me.

Phillis, we must blame our fate,

Phillis, we must blame our fate,

[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=85)Kindness
bears a certain date,

And e're those Joys we tasted,

You in peevishness and state,

The time had almost wasted.

'Twas my love did yours destroy,

'Twas my love did yours destroy,

Strephon had I still been coy,

I know you still would prize me:

Think you dream'd you did enjoy,

And then you'l not despise me.

Love like other native fires,

Love like other native fires,

Leaves what's burnt, and strait desires

Fresh Objects to be choosing;

Repetition always tyres,

And all's the worse for using.

Once again thy love pursue,

Once again thy love pursue,

And my scorns I will renew,

But passion doth so sway me,

That should I my sighs subdue,

My tears would soon betray me.

Sigh no more, nor weep in vain,

Sigh no more, nor weep in vain,

Nymph, your Beauty soon will gain

A more deserving Lover;

Slaves that once have broke their chains,

You hardly can recover.

### 4.138. Song 137.

TEll me no more you love, in vain

Fair Celia, you this passion feign;

Can those pretend to love, that do

Refuse what love perswades us too?

Who once has felt his active flame,

Dull Laws of Honor does disdain,

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=85)You would
be thought his slave, and yet

You will not to his pow'r submit.

More cruel then those Beauties are,

Whose coyness wounds us with despair;

For all the kindness which you show,

Each Smile and Kiss which you bestow,

Are like those Cordials which we give

To dying men, to make them live,

And languish cut an hour in pain;

Be kinder Celia, or Disdain.

### 4.139. Song 138.

HOw happy art thou and I,

That never knew how to love!

There's no such Blessings here beneath,

What e're there is above:

'Tis Liberty, 'tis Liberty,

Every wise man doth love.

### 4.140. Song 139.

WHy should onely Man be ty'd

To a foolish female thing,

When all Creatures else beside,

Birds and Beasts change every Spring?

Who would then to one be bound,

When so many may be found?

Why should I my self confine

To the limits of one place,

When I have all Europe mine,

Where I list to run my race?

Who would the [...] to one be bound,

When so many may be found?

Would you think him wise that now

Still one sort of meat doth eat,

When both Sea and Land allow

Sundry sorts of other meat?

Who would then to one be bound,

When so many may be found?

[[Page 166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=86)E're old
Saturn chang'd his throne,

Freedom reign'd and banisht strife,

Where was he that knew his own,

Or who call'd a woman wife?

Who would then to one bound,

When so many may be found?

Ten times happier are those men.

That enjoy'd those golden days;

Until time's redress'd agen,

I will never Hymen praise.

Who is it would to one be bound,

When so many may be found?

### 4.141. Song 140.

LOve's Empire, as the world is wide,

All living creatures Lovers be,

And those which have no life beside,

Love by a secret sympathy.

Nay Gods themselves who limit destiny,

To Love's almighty Scepter subject be.

Under gilt Roo [...]s, in humble Cells,

In Desarts, and in Princes Courts,

This uncontrouled Power dwells,

Love unto every place resorts;

And all the world under his yoke does faint,

But he's a Monarch that brooks no restraint.

### 4.142. Song 141.

OH Chloris, would the Gods allow

We e're might love as we love now,

What greater Joys hath earth in store?

Or Heav'n it self, to give us more?

For nothing sure so sweet can prove,

As pleasures of beginning Love.

But Love when to its heighth arriv'd,

Of all our Joys is shortest liv'd;

Its morning past, it sets so soon,

That none can finde the afternoon;

[[Page 167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=86)And of
that little time is lent,

Half in unkindness is mis-spent.

Since Fate to Love such short life gives.

And Love's so tender whilst it lives,

Let us remove main fears away,

So to prevent its first decay;

For Love, like blood, let out before,

Will loose its power, and cure no more.

### 4.143. Song 142.

NO, no, thou all of red and white,

Thou hast not yet undone me quite

For I have lost but half my heart,

Yet I confess the wound doth smart;

Then pretty thief, oh steal no more,

But let me keep one part in store.

Sure half's too much for thee of mine,

Unless I had some share in thine.

Though thou art fair, and though thou'rt young,

And though thou hast a pretty tongue,

And every word that thou dost say,

Might lead a Princes heart astray;

Yet all those Traps will ne'r catch me,

I must have kinder Snares from thee.

'Lass thou shalt see I can retreat,

And not lie conquer'd at thy feet.

'Tis true, if I did keep the field,

At length I must be forc'd to yield,

Not like a Coward will I flie,

Nor like a fool will stay and die,

With half my heart I'le march away,

Then t'other part not long will stay;

A heart divided knows no power,

Nor will submit above an houre.

Reproach me not, though heretofore

[...]onely freedome did adore,

[...]nd brag that none, though kind, as fair,

[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=87)The loss
of it could half repair,

Since I now willingly do yield

To Chloris beauty all the field.

With greater Joys I do resign

My freedom, though thou e're kepst thine,

And am resolv'd constant to prove,

Should her neglect transcend my love.

Strange charms they are which make me burn,

Without the hopes of a return.

To see, and not to be in love,

A wonder like her self would prove,

Whose charms by Nature, and by Art,

Do each of them deserve a heart.

For which my sorrows are not small,

I have but one to pay them all.

I must confess a while I strove

With reason to resist my love,

All saints sometimes 'gainst death do pray

Though it be to heaven their onely way.

'Tis onely Chloris hath the skill,

To make me blest against my will.

Nor will I so much as endure,

To think inconstancy a Cure;

For were I to that sin so bent,

It sure wou'd prove my punishment.

Here to adore I must confess

Is beter, than elsewhere Success.

### 4.144. Song. 143.

WAke all ye dead, what Ho, what Ho;

How soundly they sleep whose pillars lie low?

They minde not poor Lovers who walk above

On the decks of the world, in storms of love?

No whisper now, nor glance can pass

Through wick [...]s, or through panes of glass;

For our windows and doors, are shut and barr'd,

Lie close in the Church, and in the Church-yard,

[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=87)In ev'ry
grave, make room, make room,

The world [...]s at an end, and we come, we come.

The State is now, Loves foe, Loves foe,

Has seiz'd on his Arms, his Quiver, and Bowe,

Has pinion'd his Wings, and fetter'd his Feet,

Because he made way for Lovers to meet;

But oh sad chance, his Judge was old;

Hearts cruel grow, when blood grows cold.

No man being young, his Process would draw,

Oh Heavens that Love should be subject to Law,

Lovers go wooe the dead the dead!

Lie two in a grave, and to bed, to bed.

### 4.145. Song 144.

IN faith 'tis true, I am in love,

'Tis your black eyes have made me so;

My resolutions they remove,

And former niceness overthrow.

The glowing Char-coals set on fire

A heart, that former flames did shun,

Who, as Heretick unto desire,

Now's judg'd to suffer Matyrdom.

But Beauty since it is thy fate,

At distance thus to wound so sure,

Thy Vertues I w [...]ll imitate,

And see if distance prove a Cure.

Then farewel Mistriss, farewel Love,

Those lately entertain'd desires,

Wise men can from that plague remove;

Farewel black eyes, and farewel fires.

If ever I my heart acquit

Of those dull flames, I'le bid a pox

On all black eyes, and swear they'r sit

For nothing, but a Tinder-box.

### 4.146. Song 145.

I Happy saw, and faithful lov'd,

Which I shall ever, ever do,

[[Page 170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=88)Not to be
constant call'd and prov'd,

For that I am compell'd unto;

For she that in her love do's think of fame,

Love's not for the right end, but for a name.

Compell'd to love by parts divine,

I follow them whom Angels tend,

Then tell me, can my love decline

Whose lowest object do's ascend?

No I must love him, and will prove it then,

She's the best woman loves the best of men.

### 4.147. Song 146.

OUr Ruler hath got the Vertigo of State,

The world turns round in his Politick pate,

He steers in a Sea where his course cannot last,

And bears too much sail, for the strength of his Mast.

Let him plot all he can,

Like a Politick man,

Yet love though a Child may fit him:

The small Archer though blind,

Such an arrow will finde,

As with an old trick shall hit him,

Sure Angelo knows loves party is strong,

Love melts like soft wax, the hearts of the young;

And none are so old, but they think on the taste,

And weep with remembrance of kindnesses past.

Let him plot all, &c.

Love in the foolish is held a mad fit,

And madness in fools is reckon'd for wit,

The wise value love, as fools wisdome prize,

Which when they can't gain, they seem to despise.

Let him plot all, &c.

Cold Cowards all perils of anger shun,

To dangers of love, they leap when they run;

The Valiant in frolicks did follow the boy,

When he led em a dance from Greece to Troy.

Let him plot all, &c.

[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=88)

### 4.148. Song 147.

FOnd love, what dost thou mean,

To court an idle folly?

Platonick love is nothing else,

But meerly melancholly,

'Tis active love that makes us jolly.

To dote upon a face,

Or court a sparkling eye,

Or to esteem a dimpled cheek,

Compleat felicity,

'Tis to betray ones liberty.

Then pray be not so fond,

Think you that women can,

Rest satisfy'd with Complements,

The froathy part of man?

No, no, they hate a Puritan.

They care not for your sighs,

Nor your erected eyes,

They hate to hear a man complain,

Alas he dies, he dies,

Believ't they love a closer prize.

Then venter to embrace,

'Tis but a smack or two;

I'm confident no woman lives,

But sometimes she will do,

The fault lies not in her, but you.

### 4.149. Song 148.

SIlly heart forbear,

Those are murdering eyes,

In the which I swear,

Cupid lurking lies.

See his Quiver, see his Bowe too, see his Dart;

Fly, O fly! fly, O fly! Thou foolish heart.

### 4.150. Song 149.

POor Artaxander long hath woo'd

Fai [...] Celia, but in vain,

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=89)For she
on terms of Honour stood,

Though never on disdain▪

His kind address [...]s as a charm,

Sometimes she'd entertain,

With soft embraces close and warm,

Yet streight grow cold again.

### 4.151. Song 150.

THou Deity swift wing'd Love,

Sometimes below, sometimes above,

Little in shape, but great in power,

Thou that mak'st thy heart a tower,

And thy loop-holes Ladies eyes,

From whence thou strik'st the fond and wise.

Did all the shafts in thy fair Quiver,

Stick fast in my ambitious L [...]ver;

Yet thy power would I adore,

And call upon thee to shoot more,

Shoot more, shoot more.

### 4.152. Song 151.

O Cupid turn away thy Bow,

Thy pow'r we maids both feel and know

Fair Cupid turn away thy Bow,

They be those golden Arrows,

Bring Ladies all their sorrows,

And till there be more truth in men,

Never shoot at maids ag [...]n.

### 4.153. Song 152.

FAin would I wake thee sweet, but fear

I should invite you to worse chear;

In your Dreams you cannot fair,

Meaner than Musick, no compare;

None of your slumbers are compil'd,

Under the pleasures makes a Child:

Your day-delights so well compact,

That what you think turns all to act.

Id wish my self no better play.

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=89)Your
dream by night, your thought by day.

Wake, gently wake, part softly from your dreams,

The morning flies,

To your fair eyes,

To take her special beams,

### 4.154. Song 153.

LEt the Bells ring,

And the Boys s [...]ng,

The young Lass [...]s trip and play;

Let the Cups go round,

Till round goes the ground,

Our Learned Vicar we'l s [...]ay.

Let the Pig turn merrily hey,

And let the fat Goose swim,

For verily, verily, hey,

Our Vicar this day shall be t [...]im.

The stew'd Cock shall Crow—cock a doodle dow,

A loud cock a doodle shall crow,

The Duck, and the Drake,

Shall swim in a lake

Of Onions and Claret below.

Our wives shall be neat,

To bring in our meat,

To thee our noble Adviser,

Our pains shall be great,

And our Pottles shall sweat,

And we our selves shall be wiser.

We'l labor and swink,

We'l kiss, and we'l drink,

And Tithes shall come thicker and thicker,

We'l fall to the plough,

And get Children enough,

And thou shalt be learned O Vicar.

[[Page 174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=90)

### 4.155. Song 154.

HE that a Tinker, a Tinker will be.

Let him leave other loves and come listen to me;

Though he travels all the day,

Yet he comes home still at night,

And dallies with his Doxie,

And dreams of delight.

His Pot and his Toast in the morning he takes,

And all day long good Musick he makes,

He wanders up and down to Wakes and to Fairs,

And casts his Cap at the Court, and its cares;

When to the town the Tinker doth come,

Oh how the wanton wenches run.

Some bring him Basons, some bring him Bowls,

All wenches pray him to stop up their holes;

Tink goes the Hammer, the Skellet, and the Scummer,

Come bring me the Copper Kettle,

For the T [...]ker, the tinker, the merry merry tinker,

Oh he is the man of mettle.

### 4.156. Song 155.

A Silly poor shepherd was folding his sheep,

He walked so long he got cold in his feet,

He laid on his coals by two and by three,

But the more he laid on, the Cuc-colder was he.

Alas good wife what should we do now,

To buy us more fewel, we'l sell the brown Cow,

To buy us more coals to warm thee and me,

But the more he laid on, the Cut-colder was he.

Some shepherds, said she, themselves can warm keep,

By feeding their slock, and folding their sheep,

But when thou com'st home with thy tar-box and crook

Oh how it grieves me, how Cuc-cold thou dost look.

Alas good wife I walk through dew, dirt, and mire.

Whilst thou perhaps warm'st thy self without fire,

With a friend in a corner, in some such sort as where by

The warmer thou art, the Cuc-colder am I,

[[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=90)

### 4.157. Song 156.

NOw that the Spring hath fill'd our veins,

With quick and active fire,

And made green Liv'ry's o're th [...] [...]lains,

And every Grove a Quire;

Sing we this Song with mirth and merry glee,

And Bacchus crown the bowl,

And here's to thee,

And thou to me,

And every thirsty soul.

Shear sheep that have them cry we still,

But see that no man scape,

To take of the Sherry,

That makes us so merry,

And plump as the lusty grape.

### 4.158. Song 157.

PIsh, modest sipper, to't agen,

My sweetest joy,

The wine's not coy,

As women are,

My dearest puling, prethee then,

Prethee my fair,

Once more bedew those lips of thine,

Mend thy draught, and mend the wine,

Since it hath tasted of thy lip,

(Too quickly cloy'd)

How over-joy'd

It cheersully

Invites thee to another sip,

Methinks I see

The wine perfum'd by thee my fair,

Bacchus himself is dabling there.

Once more dear soul, nay prethee try,

Bath that Cherry,

In the Sherry,

The jocund wine,

[[Page 176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=91)Which
sweetly smiles and courts thy eye

As more divine:

Though thou take none to drink to me,

Takes pleasure to be drank by thee:

Nay my fair, off with't, ost with it clean,

Well I perceive,

Why this you leave,

My love reveals,

And makes me guess what 'tis you mean,

Because at meals,

My lips are kept from kissing thee,

Thou needs wilt kiss the Glass to me.

### 4.159. Song 158.

THe Spaniard loves his ancient st [...]p,

A Lombard the Venetian,

And some like breechless women go,

The Rush, Turk, Iew, and Grecian.

The thrifty French man wears smal waste,

The Du [...]ch his belly boasteth.

The English man is for th [...]m all,

And for each fashion coasteth.

The Turk in linnen wraps his head,

The Persian his in lawn too,

The Rush with Sable furrs his Cap,

And change will not be drawn to.

The Spaniards constant to his Black,

The French inconstant ever,

But of all the Felts that may be  [...]elt,

Give me the English Bever.

The German loves his Coney-wool,

The Irish-man his shag too;

The Welch his Monmouth loves to wear,

And of the same will brag too.

Some love the rough, and some the smooth,

Some great, and others small things,

But oh your liquorish English man,

[[Page 177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=91)He loves
to deal in all things

The Rush drinks Quass, Dutch Lubecks Beer,

And that is strong and mighty;

The Britain he Metheglin quaffs,

The Irish Aqua vitae.

The French affects the Orleans Grape,

The Spanyard sips his Sherry,

The English none of these can scape,

But he withall makes merry.

The Italian in her high Chopen,

Scotch Lass and lovely Vroe too,

The Spanish Donna, French Madam,

He doth not fear to go to.

Nothing so full of hazard, dread.

Nought lives above the Center;

No health, no fashion, wine, nor wench,

On which he wil not venture.

### 4.160. Song. 159.

FRom the fair Lavinian shore,

I your Markets come to store,

Muse not though so far I dwell,

And my wares come here to sell;

Such is the sacred Hunger of Gold,

Then come to my pack,

Where I cry,

What do you lack,

What do you buy,

For here it is to be sold.

You whose birth and breeding base,

Are rank'd into a nobler race;

And whose Parents heretofore

Neither Arms, nor Scutheons bore:

First let me have but a touch of your Gold,

Then come to me Lad,

You shall have,

What your Dad

[[Page 178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=92)Never
gave,

For here it is to be sold.

Madam, for your wrinkled fa [...]e,

Here's Complexion it to grace,

Which, if your earnest be but small,

It takes away the vertue all.

But if your Palms are anointed with gold

Then you shall seem

Like a Queen

Of fifteen,

Though you are threescore year old?

### 4.161. Song 160.

WHen Dasies py'd, and Violets blew,

And Cuckow-buds of yellow hue;

And Lady-smocks all silver white,

Do paint the Meadows with delight,

The Cuckow then on every tree,

Mocks married men; for thus sings he,

Cuckow, Cuckow, a word of fear,

Unpleasing to a married ear.

When shepherds Pipe on Oaten straws,

And merry Larks are Plough-mens Clocks,

When Turtles tread, and Rooks, and Daws,

And Maidens bleach their Summer Smocks,

The Cuckow then on every tree,

Mocks married men; for thus sings he,

Cuckow, Cuckow, a word of fear,

Unpleasing to a married ear.

### 4.162. Song 161.

AFter the pains of a desperate Lover,

When day and night I have sigh'd all in vain,

Ah what a pleasure it is to discover

In her eyes pity, who causes my pain!

Chorus Ah what, &c.

When the Denial comes fainter and fainter,

And her eyes give what her tongue does deny,

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=92)Ah what a
trembling I feel when I venter,

Ah what a trembling does usher my Joy!

Chor. Ah what, &c.

When with unkindness our Love at a stand is,

And both have punish'd our selves with the pain,

Ah what a pleasure the touch of her hand is!

A what a pleasure to press it again!

Chor. Ah what, &c.

When with a sigh she accords me the blessing,

And her eyes twinkle 'twixt pleasure and pain,

Ah what a Joy! Oh beyond all expressing!

Ah what a Joy to hear it again.

Chor. Ah what, &c.

### 4.163. Song 162.

CAlm was the Evening, and clear was the Skie,

And new budding Flowers did spring,

When all alone went Amintas and I

To hear the sweet Nightingale sing.

I sate, and he laid him down by me,

And scarcely his breath he could draw,

But when with a fear,

He began to come near,

He was dasht with a ah, ah, ah.

He blusht to himself, and lay still  [...]or a while,

And his modesty curb'd his desire,

But streightly convinc'd all his fears with a smile,

And added new flames to his fire.

Ah Silvia, said he, you are cruel,

To keep your poor Lover in awe,

Then once more he prest

With his hands to my brest,

But was dasht with a ah, ah, ah▪

I knew 'twas his passions caus'd all his fear,

And therefore I pitied his case,

I whisper'd him softly, there's no body near,

And laid my check close to his face:

[[Page 180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=93)But as he
grew bolder and bolder,

A shepherd came by us, and saw,

And just as our bliss

Began with a kiss,

He burst out with ha, ha, ha, ha,

### 4.164. Song 163.

WHen I sickles hang by the wall,

And Dick the shepherd blows his nail,

And Tom bears Log into the Hall,

And Milk comes frozen home in pail,

When blood is nipt, and ways be foul,

Then nightly sings the staring Owl,

Tu-whit, to-who, a merry Note,

While greasie Ione doth keel the pot.

When all aloud the winde doth blow,

And coffing drowns the Parsons saw,

And Birds sits brooking in the snow,

And Marrians Nose looks red and raw;

When roasted Crabs hiss in the bowl,

Then nightly sings the staring Owl,

Tu-whit, to-who, a merry Note,

While greasie Ione doth keel the po [...].

### 4.165. Song 164.

TAke, oh take those lips away,

That so sweetly were forsworn;

And those eyes the break of day,

Lights that do mislead the morn;

But my kisses bring again,

Seals of Love, but seal'd in vain.

### 4.166. Song 165.

SIgh no more Ladies, sigh no more,

Men were deceivers ever,

One foot in sea, and one on shore,

To one thing constant never:

Then sigh not so,

But let them go,

[[Page 181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=93)And be
you blith and bonny,

Converting all your sounds of woe,

Into hey Nony, nony.

Sing no more Ditties, sing no more

Of dumps so dull and heavy,

The fraud of men were ever so,

Since Summer first was leavy;

Then sigh not so,

But let them go,

And be you blithe and bony,

Converting all your sounds of woe,

Into hey Nony, nony.

### 4.167. Song 166.

A Maid, I dare not tell her name,

For fear I should disgrace her,

Tempted a young man for to come

One night, and to embrace her,

But at the door he made a stop,

He made a stop, he made a stop,

But she lay still, and snoring said,

The Latch pull up, the Latch pull up.

This young man hearing of her words,

Pull'd up the Latch and enter'd;

And in the place unfortunately,

To her Mothers Bed he venter'd:

But the poor maid was sore afraid,

And almost dead, and almost dead,

But she lay still, and snoring said,

The Truckle-bed, the Truckle-bed.

Unto the Truckle-bed he went,

But as the youth was going,

Th' unlucky Cradle stood in's way,

And almost spoil'd his wooing;

When after that, the maid he spy'd,

The maid he spy'd, the maid he spy'd,

But she lay still, and snoring said,

The other side, the other side.

[[Page 182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=94)Unto the
other side he went,

To shew the love he meant her,

Pull'd off his Cloaths couragiously,

And falls to th' work he was sent for;

But the poor Maid made no reply,

Made no reply, made no reply,

But she lay still, and snoring said,

A little too high, a little too high.

This lusty Lover was half asham'd

Of her gentle admonition,

He thought to charge her home as well,

As any Girl could wish him;

O now my Love, I'm right I know,

I'm right I know, I'm right I know,

But she lay still, and snoring said,

A little too low, a little too low.

Though by mistakes, at length this youth

His business so well tended,

He hot the mark so cunningly,

He defi'd the world to mend it;

O now my Love, I'm right I swear,

I'm right I swear, I'm right I swear,

But she lay still, and snoring said,

O there, O there, O there, O there.

### 4.168. Song 167.

I Can love for an hour,

When I'm at leisure,

He that loves half a day,

Sins without measure;

Cupid come tell me, what

What art had thy Mother,

To make me love one Face

More than another.

Men to be thought more wise,

Daily endeavor,

To make the world believe

They can love ever.

[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=94)Ladies
believe them not,

They will deceive you,

For when they have their wills,

Then they will leave you.

Men cannot feast themselves

VVith your sweet Features,

They love variety

Of charming Creatures;

Too much of any thing

Sets them a cooling,

Though they can nothing do,

They will be fooling.

### 4.169. Song 168.

TOm and Will were Shepherds swains,

They lov'd and liv'd together,

VVhen fair Pastor [...] grac'd their Plains,

Alas! why came she thither?

For though they fed two several Flocks,

They had but one desire,

Pastoras Eyes, and amber Locks,

Sat both their hearts on fire.

Tom came of honest gentle Race,

By Father, and by Mother,

Will was noble, but alas,

He was a younger brother.

Tom was toysom, Will was sad,

No Huntsman, nor no Fowler,

Tom was held a proper Lad,

But Will the better Bowler.

Tom would drink her Health, and swear

The Nation could not want her,

Will could take her by the ear,

And with his voice inchant her.

Tom kept always in her sight,

And ne'r forgat his duty,

Will was witty, and could write

[[Page 184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=95)Smooth
Sonnets on her Beauty.

Thus did she exercise her skill,

When both did dote upon her,

She graciously did use them still,

And still preserv'd her honor.

So cunning and so fair a she,

And of so sweet behavior,

That Tom thought he, and Will thought he

Was chiefly in her favor.

Which of those two she loved most,

Or whether she lov'd either,

'Tis thought they'l finde it to their cost,

That she indeed lov'd neither.

For to the Court Pastora's gone,

'Thad been no Court without her;

The Queen among her train had none

Was half so fair about her.

Tom hung his Dog, and threw away

His Sheep-crook, and his Wallet,

Will burst his Pipes, and curst the day

That e're he made a Sonnet.

### 4.170. Song 169.

LAwn as white as driven Snow,

Cypress as black as e're was Crow,

Gloves as sweet as Damask Roses,

Masks for Face [...], and for Noses,

Bugle-bracelets, Neck-lace Amber,

Perfume for a Ladies Chamber;

Golden Quoifs, and Stomachers,

For my Lads to give their Dears;

Pins, and Poaking-sticks of steel:

Come buy of me, Come;

Come buy, come buy:

Buy Lads, or else your Lasses cry:

Come buy.

Will you buy any Tape,

[[Page 185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=95)Or Lace
for your Cape,

My dainty Duck, my Dear-a?

Any Silk, any Thread,

Any Toys for your head,

Of the new'st, and fin'st, fin'st wear-a?

Come to the Pedler,

Money's a medler,

That doth utter all mens ware-a.

### 4.171. Song 170.

FEar no more the heat o [...]th' Sun,

Nor the furious Winters rages,

Thou thy worldly task hast done,

Home art gone, and take thy wages.

Golden Lads and Girls all must,

As Chimney-sweepers, come to dust.

Fear no more the frown o'th' Great,

Thou art past the Tyrants strook,

Care no more to cloath and eat,

To thee the Reed is as the Oak;

The Scepter, Learning, Physick must,

All follow thee, and come to dust.

Fear no more the Lightning flash,

Nor th'all-dreaded Thunder-stone.

Fear no slander, Censure rash,

Thou hast finisht Joy and Mone.

All Lovers young, all Lovers must

Consign to thee, and come to dust.

No Exorciser harm thee,

Nor no witchcraft charm thee.

Ghost unlaid forbear thee,

Nothing ill come near thee,

Quiet consummation have,

And renowned be thy Grave.

### 4.172. Song 171.

A Young man lately in our Town,

He went to bed one night,

[[Page 186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=96)He had no
sooner laid him down,

But was troubled with a Sprite:

So vigorously this Spirit stood,

Let him do what he can,

Oh then he said,

It must be laid,

By a woman, not a man.

A handsom Maid did undertake,

And into th' Bed she leapt,

And to allay the Spirits power,

Full close to him she crept:

She having such a guardian care,

Her office to discharge,

She opened wide her Conjuring-book,

And laid her leaves at large.

Her office she did well perform

VVithin a little space,

Then up she rose, and down he lay,

And durst not shew his face.

She took her leave, and away she went,

VVhen she had done the deed,

Saying, if't chance to come again,

Then send for me with speed.

### 4.173. Song 172.

'TIs a merry  [...] we live,

All our work is brought unto us,

Still are getting, never give,

For their cloaths all men do wooe us,

Yet unkinde, they blast our names

With aspersions of dishonor;

For which we make bold with their Dames,

When we take our measure on her.

### 4.174. Song 173.

HElp Love, or else I sink, for know,

He best can help that causeth wo;

Help then, and with thy smoother Palm,

The fury of my passions calm:

[[Page
187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=96)Succeeding tears
in Billows rise,

As there were Seas met in my eyes;

My  [...]ighs united proudly grown,

As the four windes combin'd in one:

Hark how they roar! my sighs and tears,

Sure have conspir'd to tempt my fears;

See how they swell now they are met,

And ev'n a tempest do beget!

It shakes my Barque, her ribs do crack,

And now I fear a dismal wrack:

Help Love for pity, then I pray,

E're my poor heart be cast away.

### 4.175. Song 174.

MAke ready fair Lady to night,

And stand at the door below,

For I will be there,

To receive you with care,

And with your true Love you shall go.

And when the stars twinkle so bright,

Then down to the door will I creep;

To my Love I will flie,

E're the Jealous can spie,

And leave my old Daddy asleep.

### 4.176. Song 175.

ONce was I sad,

T [...]ll I grew to be mad,

But I'le never be sad again boys;

I courted a Riddle,

She fancied a Fiddle,

The tune does still run in my brain boys.

The Gittarn, the Lute,

The Pipe, and the Flute,

Are the new Alamode for the Nan boys,

With Pistol and Dagger,

The women out-swagger,

The Blades with the Mu [...] and the Fan boys.

[[Page 188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=97)All the
town is run mad,

And the Hectors do pad,

Besides their false Dice, and the Slur-boys:

The new formed Cheat [...]

With their acts and debates,

Have brought the old to a Demur boys.

Men stand upon thorns,

To pull out their horns,

And to cuckold themselves in grain-boys:

When to wear um before,

Does make their heads sore,

But behind they do suffer no pain-boys.

The Papist, the Presbyter,

And Prestor Iohn,

Are much discontented we see boys:

For all their Religion,

No Mahomets Pidgeon

Can make 'um be madder than we boys.

There is a mad fellow,

Clad always  [...] yellow,

And sometim [...] his Nose is blew boys:

He cheated th [...] devil,

Which was very ev [...]

To him and to all his Crew boys.

And whilst we are thus mad,

My Princess is glad

To laugh at the world, and at me boys,

'Cause I can't apprehend

What she please to command

But it is not my self you see boys.

### 4.177. Song 176.

STay, shut the Gate,

T'other quart; faith 'tis not so late

As your thinking,

The Stars which you see,

In the Hemisphere be,

[[Page 189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=97)Are but
studs in our Cheeks by good drinking.

The Suns gone to tipple all night in the Sea, boys,

To morrow he'l blush, that he's paler than we boys,

Drink wine, give him water, 'tis Sack makes us the boys.

Fill up the Glass,

To the next merry Lad let it pass,

Come away with't:

Let's set foot to foot,

And give our mindes to't,

'Tis H [...]etical Six that doth slay wit;

Then  [...]ang up good Faces, let's drink till our Noses

Gives freedom to speak what our fancy disposes,

Beneath whose protection, now under the Rose is.

Drink off your Bowl,

'Twill enrich both your head and your soul

With Canary;

For a Carbuncle'd Face,

Saves a tedious race,

And the Indies about us we carry:

No Helicon like to the Juice of good wine is,

For Phoebus had never had wit that divine is,

Had his face not been bow-dy'd as thine is, and mine is.

This must go round,

Off with your H [...]ts till the Pavement be crown'd

With your Beavers;

A Red-coated Face,

Frights a Serjeant and's Mace,

Whilst the Constable trembles to shivers,

In state march our Faces like some of the Quorum,

While the whores do fall down; & the vulgar ador 'um

And our Noses like Link-boys run shining before 'um.

### 4.178. Song 177.

MAy I finde a woman fair,

And h [...]r minde as clear as air.

If her beauty go alone,

Tis to me as if 'twere none.

[[Page 190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=98)May I
finde a woman rich,

And not of too high a pitch;

If that pride should cause disdain,

Tell me, Lover, where's thy gain?

May I finde a woman wise,

And her falshood not disguise,

Hath she wit, as she hath will;

Double arm'd she is to ill.

May I finde a woman kinde,

And not wavering like the winde?

How should I call that love mine,

When 'tis his, and his, and thine.

May I finde a woman true,

There is Beauties fairest hue;

There is Beauty, Love, and Wit,

Happy he can compass it.

### 4.179. Song 178.

I Courted a Lass, my folly

Was the cause of her disdaining,

I courted her thus; What shall I

Sweet Dolly, d [...] for thy dear loves obtaining?

But another had dallied with Dolly,

That Dolly for all her feigning,

Had got such a mountain above her valley,

That Dolly went home complaining.

### 4.180. Song 179.

GOod People give ear

Whilst a story I tell,

Of twenty black Tradesmen,

Were brought up in Hell,

On purpose poor People

To Rob of their due;

There's none shall be noozed

If you finde but one true.

The first was a Coyner

That Stampt in a mold,

[[Page 191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=98)The
second a Voucher

To put off his Gold.

Then hark well,

And mark well,

See what will befal.

They are twenty sworn Brethren

Tradesmen all.

The third was a Padder

That fell to decay;

And when he was living

Took to the High-way.

The forth is a Mill-Ken,

To crack up a door;

Hee'l venture to rob, both

The Rich, and the Poor.

The fifth is a Glasier,

Who when he creeps in;

To pinch all the Lurry,

He thinks it no sin.

Then hark well, &c.

The sixt is a Foyl-cloy

That not one Hick spares,

And the seventh is a Budgg,

To track up the staires;

The eight is a Bulk,

That can Bulk any Hick,

If the Master be napt,

Then Bulk he is sick.

The ninth is a Ginny

To lift up a Grate;

The sees but the Lurry

With his Hooks he will bate.

Then hark well, &c.

[...]he tenth is a Shop-lift

[...]hat carries a Bob,

[...]hen he ranges the City

[[Page 192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=99)The Shops
for to Rob.

The eleventh is a Bubber,

Much used of late,

He goes to the Alehouse,

And steals there the plate.

The twelfth a Trapan,

If a Cull he doth meet,

He naps all his Cole,

And turns him i'th' street:

Then hark well, &c.

The thirteenth a Fambler,

False Rings for to sell,

When a Mob he has bit,

His Cole he will tell.

The fourteenth a Gamester,

If he sees the Hick sweet,

He presently drops down

A Cog in the street.

The fifteenth a Prancer,

Whose courage is small,

If they catch him Horse courssing

He's noozed for all.

Then hark well, &c.

The sixteenth a Sheep-napper,

Whose trade's so deep,

If he's caught in the Corn,

He's mark't for a Sheep.

The seventeenth a Dun-aker,

That will make vow's,

To go in the Country,

And steal all the Cows.

The eighteenth a Kid-napper,

Spirits young men,

Though he tip them the piks,

They nap him agen.

Then hark well, &c.

[[Page 193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=99)The
nineteenth is a Prigger

Of the Cacklers,

Goes into the Country,

To visit the Farmers,

He steals their Poultry,

And thinks it no sin,

When into the Hen-roost

I'th' night he gets in.

The twentieth a Thief-catcher,

So we him call,

If he nap a poor Tradesman,

He pays for all.

Then hark well, &c.

There's many more craftsmen,

Which I could name;

That do use such like trades,

Yet think it no shame:

These may a poor Convert,

Confess to his grief,

Are all the black Trades

Of a Gentleman Thief;

Who though a good Workman,

Is seldome made free,

Till he rides on a Cart,

To be noozed on a Tree.

Then hark well,

And mark well,

See what doth befal,

'Twas the end of these twenty

Sworn Brethren all.

### 4.181. Song 180.

COme hither sweet Melancholly,

Now tis time to be Jolly,

Dame Fortune ▪ is poor,

And Venus a whore,

And Cupid is full of his folly

[[Page 194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=100)I cannot
but laugh to see men,

Thus dote on foolsh women,

Accursed are they,

With such Puppets to play,

And blessed is he that's a free-man.

For as once, I dearly lov'd a creature,

For vertue more than feature;

But she is grown coy,

That then was my Joy,

And she is of a weather-cock nature.

I lov'd her as a sister,

A thousand times I kist her,

Yet nevertheless I mist her.

These words in her mouth were common,

She'd marry my self, or no man;

But away she flew,

Like a Hawk from mew,

So fickle a thing is woman.

Chaste Life shall be my study,

My Closet a Walk that's woody;

And during my life,

I'le ne'r have a wife,

She'l make my brains grow muddy.

My Muse shall be my Bedfellow,

A Bundle of Books my pillow,

And in stead of a Horn,

My bed I'le adorn,

With a Garland made of Willow.

I'le never more trust a woman,

That will prove constant to no man,

She sets up her guiles,

With flattering smiles,

With a purpose to undo man.

For they are always so fickle,

And in their behavior brittle.

Like grass that is old,

[[Page 195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=100)And
falls from the mould,

They are sit to be trim'd with a sickle.

False Fondling now I'le leave thee,

For thou wilt of my wits bereave me;

Although I am blind,

I evermore find,

Thou art constant to decieve me.

Prime youth lasts not, age will follow,

And make all white, thy Tresses yellow;

And when time shall date thy glory,

Then too late thou wilt be sorry.

### 4.182. Song 181.

A King lives not a braver life,

Than we merry pris'ners do,

Though fools in freedom do conceive,

That we are in want and wo.

When we never take care

For providing our fare,

We have one that doth purvay

For victual day by day.

What pray then can a King have more,

Than one that doth provide his store?

Kings have a Keeper, so have we,

Although he be not a Lord,

Yet shall strut and swell as big as he,

And command all with a word;

All the Judges do appear

Twice before us ev'ry year,

Where each one of us doth stand

With the Law in his own hand.

Can Kings command then more than we,

Who of all Laws Commanders be?

Each to the Hall walks in his chain,

Where our Guard about us stand,

And all the Country comes in amain,

At holding up of a hand,

[[Page 196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=101)Though
our Chaplain cannot preach,

Yet he'l suddenly you teach

To read of the hardest Psalm,

Doth not he deserve the Palm?

Ye Courtiers all ye cannot show,

Such Officers as these I trow.

### 4.183. Song 182.

IN Love, away, you do me wrong,

I hope I have not liv'd so long

Freed from the treach'ries of your eyes,

Now to be caught and made your prize.

No Lady, 'tis not all your Art

Can make me, and my freedom part.

In love, with what? with spanish Wine,

Or the French Juice in carnadine,

The Dimple or the other Grace,

But not in Love with your fair Face.

No there's more sweetn [...]ss in pure wine,

Than either looks or lips of thine.

Your God you say can shoot so right,

Heel wound a heart in th' darkest night,

Pray let him fling away his dart,

And see if he can hit my heart:

No Cupid, know if thou'lt be mine,

Turn Ga [...]imed [...], and fill some Wine.

Then fill a cup of Perry

And we will be merry,

There's nought but pure wine

Makes us Love sick and pine,

Ile hug the cup and kiss it,

And sigh if I miss it,

'Tis that makes us Jolly,

Sing hey trolly lolly.

### 4.184. Song 183.

A Maiden fair I dare not wed.

For fear I wear Acteons head;

[[Page 197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=101)A Maiden
black is ever proud,

The little one is ever loud.

A Maiden that is tall of growth,

Is always subject unto sloth:

The fair, the foul, the little, the tall,

Some fault remains among them all.

### 4.185. Song 184.

NOw, by my love, the greatest Oath that is,

There's none that loves thee half so well as I,

I do not neither ask your love for this;

For Heavens sake believe me, or I die,

No faithful servant e're but did deserve

His Master should believe that he did serve,

And I ask no more wages though I starve.

My love, fair Beauty, like thy self is pure,

Nor could I e're a bestial love approve,

One smile would make me willingly endure,

I can't but keep together Life and Love.

Being your pris'ner and your captiv'd slave,

So do not feast nor banquet look to have,

A little bread and water's all I crave.

Upon your sigh for pity I can live,

One tear will keep me twenty years at least,

And fifty more a gentle Look will give,

A hundred years but one kinde Word will feast,

A thousand more will surely added be,

If you an inclination have for me,

They comprehend a vast Eternity.

### 4.186. Song 185.

HAve you any work for the Sow-gelder, ho?

My Horn goes too high, too low,

Have you any Pigs, Calves, or Colts?

Have you any Lambs in your holts,

To cut for the stone?

Here comes a cunning one.

Have you any Brauches to spade,

[[Page 198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=102)Or e're
a fair Maid,

That would be a Nun?

Come kiss me 'tis done.

Hark how my merry Horn doth blow.

Too high, too low, Too high, too low.

### 4.187. Song 186.

I Am a Rogue, and a stout one,

A most couragious Drinker,

I do excel,

'Tis known full well,

The Ratter, Tom, and Tinker.

Still do I cry,

Good your Worship, good Sir,

Bestow one small denire Sir,

And bravely then,

At the Bouzing ken,

I'le spend it all in Beer Sir.

If a Bung be got by the hie-way

Then straight I do attend them;

For if Hue and Cry

Do follow, I

A wrong way soon do send them.

Still do I cry, &c.

Ten miles unto a Market,

I run to meet a Miser,

Then in a throng,

I nip his Bung,

And the party ne'r the wiser.

Still do I cry, &c.

My dainty Dells, my Doxies,

When e're they see me lacking,

Without delay,

Poor wretches, they

Will set their duds a packing.

Still do I cry, &c.

[[Page 199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=102)I pay
for what I call for,

And so perforce it must be.

For yet I can

Not know the man,

Or Hostess that will trust me▪

Still do I cry, &c.

If any give me Lodging,

A courteous knave they finde me,

For in their bed,

Alive or dead,

Some lice I leave behind me.

Still do I cry, &c.

If Gentlefolk be coming,

Then straight it is our fashion,

Our leg to tie,

Close to our thigh,

To move them to compassion.

Still do I cry, &c.

My doublet sleeve hangs empty,

And for to beg the bolder,

For meat and drink,

Mine arm I shrink

Up close unto my shoulder.

Still do I cry, &c.

If a Coach I hear be rumbling,

To my Crutches then I high me,

For being lame,

It is a shame,

Such Gallants should deny me.

Still do I cry, &c.

With a seeming bursten belly,

I look like one half dead Sir,

Or else I beg,

With a wooden leg,

And a night Cap on my head Sir.

Still do I cry, &c.

[[Page 200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=103)In
winter time stark naked,

I come into some City,

Then ev'ry man

That spare them can,

Will give me Cloaths for pity.

Still do I cry, &c.

If from out of the Low Countrey,

I hear a Captains name Sir,

Then straight I swear,

I have been there,

And so in sight came lam [...] Sir.

Still do I cry, &c.

My Dog in a string doth lead me,

VVhen in the town I go Sir,

For to be blinde,

All men are kinde,

And will their alms bestow Sir.

Still do I cry, &c.

With Switches sometimes stand I,

In the bottom of a hill Sir,

Where those men which

Do want a Switch,

Some money give me still Sir.

Still do I cry, &c.

Come buy, come buy a Horn-book,

Who buys my Pins or Needles?

In Cities I

Those things do cry,

Oft times to scape the Beadles,

Still do I cry, &c.

In Pauls Church by a Pillar,

Sometimes y'ave seen me stand Sir,

VVith a Writ that shows

VVhat care and woes

I past by Sea and Land Sir.

Still do I cry, &c.

[[Page 201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=103)Now
blame me not for boasting,

And bragging thus alone Sir,

For my self I will

Be praising still,

For Neighbors I have none Sir.

Which makes me cry

Good your Worship, good Sir,

Bestow one small Denire Sir,

And bravely then,

At the Bouzing Ken,

Ile spend it all in Beer Sir.

### 4.188. Song 187.

LEt's have a Dance upon the heath,

We gain more life by Duncons death,

Sometimes like brinded Cats we shew,

Having no Musick but our mew;

Sometimes we dance in some old Mill,

Upon the Hopper, Stones, and Wheel,

To some old Saw, or bardish Rhime,

While still the Mill-clack does keep time.

Sometimes about a hallow tree,

A round, a round, a round dance we;

Thither the chirping Critick comes,

And Beetles singing drowsie humms.

Sometimes we dance o're Fens and Furs,

To howl [...] of Wolves, and barks of Curs,

And when with none of these we meet,

We dance to the ecchoes of our feet.

### 4.189. Song 188.

MY Muse denies

To Apollogize,

For my Songs acceptation,

I know 'twill fit

Your Appetite,

Because 'tis of the fashion.

New fashions began

[[Page 202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=104)With the
world and man,

In Adam's time and Eve's,

They did begin,

To cover sin,

With a fashion of their leaves.

After way try'd,

The rough Buck's hide.

A wear of commendation,

Had not with the skin,

The Horns crept in,

And turn'd it to a fashion.

Each Taylor is read

In this fashion, his head

Is capable on't 'tis feard,

When he's not at leisure,

His wife will take measure,

Though't be by his Neighbors Y [...]rd,

The Clowns array,

Is an innocent grey,

Nor stian'd by the Dyers Art,

Which doth invest,

As pure a brest,

And no less spotless heart.

The Farmers Hose,

His wearing shoos,

For both are wondrous plain,

His Honesty,

Not Knavery, he

Most purely dyes in Grain.

The School-master in

His trouzes hath been

And bumbast Doublet long space,

Hee's a Menoptote,

For he varies not

At any time his case.

[[Page 203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=104)His wife
is pure,

In her talk demure,

Her Gown is of Reformation,

And she verily

Turns up her eye;

In a very zealous fushion.

The shop-keepers walk,

And oftentimes talk

In Gowns, or of Purple, or blew,

Since Venner and Farre,

Wore such at the Bar,

Some wisely have chang'd the Hu [...].

The Lawyer (bee't known

To all men) is prone,

To the fashion of long Hose;

And fain he would

Still have and hold

Long Suits, for he lives by those.

Now with the best,

Your Pimp's in request,

Thus your Gallant is supply'd,

By his bones as well,

As his cloaths you may smell,

Hee's rarely Frenchify'd;

His Mistriss Plum'd,

Painted, Perfum'd,

Is stillified all over,

Her loose Array

Doth every day,

A looser body cover.

The Scholar well trust,

In his black Suit brusht,

Is like to jet in his degree,

Nor is it enough,

Men point at Stuff,

Hee'l be pointed at the knee.

[[Page 204]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=105)Thus are
we become

As Apes of Rome,

Of France, Spain, and all Nations,

And not horses alone,

But men are grown

Diseased of the Fashions.

### 4.190. Song 18 [...].

WHen Orpheus sweetly did complain,

Upon his Lute with heavy strain,

How his Euridice was slain;

The trees to hear

Obtain'd an ear,

And after left it off again.

At every stroke and sorry stay,

The Boughs kept time, and nodd [...]ng lay,

And listned, bending all one way;

The Aspen-tree

As fast as he,

Began to shake, and learn to play.

If wood could speak, a tree might hear;

If wood could sound true grief so near,

A tree might drop an Amber tear:

If wood so well

Could ring a Knell,

The Cypress might condole the Beer.

The standing Nobles of the Grove,

Hearing dead wood to speak and move,

The fatal Ax began to love;

They envy'd Death

Which gave such breath,

As men alive do Saints above.

### 4.191. Song 190.

CHloris forbear a while,

Do not o're joy me,

Urge not another smile,

Lest it destroy me;

[[Page 205]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=105)That
Beauty passeth most,

And is best taking,

VVhich is soon won, soon lost,

Kinde, yet forsaking:

I love a coming Lady, faith I do,

But now and then I'd have her scornful too.

O're-cloud those eyes of thine,

Boo-peep thy features,

Warm with an April slune,

Scorch not thy creatures.

Still to display thy ware,

Still to be fooling,

Argues how rude you are

In Cupids Schooling.

Disdain begets a smile, scorn draws us nigh,

'Tis cause I would, and cannot, makes me try.

Chloris I'd have thee wise,

VVhen Gallants view thee,

Courting do thou despise,

Fly those pursue thee;

Fast moves an appetite,

Makes hunger greater,

VVho's stinted of d [...]light,

Falls to 't the better.

Be coy and kinde by times, be smooth and rough;

And buckle now and then, and that's enough.

### 4.192. Song 191.

YOu say you love me, nay can swear it too,

But stay Sir, 'twill not do;

I know you keep your Oaths,

Just as you wear your Cloaths,

VVhile new and fresh in fashion:

But once grown old, you lay them by,

Forgot like words you speak in passion.

I'le not believe you, I.

[[Page 206]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=106)

### 4.193. Song 192.

YE Fiends and Furies, come along,

Each bring a Crow and massie Prong;

Come bring your Sheckles, and draw near,

To stir up an old Sea-coal, cak't,

That in the hallow hell hath bak't

Many a thousand, thousand year.

In sulphurous Broth, Tyrius hath boil'd,

Basted with Brimstone; Tarqui [...] hath broil'd

Long, long enough; then make room,

Like smoaky Flitches hang 'um by

Upon their sooty Walls to dry;

A greater Ravisher will come,

If you want fire, fetch it from Aetna pure;

Yet stay a while, and do not stir,

For if his glowing eyes should chance

On Proserpine to shoot a glance,

He is so hot, he'd ravish her.

### 4.194. Song 193.

GO happy heart, for thou shalt lie

Intomb'd in her, for whom I die,

Example of her cruelty.

Tell her if she chance to chide

Me for slowness, in her pride,

That it was for her I dy'd.

If a tear escape her eye,

'Tis not for my Memory,

But thy Rights of Obsequy.

The Altar was my loving breast,

My heart the sacrificed beast,

And I was my self the Priest.

Your body was the sacred shrine,

Your cruel minde the Power Divine,

Pleas'd with hearts of men, nor Kine.

[[Page 207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=106)

### 4.195. Song 194.

AH Chloris! that I now could  [...]it

As unconcern'd, as when

Your infant beauty cou'd beget

No pleasure, nor no pain.

When I the Dawn us'd to admire,

And prais'd the coming Day;

I little thought the growing fire

Would take my rest away.

Your charms in harmless childhood lay,

Like mettals in the Mine,

Age from no Face took more away,

Than youth conceal'd in thine.

But as your Charms insensibly

To their perfection prest,

Fond Love as unperceiv'd did flie,

And in my bosom rest.

My passion with your Beauty grew,

And Cupid at my heart,

Stil as his Mother favor'd you,

Threw a new flaming Dart.

Each glory'd in their wanton part,

To make a Lover, he

Employ'd the utmost of his art,

To make a Beauty she.

Though now I slowly bend to love,

Uncertain of my fate,

If your fair self my chains approve,

I shall my freedom hate.

Lovers like dying men, may well

At first disorder'd be,

Since none alive can truly tell,

What fortune they must see.

### 4.196. Song 195.

ALl joy unto that happy pair,

Which this day united are,

[[Page 208]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=107)Though
all the world suffer'd decrease,

Yet may their love never grow less,

But still recru [...]ted every day.

With fresh delights may it encrease,

And may it lasting be,

As vast Eternity.

May never fatal accident have force,

To interrupt the pleasing course

Of their united passions, till they grow

So far above all here below;

They may themselves so happily deceive,

As to believe,

That though they're here,

Yet they in Heav'n do fill a sphear.

### 4.197. Song 195\. Dialogue Pastoral, Strephon and Phillis.

Phil. STrephon, what envious cloud hath made

All o're thy face this sullen shade?

Strephon. It is the Index of my grief,

Phil. But say, admits it no relief,

Thy now neglected flock doth stray,

The Wolf securely takes his prey,

And thy discarded Pipes lies by,

Whilst thou under some Bench do's lie,

Or Mirtle in the shady Grove,

And sigh'st and pin'st like one in love.

Str. Ah Phillis, thou hast touch'd me now,

I can't my passion disavow,

At that word Love, my heart do's rise,

And with it strangely sympathize.

Ph. But who did thus your heart surprize?

Str. It was the shepherdess, whose eyes

Are brighter far than any ray,

The Sun disclosed on May-day.

Ph. Who was it? Strephon tell me true,

Str. Ah Dearest Phillis, it was you,

[[Page 209]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=107) Ph.
Strive not false shepherd, to deceive

A Nymph too easie to believe

A passion, which she likes so well,

Such falshood would deserve a Hell.

Str. May th' Gods for whom fat Lambs I feed,

That on their smoaking Altars bleed,

All my devoutest pray [...]rs despise,

And all my humble sacrifice;

Or what's greater Curse may I,

Find nought from thee but cruelty,

If I do love my Phillis less,

Than my own greatest happiness;

If truth doth not with swains reside,

Where is she in the world beside?

Phil. I can't distrust so lov'd a truth,

Deliver'd by so sweet a youth,

Chorus of two. Lets joyn our hands and hearts & we [...]l'out-vie

The Gods themselves with our felicity.

Chorus of four Let those that in deceitful Courts do dwell,

Delay their joys, and tedious suits pursue,

Voices. Our honest words their courtship far excel,

'Mongst unambitious shepherds love is true.

### 4.198. Song 196.

HAste sluggish morn, why dost thou stay,

This is Venus Holiday?

Can nothing bribe thee, can no charms,

Force thee from thy Tython's Arms?

Oh yonder comes the expected guest,

Sol from his Chambers of the East,

And do's me thinks dance as on Easter day,

Th' intelligences on the sphears do play,

The winged Songsters of the Groves,

Do celebrate the union of these loves;

The Heavens do smile the Earth and all conspire,

To make the joys of thy blest time entire.

Come forth fair Bride, what wouldst thou be.

[[Page 210]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=108)Wedded
to Virginity?

Haste to the Temple, do not stay,

Kill not him with thy delay,

Whose expectations calls each hour a day,

Lo now breaks forth the beauteous dame,

Like Lightnings sudden flame;

Her high in [...]nuating power's such,

It melts the soul, but not the body touch;

The Bridegroom all do envy, each should be

The principal in this solemnity,

But now to Church they walk,

And each mans talk,

Is of the happy pair,

And what will be

Done when they united are,

They prophecy.

They're busie tongues on that do clink,

The Ladies will not speak but think,

Now to the Temple they draw neer,

Where jolly Hymen do's appear

Without his Saffron Robe, that there might be

No emblem of ensuing jealousie.

The Priest begins, their hearts and hands he joyns,

And their loves with the mystery refines;

The Bridegroom then Curses the slow pac'd Vicar,

That in the Ceremony is no quicker.

Now home they go to eat, to drink, to dance,

And at the Bride to glance.

The lusty Bridegroom's Spring-tide of his blood,

Swells in a purple flood,

Which puts him to such pains,

In his distended veins,

It longs to ebbe, and now the night has hurl'd.

Her Sable Curtains over half the world,

When we by whisprings discry,

A Plot against Virginity.

[[Page 211]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=108)The
Ladies steal the Bride away,

Th' impatient Bridegroom brooks no stay,

But slinks away and thither all do swarm,

The Bridal Ceremony's to perform;

Then we withdraw, nor may the Candles stay,

'Cause they are emblems of th' unwish't for day.

My Muse dare say no more, but leaves the th [...]am

To ev'ry man and woman that nights dream.

### 4.199. Song 198.

WHen Celia I intend to flatter you,

And tell you lies to make you true

I swear

There's none so fair,

There's none so fair,

And you believe it too.

Oft have I matcht you with the Rose, and said,

No twins so like hath Nature made;

But 'tis

Onely in this,

Onely in this,

You prick my hand and fade.

Oft have I said there is no precious stone,

But may be found in you alone,

Though I,

No stone espy,

No stone espy,

Unless your heart be one.

When I praise your skin, I quote the wooll,

The Silk-worms from their entrails pull,

And shew,

That new faln snow,

That new faln snow,

Is not more beautiful.

Yet grow not proud by such Hyperboles,

Were you as excellent as these

While I,

[[Page 212]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=109)Before
you lie,

Before you lie,

They might be had with ease.

### 4.200. Song 199.

A Maiden of late,

Whose Name was Sweet Kate,

Was dwelling in London, near to Aldersgate;

Now list to my Ditty, declare it I can,

She would have a childe without help of a man.

To a Doctor she came,

A man of great fame,

Whose deep skill in Physick report did proclaim,

Quoth she, Master Doctor, shew me if you can,

How I may conceive without help of a man.

Then listen, quoth he,

Since so it must be,

This wondrous strong Med'cine I'le shew presently:

Take nine pound of Thunder, six legs of a Swan,

And you shall conceive without help of a man.

The wooll of a Frog,

The juyce of a Log,

Well parboil'd together in the Skin of a Hog,

With the Egg of a Moon-calf, if get it you can,

And you shall conceive without help of a man.

The love of false Harlots,

The faith of false Varlets,

With the truth of Decoys that walk in their Scarlets,

And the feathers of a Lobster well fry'd in a pan,

And you shall conceive without help of a man.

Nine drops of Rain,

Brought hither from Spain,

With the blast of a Bellows quite over the Main.

With eight quarts of Brimstone, brew'd in a Beer-can,

And you shall conceive without help of a man.

Six pottles of Lard,

Squeez'd from a Rock hard,

[[Page 213]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=109)VVith
nine Turky Eggs, each as long as a yard,

VVith a Pudding of Hail-stones well bak'd in a pan,

And you shall conc [...]ive without help of a man.

These Med'cines are good,

And approved have stood,

VVell temper'd together with a pottle of blood,

Squeez'd from a Grashopper, and the nail of a Swan,

To make Maids conceive without help of a man.

### 4.201. Song 200.

NO man loves fiery passion can approve,

As yielding either pleasure or promotion;

I like a milde, and lukewarm zeal in Love,

Although I do not like it in devotion.

For it hath no coherence with my Creed,

To think that Lovers mean as they pretend,

If all that said they dy'd, had dy'd indeed,

Sure long ere this the world had had an end.

Some one perhaps in long Consumption dry'd,

And after falling into love, might die:

But I dare swear he never yet had dy'd,

Had he been half so sound at heart as I.

Another rather than incur the slander

Of true A postate, will false Martyr prove;

I'le neither Orpheus be, nor yet Leander,

I'le neither hang, nor drown my self for love.

Yet I have been a Lover by report,

And I have dy'd for love as others do,

Prais'd be great Iove, I dy'd in such a sort,

As I reviv'd within an hour or two.

Thus have I liv'd, thus have I lov'd till now,

And ne're had reason to repeat me yet,

And whosoever otherwise will do,

His courage is as little as wit.

### 4.202. Song 201.

WHat creatures on earth,

Can boast freer mirth,

[[Page 214]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=110)Less
envy'd and loved than we?

Though Learning grow poor,

We scorn to implo [...]e

A gift, but what's noble and free.

Our freedom of minde,

Cannot be confin'd,

With riches ware inwardly blest;

Nor death, nor the grave,

Our worths can deprave,

Nor malice our ashes molest:

When such moles as you,

Your own earth shall mue,

And worms shall your Memory eat;

Our names being read,

Shall strike Envy dead,

And Ages our worth shall repeat.

### 4.203. Song 201.

WHen I see the young men play,

Young methinks I am as they,

And my aged thoughts laid by,

To the Dance with joy I fly;

Come, a flowry Chaplet lend me,

Youth and mirthful thoughts attend me,

Age be gone, we'l dance among

Those that young are, and be young:

Bring some wine boy, fill about,

You shall see the old man's stout;

Who can laugh and tipple too,

And be mad as well as you.

### 4.204. Song 202.

BRight Cynthia scorns,

Alone to wear horns,

To her Sexes grief and shame;

But swears in despight

Of the worlds great light,

That men shal wear the same.

[[Page 215]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=110)The man
in the moon,

To hear this in a swoun,

And quite out of his wits fell,

And with this affront,

(Quoth he) a pox on't,

My forehead begins to swell.

A way streight he wood,

In his Lunatick mood,

And from his Mistriss would run;

And swore in his heat,

Though stew'd in his sweat,

He had rather go dwell in the Sun.

But he was appeas'd,

To see other men pleas'd,

And none that did murmur or mourn;

For without an affright,

Each man with delight,

Did take to himself the horn.

The Lord he will go,

In his Park to and fro,

Pursuing the Deer that is barren;

But whilst he's in's Park,

His Steward or Clark,

May boldly go hunt in his warren.

The Citizen Clown,

In his foxfur'd Gown,

And his Doublet fac'd with Ale,

Talks slow, and drinks quicker,

Till his wife like his liquor

Leaves working and relisheth stale.

Lo thus she behorns him,

And afterwards scorns him,

Though he come to be major of the rout;

And thinks it no sin,

To be well occupv'd within,

While her Husband i [...] busie without.

[[Page 216]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=111)The
Puritan wi [...]l go,

Ten miles to and fro,

To hear a sanctify'd Brother;

But whilst his zeal burns,

His wife she up turns

The egg's of her eyes to another.

The Lawyer to succor 'um,

With Parchment and Buckr'um,

To London the next way will strike;

But whilst he opens his case,

To his adversaries face,

His wife to her friend doth the like.

The Physitian will ride,

To his Patient that dy'd

Of no disease but that he did come;

But whilst abroad he doth kill,

With Potion and Pill,

His wife takes a glister at home.

The Merchant o're-runs,

The Sea with his Guns,

His Marriners and their Mates,

But whilst he doth please

Himself on the broad Seas,

Another may ride on his streights.

The Soldier will go,

Like a man to his foe,

With brave resolution to fight,

Whilst his wife with her friends,

In her wanton arms spends

Time, and makes him a beast by night.

And though that he be,

Well arm'd Cap a Pee,

He must yield to a naked boy's scorn,

And instead of bright Steel,

And hard Iron, he [...]l

Be content with a hard piece of Horn.

[[Page 217]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=111)Thus all
men will love

Their wives, though they prove

Them false ev'n in their own sight,

But yet they do well,

For a Horn you can tell,

Was always a friend to the night.

### 4.205. Song 203.

COme away bring on the Bride,

And place her by her Lovers side;

You fair troop of maids attend her,

Pure and holy thoughts befriend her.

Blush and wish you Virgins all,

Many such fair nights may fall.

Chor. Hymen fill the house with joy,

All thy sacred fires employ;

Blesse the bed with holy love,

Now fair Orb of Beauty move.

### 4.206. Song 204.

AT dead low ebb of night, when none

But great Charl's wain was driven on;

When mortals strict cessation keep,

To recreate themselves with sleep,

'Twas then a boy knockt at my gate,

Who's there, said I▪ that calls so late?

Oh let me in he soon reply'd,

I am a Child, and then he cry'd,

I wander without light or guide,

[...]ost in this wet, blind, moonless night.

In pitty then I rose,

And straight unbar'd my door, and sprang a light,

Behold it was a boy, a sweeter sight

—Ne'r blest mine eye;

I view'd him round and saw strange things,

A Bow, a Quiver, and two wings,

I led him to the sire, and then

I dry'd and chaf'd his hands with mine;

[[Page 218]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=112)I gently
press'd his tresses curles,

VVhich new faln rain had hung with Pearls;

At last when warm, the younker said,

Alas my Bow, I am afraid

The string is wet, pray Sir, let's try

My Bow; on that, do, do, said I,

He bent and shot so quick and smart,

As through my Liver reach'd my heart;

Then in a trice he took his flight,

And laughing said, my bow is right:

It is, oh 'tis, for as he spoke,

'Twas not his Bow, but my heart broke.

### 4.207. Song 205.

THe Beard thick or thin,

On the lip or chin,

Doth dwell so near the tongue,

That her silence

In the beards defence,

May do her Neighbor wrong.

Now a beard is a thing,

That commands in a King,

Be his Scepter ne'r so fair?

VVhere the beard bears the sway,

The people obey,

And are subject to a hair▪

'Tis a Princely sight,

And a grave delight,

That adorns both young and old;

A well thatch't face,

Is a comely grace,

And a shelter from the cold.

VVhen the piercing North,

Comes blust [...]ing forth,

Let a barren face beware;

For a trick it will find,

VVith a razor of wind,

[[Page 219]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=112)To shave
the face that's bare.

But there's many a nice,

And strange device,

That doth the beard disgrace;

But he that is in,

Such a foolish sin,

Is a traytor to his face.

Now of Beards there be,

Such a company,

And fashions such a throng,

That it is very hard,

To handle a beard,

Though it be ne'r so long.

The Roman T

In its bravery,

Doth first its self disclos [...] ▪

But so high it turns,

That oft it burns,

With the  [...]lam [...]s of a To [...]d nose.

The Stilletto beard,

Oh it makes me afear'd

It is so sharp beneath,

For he that doth place,

A dagger in's his face,

What wear's he in his sh [...]ath?

But methinks I do itch,

To go through stitch,

The needle beard to amend,

Which without any wrong,

I may call too long,

For a man can see no end.

The Souldiers beard,

Doth march in shear'd,

In figure like a spade;

With which he'l make,

His en'mies quake,

[[Page 220]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=113)And
think their Graves are made.

The grim stubble eke,

On the Judges cheek,

Shall not my Verse despise,

It is more fit

For a Nutmeg, but yet

It grates poor Prisoners eyes.

What doth invest,

A Bishops brest.

But a Milk-white spreading hair,

Which an Emblem may be,

Of integrity,

Which doth inhabit there.

I have also seen,

On a womans chin,

A hair or two to grow,

But alas the face,

Is too cold a place,

Then look for a beard below,

But Oh let us tarry,

For the beard of King Harry,

That grows about the chin,

With his bushy pride,

And a Grove on each side,

And a Champion ground between.

Last, the clown doth out rush

With his beard like a brush,

Which may be well endur'd,

For though his face,

Be in such case,

His Land was well manur'd.

### 4.208. Song 206.

FAir Mistriss I would gladly know,

What thing it is you cherish so,

What instrument and from whence bred,

Is that you call a Maiden-head?

[[Page 221]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=113)Is it a
spirit, or the treasure

Lovers loose in height of pleasure?

If it be so, in vain you keep,

That waking which you loose in sleep;

But since you know not, I will tell ye,

It is a spring beneath your belly,

Fruit that alone you cannot taste,

And barren seed till it you waste;

Mettal that musts for want of using,

A Gem most precious when 'tis loosing.

A sweet and pleasing sacrifice,

Then chi [...]fly living when it dies.

A wealth that makes the unthrift blest,

An instrument that soundest best,

(A wonder to be heard or spoke)

When the string in two is broke.

Then let us offer love his due,

My Maiden-head I'le give to you,

And in exchange receive another,

What would you more, there's one for th' other.

### 4.209. Song 207\. A Dialogue between Orpheus and Charon.

Orph. CHaron, O Charon,

Thou wafter of the souls to bliss or ban [...].

Cha. Who calls the Ferry-man of Hell?

Orp. Come near,

And say who lives in joy, and whom in fear.

Cha. Those that die well, eternal joyes shall follow.

Those that die ill, their own soul fate shall swallow.

Orph. Shall thy black barque those guilty spirits stow,

That kill themselves for love?

Char. O No, O no.

My cordage cracks when such great sins are near,

No wind blows fair, nor I my self can stear.

Orph. What Lovers pass, and in Elizium raign?

Cha. Those gentle loves that are belov'd again,

[[Page 222]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=114) Orph.
This Soldier loves, and fain would die to win,

Shall he go on?

Char. No, 'tis too foul a sin.

He must not come aboard: I dare not row,

Storms of despair, and guilty blood will blow.

Orph. Shall time release him, say?

Char. No, no, no, no,

Nor time, nor death can alter us, nor prayer;

My boat is destiny, and who then dare

But those appointed come aboard; live still,

And love by reason mortal, not by will.

Orph. And when thy Mistriss shall close up thine eyes

Char. Then come aboard and pass,

Chorus Orph. Till then be wise,

Char. Till then be wise.

### 4.210. Song 208.

LOok out bright eyes, and bless the air,

Even in shadows you are fair.

Shut up Beautie is like fire,

That breaks out cleerer still and higher.

Though your body be confin'd,

And sought love a Prisoner bound;

Yet the Beauty of your minde,

Neither check, nor chain hath found:

Look out nobly then, and dare,

Even the fetters that you wear.

### 4.211. Song 209.

SUre 'twas a dream, how long fond man have I,

Been fool'd into Captivity;

My Newgate was my want of wit,

I did my self commit,

My bonds I knit.

I mine own Goaler was the only foe,

That did my freedom d [...]savow;

I was a Prisoner, cause I would be so.

But now I will shake off my chains and prove,

[[Page 223]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=114)Opinion
built the Goals of Love;

Made all his bonds, gave him his bow,

His bloody arrows too,

That murther so.

Nay, those dire deaths which idle Lovers dream,

Were all contriv'd to make a theam,

For some carowzing Poets drunken flame.

Twas a fine life I liv'd, when I did dress

My self to court your peevishness;

When I did at your footstool lie,

Expecting from your eye,

To live or die.

Now smiles, or frowns, I care not which I have,

Nay rather than I'le be your slave,

I'le court the Plagues to send me to my grave.

Farewel those charms that did so long bewitch.

Farewel that wanton youthful itch;

Farewel that treacherous blinking boy,

That proffers seeming joy,

So to destroy,

To all those night embraces which as you,

Know very well were not a few;

For ever, ever more, I bid adieu.

Now I can stand the sallies of your eyes,

In vain are all those batteries,

Nor can that love dissembling stile,

Nor can that crafty smile,

Longer beguile.

Nor those hard traps which each hour you renew,

To all those witchcrafts and to you,

For ever, ever more, I bid adieu.

### 4.212. Song 120.

HOld, hold, thy nose to the Pot, Tom, Tom.

And hold thy nose to the Pot, Tom, Tom,

Tis thy pot, and my pot,

And my pot, and thy pot,

[[Page 224]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=115)Sing
hold thy nose to the pot, Tom, Tom.

'Tis Mault that will cure thy Maw, Tom.

And will heal thy distempers in Autumn;

[...]elix qui facient,

I prithee be patient,

Aliena pericula cantum.

Then hold thy Nose  [...]o the pot, Tom, Tom,

Hold, hold thy Nose to the pot, Tom, Tom,

Neither Parson nor Vicar,

But will toss off his Liquor

Sing hold thy Nose to the pot, Tom, Tom.

### 4.213. Song 211.

NOw I confess I am in love,

Though I did think I never could,

But 'tis with one dropt from above,

Whose nature's made of finest mould;

So fair, so good, so all divine,

I'd quit the world to make her mine.

Have you not seen the Stars retreat,

When Sol salutes our Hemisphere?

So shrink the Beauties called great,

When sweet Rosela doth appear;

Were she as other women are,

I should not love, nor yet despair.

But I could never bear a minde

Willing to stoop to common faces;

Nor confidence enough can finde

To aim at one so full of graces;

Fortune and Nature did agree,

No woman should be wed by me.

### 4.214. Song 212.

WIth an old motly Coat, and a Mumsie Nose,

And an old Jerkin that's out at the elbows,

And an old pair of boots drawn on without hose,

Stufft with rags in stead of Toes.

And an old souldier of the Queens,

And the Queens old souldier.

[[Page 225]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=115)With an
old rusty Sword that's hackt with blows,

And an old Dagger to scare away the Crows,

And an old Horse that reels as he goes,

And an old Saddle that no man knows,

And an old souldier of the Queens,

And the Queens old souldier.

With his old wounds in Eighty eight,

Which he recover'd at Tilbury Fight,

With an old Pasport that never was read,

That in his old travels stood him in great stead;

And an old souldier of the Queens,

And the Queens old souldier.

With his old Gun, and his Bandaliers,

With an old Head-piece to keep warm his ears,

With an old Shirt is gone to wrack,

With a great Louse and a list on his back,

Is able to carry a Pedlar and his pack.

And an old souldier of the Queens,

And the Queens old souldier.

With an old Quean to lie by his side,

That in old time had been pockisi'd:

He's now rid to Bohemia to fight with his foes,

And he swears by his valour he'l have better cloaths,

Or else he'l loose Legs, Arms, Fingers, and Toes,

And he'l come again, when no man knows,

Like an old souldier of the Queens,

And the Queens old souldier.

### 4.215. Song 21 [...].

WIth an old Song made by an old ancient pate,

Of an old worshipful Gentleman who had a great estate

Who kept an old house at a bountiful rate

And an old Porter to relieve the poor at his gate,

Like an old Courtier of the Queens, &c.

With an old Lady whose anger 'tis good words asswages

Who every quarter pays her old servants their wages

Who never kn [...]w what belongs to Coach-men, Foot-men, and Pages.

[[Page 226]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=116)But kept
twenty old fellows with blew coats & badges,

Like an old Courtier, &c.

VVith an old Study fill'd full of learned Books,

VVith an old reverend Parson; you may judge him by his looks,

VVith an old Buttery Hatch worn quite off the old Hooks,

And an old Kitchin, which maintains half a dozen old Cooks,

Like an old, &c.

VVith an old Hall hung round about with Guns, Pikes, and Bowes,

With old Swords and Bucklers, which have born many shrewd blows,

And an old Frysado coat to cover his Worships Trunk-Hose,

And a Cup of old Sherry to comfort his Copper Nose,

Like an old, &c.

VVith an old fashion when Christmas is come,

To call in his neighbors with Bag-pipe and Drum,

And good cheer enough to furnish every old Room,

And old Liquor able to make a Cat speak, and a wise man dumb,

Like an old, &c.

VVith an old Hunts-man, a Faulconer, and a Kennel of Hounds,

VVhich never hunted nor hawk'd, but in his own Grounds,

VVho like an old wise man, kept himself within his own bounds,

And wh [...]n he died gave every childe a thousand old pounds,

Like an old, &c.

But to his eld [...]st Son his House and Lands he assign [...]d,

Charging him in his Will, to keep the old bountiful minde,

To love his good old servants, and to neighbours be kinde:

But in the ensuing Ditty, you shall hear how he was enclin'd,

Like a young  [...]ourtier of the Kings, &c.

Like a young Gallant newly come to his Land,

[[Page 227]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=116)That
keeps a brace of whores at his own command,

And takes up a thousand pounds upon's own Land,

And  [...]eth drunk in a new Tavern till he can neither go nor stand,

Like a young, &c.

VVith a neat Lady that is frisk and fair,

VVho never knew what belong'd to good House-keep­ing, or care,

But buys several Fans to play with the wanton Air,

And seventeen or eighteen dressings of other mens hair,

Like a young, &c.

VVith a new Hall built where the old one stood,

VVherein is burned neither Coal, nor VVood,

And a new Shuffle-board Table, smooth and red as blood,

Hung round with Pictures, which doth the poor little good,

Like a young, &c.

VVith a new Study stuff'd full of Pamphlets and Plays,

VVith a new Chaplain that swears faster than he prays,

VVith a new Buttery Hatch that opens once in four or five days,

VVith a new French Cook to make Kickshaws and Toys,

Like a young, &c.

VVith a new fashion when Christmas was come,

VVith a new Journey up to London we must be gone,

And leave no body at home, but our new Porter Iohn,

VVho relieves the poor with a thump on the back with a stone.

Like a young, &c.

VVith a Gentleman-Usher, whose Carriage is com­pleat,

VVith a Foot-man, a Coachman, a Page to carry meat,

VVith a Waiting-Gentlewoman, whose Dressing is very neat,

VVho when the Master has dyn'd, lets the Servants not eat.

Like a young, &c.

VVith a new Honor bought with his Fathers old gold,

That many of his Fathers old Manors hath sold,

[[Page 228]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=117)And this
is the occasion that most men do hold,

That good House-keeping is now adays grown so cold

Like a young Courtier of the Kings,

Oh the Kings young Courtier.

### 4.216. Song 214.

WIth a new Beard but lately trim'd,

With a new Love-lock neatly kemb'd,

With a new Favour snatcht or nimb'd,

With a new Doublet French like limb'd,

With a new Gate as if he swim'd,

And a new souldier of the Kings,

Oh the Kings new souldier.

With a new Feather in his Cap,

With new white Boots without a strap,

And newly paid for, by great hap;

With a new Quean upon his lap,

And a new Brat that ne'r eat pap,

And a new, &c.

With a new Hat without a Band,

With a new Office without Land,

With all his fingers on his hand,

With a new face at Plymouth tan'd,

And a new horse already pawn'd,

And a new, &c.

With a new Cassock lin'd with Cotten,

With Cardecues to call his Pot in,

With a new Gun that ne'r was shot in,

Under a new Captain very hot in

A new Command, and hardly gotten.

And a new, &c.

With a new Head-piece shot, ne'r hit,

With a new Head of greenish wit,

With new Shirts without louse or nit,

With a new Band, not torn as yet,

With a new Spear, and very fit,

For a new, &c.

[[Page 229]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=117)With a
new Jacket made of Buff,

With new Sleeves of Spanish stuff,

With a new Belt of Leather enough;

With new Tobacco-pipes to puff,

And a new Brawl to take in snuff,

Like a new, &c.

He's newly come to sixteen years,

And gone abroad with his Mothers tears,

With his Monmouth Cap about his ears,

VVith new Bravadoes void of fears,

And a new Oath by which he swears

To be a new, &c.

VVith a new Nose that ne'r met foe,

With a new Sword that ne'r struck blow,

With a new red Breech to make a show,

VVith a new Copper Lace or two,

And new Points on his wings also,

To a new Countrey he will go,

To drink old Sack, and do no moe,

Like a new souldier of the Kings,

Oh, the Kings new souldier.

### 4.217. Catch, Or Song 215.

THe Hunt is up, the Hunt is up,

And now it is almost day,

And he that's a bed with another mans wife,

It's time to get him away.

### 4.218. Mock-Song 216.

OH Love! whose power and might,

No creature e're withstood,

Thou forcest me to write,

Come turn about Robin Hood.

Sole Mistriss of my heart,

Let me thus far presume,

To crave in this request,

A black patch for the Rhume,

[[Page 230]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=118)Grant
pity, or I die,

Love so my heart bewitches,

VVith grief I howl and cry;

Oh how my Elbow itches.

Tears overflow my sight▪

With floods of dayly weeping,

That in the silent night,

I cannot rest for sleeping.

What ist I would not do

To purchase one sweet smile?

Bid me to China go,

'Faith I'le sit still the while.

Oh women you will never,

But think men still will flatter;

I vow I love you ever,

But yet it is no matter.

Cupid is blinde, they say,

But yet methinks he seeth;

He struck my heart to day,

A Turd in Cupid's Teeth.

Her Tresses that were wrought,

Much like the golden snare,

My loving heart hath caught,

As Moss did catch his Mare.

But since that all relief,

And comforts do forsake me,

I'le kill my self with grief,

Nay then, the devil take me.

And since her greatful merits

My loving look must lack,

I'le stop my vital spirits

With Claret and with Sack.

Mark well my woful hap,

Iove, rector of the Thunder,

Send down thy Thunder-clap,

And rend her Smock in sunder.

[[Page 231]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=118)

### 4.219. Mock-Song, in Answer.

YOur Letter I receiv'd,

Bedeckt with flourishing quarters

Because you are deceiv'd,

Go hang you in your Garters.

My beauty, which is none,

Yet such as you protest;

Doth make you sigh and groan;

Fie, fie, you do but jest.

I cannot chuse but pitty

Your restless mournful tears,

Because your plaints are witty,

You may go shake your  [...]ars.

To purchase your delight,

No labor you shall leese,

Your pains I will requite;

Maid, give him some bread and cheese.

'Tis you I fain would see,

'Tis you I daily think on;

My looks as kinde shall be,

As the Devils over Lincoln.

If ever I do tame,

Great Iove of Lightnings flashes,

I'le send my fiery flame,

And burn thee into ashes.

I can by no means miss thee,

But needs must have thee one day;

I prithee come and kiss me,

Whereon I sate on Sunday.

### 4.220. Song 217.

IF she be fair, I fear the rest,

If she be sweet, I'le hope the best,

If she be fair, they say she'l do,

If she be foul, she'l do so too;

If she be fair, she'l breed suspect,

If she be foul, she'l breed neglect.

[[Page 232]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=119)If she
be born o'th' better sort,

Then she doth savor of the Court;

If she be of the City born,

She'l give the City Arms, the Horn,

If she be born of Parents base,

I scorn her Vertues for her place;

If she be fair and witty too,

I fear the harm h [...]r wit may do.

If she be fair and wanteth wit,

I love no beauty without it.

In brief, be what she will, I'm one

That can love all, but will wed none.

### 4.221. Song 21 [...].

THere's none but the glad man,

Compar'd to the mad man,

Whose heart is still empty of care;

His fits and his fancies

Are above all mischances,

And mirth is his ordinary fair:

Then be thou mad, and he made, mad all let us be,

There's no men leads lives more merry than we.

### 4.222. Song 219.

GAze not on thy Beauties pride,

Tender Maid in the false tide

That from Lovers eyes do slide.

Let thy faithful Christal show

How thy colours come and go,

Beauty takes a foil from wo.

Love that in those smooth streams lies,

Under Pity's fair disguise,

Will thy melting heart surprize.

Nets of Passions finest thread,

(Snaring Poems) will be spread,

All to catch thy Maiden-head.

Then beware, for those that cure

Loves disease, themselves endure

[[Page 233]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=119)For
reward, a Calenture.

Rather let the Lover pine,

Than his pale cheek should assign

A perpetual blush to thine.

### 4.223. Song 220.

A Beggar got a Bayliff,

A Bayliff got a Yeoman,

A Yeoman got a Prentice,

A Prentice got a Free-man,

A Free-man got a Master,

And he begot a Tease,

And soon became a Gentleman,

Then a Justice of Peace;

This Justice got a Daughter,

And she is come to light,

She stept into the Court,

And there she got a Knight.

A Knight got a Lord,

A Lord an Earl begot,

An Earl got a Duke,

This Duke he was a Scot:

This Duke a Prince begot,

A Prince of Royal hope,

He begot an Emperor,

The Emperor a Pope.

The Pope got a Bastard,

He was a Noble Spark,

He lay with a Nun,

And so begot a Clark.

A Clark got a Sexton,

A Sexton got a Vicar,

A Vicar got a Parson,

And all of them got liquor,

Till they were all made Prebends,

And so they got a Dean,

A Dean got a Bishop,

A Bishop got a Quean.

[[Page 234]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=120)

### 4.224. Song 221.

I'Le Sing you a Sonnet that ne'r was in Print,

'Tis truly and newly come out of the Mint,

I'le tell you before-hand, you [...]l find nothing in't.

On nothing I think, and on nothing I write,

'Tis nothing I court, yet nothing I slight,

Nor care I a pin, if I get nothing by't.

Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, B [...]asts, Birds, Fish, and Men,

Did start out of nothing, a Chaos, a Den;

And all things shall turn into nothing ag [...]n.

'Tis nothing sometimes makes many things hit,

As when fools among wise men do silently sit,

A fool that says nothing, may pass for a wit.

What one man loves is another mans loathing,

This blade loves a quick thing, that loves a slow thing,

And both do in the conclusi'on love nothing.

Your Lad that makes love to a del [...]cat [...] smooth thing

And thinking with sighs to gain her and soothing,

Frequently makes much ado about nothing.

At last when his Pat'ence and Purse is decay'd,

He may to the bed of a Whore be betray'd;

But she that hath nothing, must need be a maid.

Your flashing, and clashing, and slashing of wit,

Doth start out of nothing, but fancy and fit;

'Tis little or nothing to what hath been writ.

When first by the  [...]ars we together did fall,

Then something got nothing, and nothing got all;

From nothing it came, and to nothing it shall.

That party that seal'd to a Cov'nant in haste,

Who made our 3 Kingdoms, and Churches lie waste;

Their project, and all came to nothing at last.

They raised an Army of Horse, and of Foot,

To tumble down Monarchy, Branches and Root;

They thunder'd, and plunder'd, but nothing would do't.

The Organ, the Altar, and Ministers cloathing,

In Presbyter Iack begot such a loathing,

That he must needs raise a petty New-nothing,

[[Page 235]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=120)And when
he had reb'd us in sanct'fi'd cloathing,

Perjur'd the people by faithing and trothing.

At last he was catch't, and all came to nothing.

In several Fact [...]ons we quarrel and brawl,

Dispute, and contend, and to fighting we fall;

I'le lay all to nothing, that nothing wins all.

When War, and Rebellion, and Plundering grows,

The Mendicant man is the freest from foes,

For he is most happy hath nothing to lose.

Brave Caesar, and Pompey, and Great Al'xander,

Whom Armies follow'd as Goose follows Gander,

Nothing can say t' an action of slander.

The wisest great Prince, were he never so stout,

Though conquer the world, and give mankind a Rout,

Did bring nothing in, nor shall bear nothing out.

Old Noll that arose  [...] High-thing,  [...] Low-thing,

By brewing Rebellion, Nicking, and Frothing,

In sev'n years distance was All-things, and nothing.

Dick (Olivers Heir) that pitiful slow-thing,

Who once was invested with Purple-clothing,

Stands for a Cypher, and that stands for nothing.

If King-killers bold are excluded from bliss,

Old Bradshaw (that feels the reward on't by this)

Had better been nothing, than what now he is.

Blind Collonel Hewson, that lately did crawl

To lofty degree, from a low Coblers stall,

Did bring Aul to nothing, when Aul came to all.

Your Gallant that Rants it in Dell'cate clothing,

Though lately he was but a pit'ful low-thing,

Pays Landlord, Draper, and Taylor with nothing.

The nimble-tongu'd Lawyer that pleads for his pay,

When death doth Arrest him and bear him away,

At the Gen'ral Bar will have nothing to say.

Whores that in silk were by Gallants embrac't,

By a rabble of Prentices lately were chac't,

Thus Courting, and sporting, comes to nothing at last.

[[Page 236]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=121)If any
man tax me with weakness of wit,

And say that on nothing, I nothing have writ,

I shall answer, Ex nihilo, nihil fit.

Yet let his discret'on be never so tall,

This very word nothing shall give it a fall,

For writing of nothing I comprehend all.

Let every man give the Poet his due,

'Cause then it was with him, as now its with you;

He study'd it when he had nothing to do.

This very word nothing, if took the right way,

May prove advantag'ous, for what would you say,

If the Vintner should cry, there's nothing to pay.

### 4.225. Song 222.

BY Heaven I'le tell her boldly that 'tis she,

Why  [...]uld she asham'd or angry be,

That she's belov'd by me?

The Gods may give their Altars o're;

They'l smoak but seldom any more,

If none but happy men must them adore.

The lightning which tall Oaks oppose in vain,

To strike sometimes does not disdain,

The humbler Furzes of the plain.

She being so high, and I so low,

Her power by this doth greater show,

Who at such distance gives so sure a blow.

Compar'd with her all things so worthless prove,

That nought on earth can towards her move,

Till 't be exalted by her love.

Equal to her, alas, there's none;

She like a Deity is grown,

That must create, or else must be alone.

If there be man who thinks himself so high,

As to pretend equality,

He deserves her less than I.

For he would cheat for his relief,

[[Page 237]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=121)And one
would give with lesser grief,

To an undeserving beggar than a thief.

### 4.226. Song 223.

WHen I drein my Goblets deep,

All my cares are rockt asleep,

Rich as Craesus, Lord o'th' earth,

Chanting Odes of wit and mirth,

And with Ivy Garlands crown'd,

I can kick the Globe round, round.

Let others fight while I drink,

Boy, my Goblet fill to th' brink;

Come fill it high, fill it high,

That I may but drink and die.

For when I lay down my head,

'Tis better to be drunk,

'Tis better to be drunk,

Dead drunk, than dead.

### 4.227. Song 224.

Be not thou so foolish nice,

As to be invited twice;

VVhat should women more incite,

Than their own sweet appetite?

Shall salvage things more freedom have,

Than Nature unto woman gave?

The Swan, the Turtle, and the Sparrow,

Bill and Kiss, then take the Marrow;

They Bill and Kiss, what then they do,

Come Bill and Kiss, and I'le shew you.

### 4.228. Song 225.

PHillis on the new made hay,

Phillis on the new made hay,

In a wanton posture lay,

Thinking no shepherd nigh her,

But Amintas came that way,

And threw himself down by her.

[[Page 238]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=122)Hotly he
pursu'd the game,

Hotly he pursu [...]d the game,

She cry'd pish▪ and fie for shame;

I vow you shall not do it;

But the youth soon overcame,

And eagerly fell to it.

When alas to vex her more,

When alas to vex her more,

He e'r she began gave o're;

For such was the adventure,

He made his complement at door.

And could not stay to enter.

In great rage she flung away,

In great rage she flung away,

He asham'd, and breathless lay;

But though he had displeas'd her,

He rally [...]d, and renew'd the fray,

And manfully appeas'd her,

### 4.229. Song 226.

COme Iack, let's drink a Pot of Ale,

And I shall tell thee such a tale

Will make thine ears to ring:

My Coyn is spent, my time is lost,

And I this onely fruit can boast,

That once I saw my King.

But this doth most afflict my minde,

I went to Court in hope to finde,,

Some of my friends in place:

And walking there I had a sight

Of all the Crew, but by this light,

I hardly knew one face.

S'life of so many noble Sparks,

Who on their bodies bear the marks

Of their integrity,

And suffer'd ruine of Estate,

It was my base unhappy fate,

[[Page 239]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=122)That I
not one could see.

Not one upon my life, among

My old acquaintance all along,

At Truro and before:

And I suppose the place can show,

As few of those whom thou didst know,

At York or Marston Moor.

But truly there are swarms of those

Whose chins are beardless, yet their Nose

And backsides still wear Muffs:

Whilst the old rusty Cavalier

Retires, or dares not once appear,

For want of Coin and Cuffs.

When none of those I could discry,

Who better far deserv'd then I,

I calmly did reflect:

Old servants they by rule of state,

Like Almanacks grow out of date,

What then can I expect?

Troth in contempt of fortunes frown,

I'le get me fairly out of town,

And in a Cloyster pray:

That since the Stars are yet unkinde

To Royalists, the King may finde

More faith [...]ul friends than thay,

### 4.230. Song 227.

I Marvel Dick that having been

So long abroad, and having seen

The world as thou hast done:

Thou shouldst acquaint me with a tale,

As old as Nectar, and as stale,

As that of Priest and Nun.

Are we to learn what is a Court?

A Pageant made for fortunes sport,

Where merits scarce appear:

For bashful merits only dwels

[[Page 240]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=123)In
Camps, in Villages, and Cells,

Alas it comes not there.

Desert is nice in its address,

And merit oft times doth oppose

Beyond what guilt would do;

But they are sure of their demands,

That come to Court with Golden hands,

And brazen faces too.

The King indeed doth still profess,

To give his party soon redress,

And cherish honesty;

But his good wishes prove in vain,

Whose service with the servants gain,

Not always doth agree.

Ah Princes be they ne'r so wise,

Are fain to see with others eyes,

But seldom hear at all,

And Courtiers finde their interest,

In time to feather well their Nest,

Providing for their fall.

Our comfort doth on him depend,

Things when they are at worst will mend.

And let us but reflect

On our condition 'tother day,

When none but Tyrants bore the sway,

What did we then expect?

Mean while a calm retreat is best,

But discontent if not supprest,

May breed Disloyalty:

This is the constant Note I'le sing,

I have been faithful to my King,

And so shall live and die.

### 4.231. Song 228.

'TWas then we had a thriving Trade,

When Lackies brought our work unto us;

The Ladie with her Am'rous blade

[[Page 241]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=123)Then did
Complement and woo us,

But now the world's turn'd upside down,

The Righteous too are monstrous wicked.

The Vest, the Tunick, and the Gown,

Hang all upon the feeble Ticket,

And when a Dun is sent, like Lords

They swear and swagger at their Taylor,

But nor their Swords,

Nor Damme words,

Shall Hector, Constable, or Goaler.

### 4.232. Song 229.

PHillis I pray,

Why did you say,

That I did not adore you?

I durst not sue,

As other's do,

Nor talk of love before you.

Should I make known

My flame, you'd frown,

No tears could e're appease you,

'Tis better I,

Should silent die,

Than talking to displease you.

### 4.233. Song 230.

COme Chloris hie we to the Bower,

To sport us e're the day be done.

Such is thy power,

That every slower

Will ope to thee as to the Sun.

And if a slower, but chance to die,

With my sighs blast, or mine eyes rain;

Thou canst revive it with thine eye,

And with thy breath make sweet again.

The wanton Suckling and the Vine,

Will strive for th' honour, who first may

[[Page 242]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=124)With
their green Arms incircle thine,

To keep the burning Sun away.

### 4.234. Song 131.

THough I am young, and cannot tell

Either what Love or Death is well;

And then again I have been told,

Love wounds with heat, and Death with cold.

Yet I have hear'd they doth bear Darts,

And both do aim at humane hearts;

So that I fear they do but bring

Extreams to touch, and mean one thing.

### 4.235. Song 132.

UPon the Change where Merchants meet,

'Twixt Cornhil and Threadneedle-street,

Where Wits of ev'ry size are hurl'd,

To treat of all things in the world,

I saw a folded Paper fall,

And upon it, these words were writ,

Have at all.

Thought I, if have at all it be,

For ought I know 'tis have at me;

And (if the consequence be true)

It may as well be have at you:

Then listen pray to what I shall

In bri [...]f declare, what's written there,

Have at all.

I am a Courtier who in sport,

Do come from the Vtopian Court,

To whisper softly in your ear,

How high we are, and what we were;

To tell you all would be too much,

But here and there a little touch.

Have at all.

I was not many years ago,

In tatter'd trim from top to toe,

But now my ruin'd robes are burn'd,

[[Page 243]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=124)My rags
are all to Ribons turn'd:

My patches into Pieces fall,

I cogg a Dy, swagger and lie,

Have at all.

Upon my Pantalonian Pate,

I wear a Milleners estate:

But when he duns me at the Court,

I shew him a Protection for't;

Whilst he doth to protesting fall,

And then I cry, Dam-me, you lie▪

Have at all.

Since Venus shav'd off all my hair,

A powder'd Perriwig I wear,

Which brings me in the Golden Girls,

Wh [...]ch I procure for Lords and Earls;

When Love doth for a Cooler call,

My fancy drives at maids and wives,

Have at all.

My Lodgings never are in quiet,

Another duns me for my Diet,

I had of him in fifty three;

Which I forget, so doth not he;

I call him sawcy fellow, Sirrah,

And draw my Sword to run him thorough,

Have at all.

Yet once a Friend that sav'd my life,

Who had a witty wanton wife,

I did in courtesie requite,

Made him a Cuckold, and a Knight;

Which makes him mount like Tennis-ball,

Whilst she and I, together cry,

Have at all.

But yet these Citts are subtle slaves,

Most of them Wits, and knowing Knav [...];

We get their Children, and they do

From us get Lands, and Lordships too:

[[Page 244]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=125)And 'tis
most fit in these affairs,

The Land should go to the right Heirs,

Have at all.

A Souldier I directly hate;

A Cavalier once broke my pate;

With cane in hand he overcome me,

And took away my Mistriss from me;

For I confess I love a wench,

Though English, Irish, Dutch, or French,

Have at all.

A Souldiers life is not like mine;

I will be plump, when he shall pine:

My projects carry stronger force,

Than all his Armed Foot and Horse;

What though his Morter-pieces roar,

My Chimney-pieces shall do more,

Have at all.

Thus have I given you in short,

A Courtier of Utopia Court,

I write not of Religion,

For (to tell truly) we have none,

If any me to question call,

With Pen, or Sword, Hab Nab's the word,

Have at all.

### 4.236. Song 233.

POor Ienny and I we toiled,

A long long Summers day,

Till we were almost spoyled,

With making of the Hay.

Her Kerchief was of holland clear

Bound low upon her brow,

I se whisper'd something in h [...]r ear,

[...]ut what's that to you?

Her St [...]ckings were of Kersey green,

Well sticht with yellow silk,

[...]h! sike a leg was never seen,

[[Page 245]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=125)Her skin
as white as Milk.

Her hair was black as any Crow,

And sweet her mouth was too,

Oh! Ienny daintily could mow,

But whats that to you?

Her Petty-coats were not so low,

As Ladies now do wear 'em;

She needed not a Page I trow,

For I was by to bear 'em;

I'z took 'em up all in my hand,

And I think her Linnen too,

Which made a friend of mine to stand,

But what's that to you?

King Solomon had wives enough,

And Concubines a Number;

Yet I'z possess more happiness,

And he had more of Cumber;

My joy surmounts a Wedded life,

With fear she lets me mow,

A Wench is better than a wife,

But what's that to you?

The Lilly and the Rose combine

To make my Ienny fair,

There's no contentment sike as mine,

I'm almost void of care.

But yet I fear my Ienny's face,

VVill cause more men to woo,

Which I shall take for a disgrace,

But what's that to you?

### 4.237. Song 234

AH! Celia, leave that cruel Art

Of killing with those conqu'ring eyes,

Your triumph o're a tender heart,

Makes a sad Victim of your prize.

Such Souldiers little Honor gain,

As trample o're a Captive slave;

[[Page 246]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=126)That use
of Victory is vain,

Pursues the Foe unto his Grave.

But prisoner-like as when repriev'd,

Sad sighs I will no more approve,

Nor think 'tis happy to be griev'd,

Nor sacrifice my self to Love.

Though 'tis most true, your Beauty last.

As pow'rful as it was before,

But having felt its fatal blasts,

I'm warn'd to give devotion o're.

If now at last you will be kinde,

And just, as I have been to you,

I then may once more change my minde,

And be for ever, ever true.

But if you will be cruel still,

And constant zeal can nothing move,

Then be you wedded to your will,

And I'le divorce my self from love.

### 4.238. Song 135.

COok Laurel would have the Devil his Guest,

And bad him home to Peak to Dinner,

Where Fiend had never such a Feast,

Prepared at the charge of a Sinner.

With a Hey Down, Down a Down, Down.

His stomach was queasie, he came thither Coacht,

The joggings had caused his Cruets to rise,

To help which, he call'd for a Puritan poacht,

That used to turn up the white of his eyes.

With a H [...]y, &c.

And so he recovered unto his wish,

[...] s [...]t him down, and began to eat:

A Promooter in Plumb-broth was the first Dish,

His own Privy-Kitchin had no such meat.

With a H [...]y, &c.

[[Page 247]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=126)Yet
though with this he much was taken,

Upon a sudden he shifted his Trencher,

As soon as he spyed the Bawd and Bacon,

By which you may know the Devil's a wencher.

With a Hey, &c.

Six pickled Taylors sliced and cut,

With Sempsters and Tyre-women fit for his pallet,

With Feather-men and Perfumers, put

Some twelve in a Charger, to make a Grand-sallet.

With a Hey, &c.

A rich fat Usurer stew'd in his marrow,

With him a Lawyers Head and Green-sawee,

All which his belly took in like a Barrel,

As though till then he had never seen Sawee.

With a Hey, &c.

Then Carbonado'd and Cookt with pains,

Was brought up a Serjeants cloven Face,

The Sawce was made of a Yeomans brains,

That had been beaten out with his Mace.

With a Hey, &c.

Two roasted Sheriffs came hot to the Board,

The Feast had nothing been without them,

Both living and dead were foxed and furr'd,

And their Chains like Saucages hung about them.

With a Hey, &c.

The next Dish was the Mayor of the Town,

With a Pudding of Maintenance put in his belly,

Like a Goose in her feathers, in his Gown,

With a couple of Hinch-boys boyl'd to a Jelly.

With a Hey, &c.

Next came the over-worn Justice of Peace,

With Clerks like Gizzards stuck under each arm▪

And Warrants like Sippets, lay in his own grease,

Set over a Chafing-dish to be kept warm.

With a Hey, &c.

[[Page 248]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=127)A London
Cuckold came hot from the Spit,

And when the Carver open had broke him,

The Devil chopt his head up at a bit,

But his horns had almost like to choak him.

With a Hey, &c.

A fair large Pasty of a Midwife hot,

And for cold Bak'd meat in this story,

A reverend painted Lady was brought,

Long coffu [...]d in Crust till now she [...]s grown hoary.

With a Hey, &c.

The loyns of a Leacher then was roasted,

With a plump Harlots Head and Garlick;

With a Panders Petti-toes that had boasted

Himself for a Captain, that never was warlick.

With a Hey, &c.

Then boiled and stuck upon a Prick,

The Gizzard was brought of a holy Sister,

That bit made the Devil almost so sick,

That the Doctor did think he'd need of a Glister.

With a Hey, &c.

The Jowl of a Jaylor serv'd for a Fish,

A Constable sowced piss'd Vineger by;

Two Alderm [...]n Lobsters laid in a dish,

A Deputy Tart, and a Church-warden Pye.

With a Hey, &c.

All which he devoured, then for a close,

He did for a Draught of Derby call,

He heaved the Vess [...]l up to his Nose,

[...]nd never left till he had drunk up all.

With a Hey, &c.

Then from the Table he gave a start,

Where banquet and wine was not to seek,

[...]ll which he blew away with a Fart,

From whence it [...]s call'd, Th Devils Arse in the Peak.

With a Hey Down, Down a Down, Down.

[[Page 249]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=127)

### 4.239. Song 236.

THirsis, Thirsis, I wish as well as you,

To Honor, to Honor, there were nothing due,

Then would I pay my debt of love,

In that same Coin,

In the same Coin which you approve;

And now you must in friendship take,

'Tis all the payment I can make,

Friendship so high, that I may say,

'Tis rather love,

'Tis rather love with some allay;

Then rest contented, since that I

As well my self, as you deny,

And learn of me bravely to bear

The loss of what I hold so dear;

And that which Honor does in me,

Let my example,

My example work in thee.

### 4.240. Song 237.

OH! the little house that lies under the hill,

Oh! the little house that lies under the hill,

There's Ale, and Tobacco, and Wenches at will,

Oh! the little house that lies under the hill.

### 4.241. Song 238.

ON a hill there grows a Flow'r,

Fair befal the gentle Sweet,

By that Flow'r there is a Bow'r,

Where the heav'nly Muses meet.

In that Bow'r there is a Chair

Fringed all about with Gold,

Where doth sit the fairest Fair,

Mortal ever did behold.

It is Phillis fair and bright,

She that is the Shepherds Joy,

She that Venus did despight,

And did blinde her little Boy.

This is she, the wise, the rich,

[[Page 250]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=128)That the
world desires to see;

[...] i [...] Ipsa quae, the which,

There is none but onely she.

Who would not this face admire,

Who would not this Saint adore?

Who would not this sight desire,

Though he thought to see no more?

O fair eyes! but let me see,

One good look, and I am gone,

Look on me, for I am he,

Thy poor filly Coridon.

Thou that art the shepherds Queen,

Look upon thy silly swain,

By thy vertues have been seen,

Dead men brought to live again.

### 4.242. Song 239.

SInce life's but short, and time amain

Flyes on, and ne'r looks back again;

Lets laugh and sing and merry be,

And spend our hours in jollity.

Good wine makes the Pope religiously given,

And sends all the Monks, and little Fryers to heaven,

Then take a merry glass,

Fill it just as it was,

And let no man take it in dudgeon;

He that makes any stir,

Is no true drunken Cur,

Hang him up that is a Curmudgeon.

'Twas Ioves refreshment when his mind was shrunk

With cares, to make himself with Nectar drunk;

So heavenly drunk, his brain ran like the sphears,

Round, and made Musick to his ears.

He's a Right honest man, you may believe what he'l tell you.

If he hath a jolly Nose, and a beautiful belly.

Then take a merry glass, &c.

Great Alexander to enflame his heart

[[Page 251]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=128)With
courage, drank two Gallons and a quart

At six go downs, and then in Raptures hurld,

He went and conquer'd all the world,

Darius lost Persia, and the Macedon won it,

But if he had not been drunk he could never have done it.

Then take a merry glass, &c.

### 4.243. Song 240.

LOve I must tell thee, I'le no longer be

A Victim to thy beardless Deity;

Nor shall this heart of mine,

Now 'tis return'd

Be offer'd at thy shrine,

Nor at thine Altar burn'd,

Love like Religion's made an airy name,

To aw those souls whom want of wit makes tame.

There's no such thing as Quiver, Shaft, or Bow,

Nor do's Love wound, but we imagine so;

Or if it does perplex,

And grieve the minde,

'Tis in the Mase'line Sex,

Women no sorrow finde;

'Tis not our Parts or Persons that can move 'em,

Nor ist mens worth, but wealth makes women love 'em.

Reason, not love, henceforth shall be my guide,

Our fellow creatures shan't be deifi'd.

I'le now a Rebel be,

And so pull down,

The Distaff Hierachy,

Or Females fancy'd Crown.

In these unbridled times, who would not strive

To free his neck from all prerogative?

### 4.244. Song 241.

THe Spring's coming on, and our Spirits begin

To retire to their places merrily home,

[...]nd every soul is bound to lay in

A new brewing of blood for the year that's to come.

[[Page 252]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=129)They're
Cowards that make it of Clarifi'd whey,

Or swill with the swine in the Juice of the Grains;

Give me the Racy Canary to play

(And the sparkling Renish to vault) in my veins.

Let Doctors go teach our lives are but short,

And overmuch wine a new death will invite,

But we'l be revenged before hand for't,

And crown a lives mirth, with the space of a night.

Then stand we about with our glasses full crown'd,

Whilst ev'ry thing else to their postures doth grow,

Till our heads and our caps with the houses turn round,

And the cellars become where the chambers are now.

Then fill out more wine, 'twill a sacrifice bring,

We'l tipple, and fiddle, and fuddle all out

This night in full Draughts, with a health to our King,

Till we baffle the States, and the Sun face about,

Whose first rising Rays when shot from his throne,

Shall dash upon faces as red as his own,

And wonder that mortals can fuddle away

More wine in a night than he water in a day.

### 4.245. Song 242.

LOve is a Bubble,

No man is able

To say it is this, or 'tis that,

'Tis so full of passions,

Of sundry fashions,

'Tis like I cannot tell what.

'Tis fair in the Cradle,

'Tis foul in the Saddle,

'Tis either too cold, or too hot.

An errant Lier,

Fed by desire,

It is, I and it is not.

Love is a fellow,

Clad all in yellow,

The cankerworm of the minde,

[[Page 253]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=129)A privy
mischief,

And such a sly thief,

As no man is able to finde,

Love is a wonder,

'Tis here, and 'tis yonder

As common to one, as to moe,

So great a cheater,

Every mans better,

Then hang him, and so let him go.

### 4.246. Song 243.

DEar Love, let me this ev'ning die,

Oh smile not to prevent it;

But use this opportunity,

Lest we do both repent it;

Frown quickly then, and break my heart,

So that my way of dying,

May though my life prove full of smart,

Be worth the worlds envying.

Some striving knowledge to refine,

Consume themselves with thinking,

And some whose friendship's seal'd in wine

Are kindly kill'd with drinking.

And some are rack't on Indian coast,

Thither by gain invited,

And some in smoke of battle lost,

Whom drums, not lutes delighted.

Alas, how poorly these depart,

Their graves still unattended,

Who dies not of a broaken heart,

In love is not befriended;

His memory is onely sweet,

All Praise no pitty moving,

Who fondly at his mistriss feet,

Doth die with over-loving.

And now thou frown'st, and now I die,

My Corps by Lovers follow'd

[[Page 254]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=130)Shall
shortly by dead Lovers lie

For that ground's only hallow'd.

If the priest tak't ill, I have a grave,

My death not well approving,

The Poets my estate shall have,

To teach the Art of loving,

And now let Lovers ring the Bells

For the poor youth departed,

He which all others else excel's,

That are not broken-hearted.

My grave with flowers let Virgins strow,

But if thy tears fall near them,

They'l so excel in scent and show,

Thy self will shortly wear them:

Such flowers how much will Flora prize,

That on a Lover's growing,

And water'd by his Mistriss eyes

With pitty overflowing?

A grave so deckt will (though thou art

Yet fearful to come nigh me)

Provoke thee straight to break thy heart

And lie down boldly by me.

Then ev'ry where the Bels shall ring,

While all to black is turning,

All Torches burn, and each Quire sing,

As Natures self were mourning,

And we hereafter may be found

(By Destinies right placing)

Making, like flowers, love under ground,

Whose roots are still embracing.

### 4.247. Song 244.

YEs, I could love if I could finde

A Mistriss pleasing to my minde,

Whom neither pride, nor Gold can move,

To buy her Beauty, sell her Love,

[[Page 255]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=130)Goes
neat, yet cares not to be fine,

Who loves me for my self, not mine.

Not Lady proud, nor City coy,

But full of freedome, full of Joy,

Not childish young, nor Beldam old,

Not si [...]ry hot, nor Icy cold;

Not gravely wise to guide a State,

Nor vain, as to be pointed at;

Not rich, nor proud; nor base, nor poor,

Nor chaste, nor no reputed whore.

When such a Lass I shall discover,

Cupid entitle me a Lover.

### 4.248. Song 245.

YOu maidens, and wives, and yong widows rejoyce,

Declare your thanksgiving with heart and with voice

Since waters were waters, I dare boldly say

There ne'r was such cause for a thanksgiving day;

For from London Town,

There's lately come down

Four able Physitians that never wore Gown,

Their Physick is pleasant, their Dose it is large,

And you may be cur'd without danger or charge.

No Bolus, no Vomit, no Potion, no Pill,

(Which sometimes do cure, but oftner do kill,)

Your taste, nor your stomack, need never displease,

If you'l be advised but by one of these:

For they've a new Drug,

Which is call [...]d The close Hug,

Which will mend your complexion, and make you look smug

A soveraign Balsom which once well apply'd,

Though griev'd at the heart, the patient ne'r dy'd.

In the morning you need not be rob'd of your rest,

For in your warm beds your Physick doth best,

And though in the taking some stirrings requir'd,

The motions so pleasant you cannot be tyr'd,

For on your back you must lie,

[[Page 256]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=131)With
your buttock raised high,

And one of these Doctors must always be by,

Who still will be ready to cover you warm,

For if you take cold, all physick doth harm.

Before they do venture to give their direction,

They always consider their patients complexion,

If she have a moist palm, or a red head of hair,

She requires more physick than one man can spare,

If she have a long Nose,

The Doctor scarce knows

How many good handsuls must go to her Dose.

You Lady's that have such ill symptoms as these,

In reason and conscience should pay double fees.

But that we may give to these Doctors due praise,

Who to all sorts of people their favours conveys,

On the ugly for pitty sake, skill shall be shown,

And as for the handsom they're cur'd for their own,

On you silver, or Gold,

They never lay hold,

For what comes so freely they scorn should be sold.

Then joyn with these Doctors and heatily pray,

Their power of healing may never decay.

### 4.249. Catch or Song 246.

POmpey was a mad man, a mad man,

Pompey was a mad man, a mad man was he,

So long he was a glad man, a glad man,

So long he was a glad man, a glad man was he,

Till Caesar in Pharsalia, routed his Battalia,

'Cause he was a madder, a madder far than he,

Then be thou mad, and I mad, and mad let us be,

And the Devil himself shan't be madder than we.

### 4.250. Song 247.

OH Anis quoth he, well Thomas quoth she,

What wouldst thou say man unto me?

I love thee quoth he, dost love me quoth she,

Ch'me the more beholding to thee.

[[Page 257]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=131)To bed
then quoth he, no Thomas quoth she,

Not till the parson hath said all unto me,

I'z bump thee quoth he, wo't bump me quoth she,

Ch'im the more beholding to thee.

How lik'st it quoth he, well Thomas quoth she,

So thou comst but once more unto me,

That I will quoth he, sayst thou so quoth she,

Ch'im the more beholding to thee.

### 4.251. Song 248.

BOnny Kate, Kenny Kate, lay thy leg o're me,

Thou bee'st a bonny Lass, fain would I mow thee,

Fain would I mow thee, ans thou wouldst let me,

Bonny Kate, Kenny Kate, do not forget me.

Out away Ionny lad, I'se am a Virgin,

There is no hope for thee for to get pergin,

For to get pergin, I dare not let thee,

Out away Ionny lad, I'se mun forget thee.

Thou bee'st young, so is I, let us be doing,

There is no better thing than to be mowing,

Than to be mowing, ans thou wouldst let me,

Bonny Kate, Kenny Kate, do not forget me.

Why dost thou whimper so, thou know'st my minde Io,

Would mother suffer me, I would be kinde Io,

I would be kinde Io, a [...]'s she would let me,

Bonny lad, Ionny lad, I se ne're forget thee.

### 4.252. Song 249.

I Went to the Alehouse as an honest woman shoo'd,

And a knave follow'd after, as you know knaves woo'd

Knaves will be knaves in every degree,

I'le tell you by and by how this knave serv'd me.

I call'd for my pot as an honest woman shoo'd,

And the knave drank it up, as you know knaves woo'd,

Knaves will be knaves, &c.

I went into my bed as an honest woman shoo'd,

And the knave crept into't, as you know knaves woo'd,

Knaves will be knaves, &c.

[[Page 258]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=132)I prov'd
with childe as an honest woman shood,

And the knave ran away, as you know knaves woo'd,

Knaves will be knaves in every degree,

And thus have I told you how this knave serv'd me.

### 4.253. Song 250.

HAng fear, and cast away care,

The Par'sh is bound to finde us,

Thou, and I,

And all must die,

And leave this world behinde us;

The Bells shall ring,

The Clerk shall sing,

And the good old wife shall winde us,

And Iohn shall lay,

Our bones in clay,

Where the Devil ne'r shall finde us.

### 4.254. Song 251.

NAy prithee don't flie me,

But sit thee down by me,

For I cannot endure

The man that's demure,

A pox on your Worships and Sirs:

For your Congees and Trips,

With your legs and your lips,

Your Madams, and Lords,

With such sinical words,

The Complement you bring,

That doth spell nothing,

You may keep for the Chains and the Furrs;

For at the beginning was neither Peasant nor Prince,

And who the devil made the distinction since?

Those Titles of Honors,

Do remain in the Donors,

And not in the thing,

To which they do cling,

If his soul be too narrow that wears them;

[[Page 259]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=132)No
delight can I see,

In the thing call'd Degree,

Hone [...] Dick sounds as well,

As a name with an L,

That with Titles do swell,

And hums like a Bell,

To affright mortal ears that do hear 'um:

He that wears a brave Soul, and dares honestly do,

Is a Herald to himself, and a Godfather too.

Why should we then dote on,

One with a fools Coat on,

Whose Coffers are cram'd,

Yet he will be damn'd

E're he'l do a good act, or a wise one?

What reason hath he,

To be Ruler o're me,

Who is Lord o're his Chest,

But his head and his brest

Are but empty and bare,

And puft up with air,

And can neither assist, nor advise one:

Honor's but air, and proud flesh but dust is,

'Tis the Commons makes the Lords as the Clerk makes the Iustice.

But since it must be

Of a different degree,

'Cause some do aspire

To be greater and higher,

Than the rest of their fellows and brothers;

He that hath such a spirit,

Let him gain't by his merit,

Spend his wit, wealth, and blood,

For his Countreys good,

And make himself fit

By his Valour and Wit,

For things above the reach of all others:

[[Page 260]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=133)Honor's
a Prize, and who wins it may wear it,

If not, 'tis a badge, and a burthen to bear it.

For my part let me,

Be but quiet and free,

I'le drink Sack and obey,

Let the great ones sway,

That spend their whole time in thinking,

I'le not busie my pate.

With the matters of State,

The News-books I'le burn all,

And with the Diurnal

Light Tobacco, and admit,

They are so far fit,

To serve good Company, and Drinking;

All the name I desire is an honest good fellow,

For that man has no worth that won't sometimes be mellow.

### 4.255. Song 252.

WHy shouldst thou swear I am forsworn,

Since thine I vow'd to be?

Lady, it is already morn,

And 'twas last night I swore to thee,

That fond impossibility.

Have I not lov [...]d thee much and long,

A tedious twelve hours space?

I must all other Beauties wrong,

And rob thee of a new embrace,

Should I still dote upon thy face;

Not but all Joy's in thy brown hair,

By others may be found,

But I must search the black, the fair,

Like skilful Mineralists that sound,

For treasure in a plow d-up ground.

Then if when I have lov'd my round,

Thou prov'st the pleasant she,

With spoil of other beauties crown'd,

[[Page 261]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=133)I loaden
will return to thee,

Even sated with variety.

### 4.256. Song 253.

THe May pole is up,

Now give me the Cup,

I le drink to the Garlands around it;

But first unto those,

Whose hands did compose,

The glory of Flowers that crown'd it;

A health to my Girls,

Whose husbands may Earls,

Or Lords be, granting my wishes;

And when they shall wed

To the Bridal bed,

Then multiply all like to fishes.

### 4.257. Song 254.

FArewel fond Love, under whose childish whip,

I have serv'd out a weary prentiship;

Thou that hast made me thy scorn'd property,

To dote on those that love not, and to fly

Love that woo'd me: go bane of my content,

[...]nd practice on some other patient.

Farewel fond hopes, that fan'd my warm desire,

Till it had rais'd a wilde unruly fire,

Which no sighs could, nor tears extinguish can,

Although my ey [...]s out-flow the Ocean.

Forth from my thoughts for ever, thing of air,

Begun in error, finish'd in despair,

Farewel false world, upon whose restless stage,

'Twixt love and hope, I have fool'd out an age.

Ere I will seek to thee for my redress,

I le wooe the wind, and court the wilderness,

And bury [...]d from the days discovery,

[...]inde out some slow but certain way to die.

My woful Monument shall be my Cell.

The murmurs of the purling Brooks my Knell,

[[Page 262]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=134)And for
my Epitaph the Rocks shall grone

Eternally, if any ask that stone

What wretched thing doth in that compass lie?

The hollow Eccho shall reply, 'tis I, 'tis I.

The hollow Eccho shall reply, 'tis I.

### 4.258. Song 255.

GO with thy staff the Sea divide,

And with thy whistle stop the tide.

Catch the wilde windes fast in thy fist,

And let them blow but when thou list,

Creep into Neptunes watry bed,

And get a Syrens maiden-head,

Then sore more high, and fetch me down

Fair Ariadne's starry Crown,

So that with it I may wear

Some of Beronice's hair,

Make Mars and Saturn's aspects mild,

And get the Virgin Star with child,

But if thou hast a daring soul,

Go whip the Bear about the Pole,

All this thou mayst long e're thou can

A woman finde, a woman finde, that's true to man;

For womens hearts take new desires

Far sooner than the powder fires,

Their flashes are more violent

Than those flames, and sooner spent.

Like Torrents womens loves rise high,

Make a noise, decrease, and die.

Then let no wise man think it strange

That women are so apt to change.

No creature underneath the sun,

Bears such relation to the moon,

He then that for their love is sick,

Is worse then they, Is worse then they, Hee's lunatick.

[[Page 263]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=134)

### 4.259. Song 256.

A Bggar a Beggar,

A Beggar I'le be,

There's none leads a life more jocund than he,

A beggar I was,

And a beggar I am,

A beggar I le be, from a beggar I came,

If as it begins our tradings do fall,

We in the conclusion shall beggars be all.

Tradesmen are unfortunate in their affairs,

And few men are thriving, but Courtiers and Players;

A Craver my Father,

A Maunder my Mother,

A Filer my Sister, a filcher my Brother,

A Canter my Uncle,

That car'd not for Pelf,

A Lifter my Aunt, and a beggar my self;

In white wheaten straw when their belly's were full,

Then I was begot between Tinker and Trull.

And therefore a beggar a beggar I le be,

For there's none leads a life more jocu [...]d than he.

When boys do come to us,

And that their intent is

To follow our calling, we ne'r bind them Prentice;

Soon as they come too't,

We teach them to doo't.

And give them a sta [...]f and a wallet to boot,

We teach them their Lingua to Crave and to Cant,

The Devil is in them if then they can want.

And or he, or she, that beggars will be,

Without Indentures they shall be made free.

We beg for our bread, yet

Sometimes it happens,

We feast it with Pig, Pullet, Coney, and Capons,

For Churches affairs,

We are no men-slayers,

[[Page 264]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=135)We have
no Religion, yet live by our prayers.

But if when we beg, men will not draw their Purses,

We charge and give fire, with a Volley of Curses.

The Devil confound your good worship we cry,

And such a bold bazen fac't beggar am I.

We do things in season,

And have so much reason,

We raise no Rebelion, nor ne'r talk treason,

We bill at our mates,

At very low rates,

Whilst some keep their Quarters as high as the gates,

With Shinkin ap Morgan, with Blew-cap or Tege,

We into no Covenant enter, nor League.

And therefore a bonny bold beggar I le be,

For none lives a life that's so jocund as he.

For such petty pledges,

As shirts from the hedges,

We are not in fear to be drawn upon sledges,

But sometimes the whip,

Doth make us to skip,

And then we from tything, to tything do trip,

For when in a poor bouzing ken we do bib it,

We stand more in dread of the Stocks than the Gibbet,

And therefore a merry mad beggar I'le be,

For when it is night in the barn tumbles he.

We throw down no Altar,

Nor ever do falter,

So much as to change a Gold chain for a halter,

Though some men do flout us,

And others do doubt us,

We commonly bear forty pieces about us,

But many good fellows are fine and look fiercer,

That owe for their cloaths to their Taylor and Mercer,

And if from the Stocks I can keep out my feet,

I fear not the Compter, Kings-bench, nor the Fleet.

Sometimes I do frame,

My self to be lame,

[[Page 265]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=135)And when
a Coach comes I do hop to my game,

We seldom miscarry,

Or ever do marry

By the Gowns, Common-Prayer, or Cloak Directory;

But Simon and Susan like birds of a feather,

They kiss, and they laugh, and so lie down together.

Like Pigs in the Pease-straw intangled they lie,

Till there they beget such a bold Regue as I.

### 4.260. Song 257.

I Dream'd we both were in a bed

Of Roses, almost smoothered;

But then I heard thy sweet breath say,

Faults done by night will blush by day,

I kiss thee (panting and I call)

The night to record, that was all;

But ah! if empty dreams so please,

Loye give me more such nights as these.

### 4.261. Song 258.

GO treacherous hopes, by whose uncertain fire

I cherish my tyrannical desire;

Love is a more uncertain ghess than care,

And my fate's such,

That will cost as much,

To love as to despair.

'Tis true our lives are but a long disease,

Made up with real care, and seeming ease,

Ye Gods that such uncertain favours give▪

Oh tell me why,

It is so hard to die,

And such a task to live,

### 4.262. Song 259.

WWhy should we boast of Arthur and his Knights,

Knowing how many men have performed fights,

Or why should we speak of Sir Lancelot du Lake,

Or Sir Tristram du Leon, who fought for Ladies sake,

[[Page 266]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=136)Read old
Stories, and there you shall see

How St. George, St. George, he made the Dragon flee.

St. George he was for England,

St. Dennis was for France,

Sing Hony soit qui mal y pense.

To speak of the Monarchs, it were too long to tell,

And likewise of the Romans how far they  [...]id excel;

Hannibal and Scipio they many a field did fight,

Orlando Furioso he was a valiant Knight,

Romulus and Rhemus were those that Rome did build,

But St. George, St. George, the Dragon he hath kill'd.

St. George, &c.

Iephtha and Gideon they led their men to fight,

The Gibbonites and Ammonites, they put them all to slight,

Hercules's valour was in the Vale of Basse,

And Sampson slew a thousand with the Jaw-bone of an Ass,

And when that he was blinde pull'd the Temple to the ground,

But St. George, St. George the Dragon did confound.

St. George, &c.

Valentine and Orson they came of Pepius blood,

Alfrid and Aldricus they were brave Knights and good,

The four sons of Ammon that fought with Charlemain,

Sir Hugh de Boudeaux and Godfrey de Bullaigne,

These were all French Knights, the Pagans did convert,

But St. George, St. George pull'd out the Dragons heart,

St. George, &c.

Henry the fi [...]th he conquered all France,

He quartered their Armies, honour to advance,

He raced their Walls, and pull'd their Cities down,

And he garnish'd his Land with a double triple Crown,

He thumped the French, and after home he came,

But St. George, St. George, he made the Dragon tame.

St. George, &c.

[[Page 267]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=136)St.
David you know loves Le [...]ks and toasted Cheese,

And Iasan was the man brough [...] home the golden Fleece,

And Patrick you know he was St. Georges boy,

S [...]ven years he kept his Horse, and then stole him away,

For which knavish Act a slave he doth remain,

But St. George, St. George, the Dragon he hath slain.

St. George, &c.

Tamberlain the Emperour in Iron Cage did Crown,

With his bloody slag display [...]d before the Town,

Scanderbeg magnanimous Mahomets Ba [...]haw did dread,

Whose victorious bones were worn when he was dead,

His Beglerbegs, his corn-like-dregs  [...] astriot he was call'd,

But St. George, St. George, the Dragon he hath mauld▪

St. George, &c.

Ottoman the Tartar he came of Persia's Race,

The great Mogul with his chest so full of Cloves and Mace,

The Grecian youth Bucephalus he madly did bestride,

But these with their Worthies Nine St. George did them deride,

Gustavus Adolphus was Sweedlands warlike King,

But St. George, St. George, pull'd forth the Dragons Sting.

St. George, &c.

Pendragon and Cadwallader of brittish blood  [...]oast,

Though Iohn of Gaunt, his foes did daunt, St. George shall rule the roast,

Agamemnon and Cleomedon, and Macedon did feats,

But compared to our Champion, they are but meerly cheats,

Brave Malta Knights in Turkish fights their brandish Swords outdrew,

[[Page 268]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=137)But St.
George, met the Dragon and ran him through and through.

St. George, &c.

Bidia the Amazon, Porteus overth [...]ew,

As fierce as any Vandal, Goth, Sarazen, or Iew,

The potent Holofernes as he lay on his bed,

In came wise Iudith and subtly stole his head,

Brave Cyclops stout with Iove he fought, although he showr'd down thunder,

But St. George kill'd the Dragon, and is not that a won­der?

St. George, &c.

Marke Anthony Ile warrant you, plaid feats with Egypts Queen,

Sr. Eglemore that valiant Knight, the like was never seen,

Grim Gorgons might, was known in fight,

Old  [...]evis most men frighted,

The Myrmidons and Prester Iohns, why were not these men Knighted?

Brave Spinola took Bredah, Nassaw did it recover;

But St. George met the Dragon and turn'd him o're and over,

St. George he was for England,

St. Dennis was for France,

Sing Hony  [...]eit qui mal y pense.

### 4.263. Song 260.

SWift as the feet of Leda, I

Will to Olymphus flowred bosom slye,

And there lie quaffing in mortallity,

Who tastes such sweets, those hearts can never die.

The Cyprus Queen's not half so fair,

Beautie her self can't with my Love compare,

She doth impale all things the Gods count rare,

Come vy with her what Sublunary dare?

Her Neck's a tower of Snow, her head

[[Page 269]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=137)A Rosie
Globe with curling Amber spread,

Whose darts are able to amase the dead,

And make them leap from their cold shady Bed.

When she first opes her cased Eyes,

You'd swear two Suns at once broke through the skies,

Or that they were bright Lamps of Paradice,

The sawcy Gazer on those splendor dies.

Her Ivory Brows a Throne erect,

To arbitrate betwixt each Lovers Sect,

Her footstool with majestick Arch is deckt,

It frowns to death Loves wanton Heretick.

Descending hence a little, grows

A lovely Gnomon, rustick call'd the Nose,

Each side two blushing Hemisphere's disclose,

Where th' Lilly's youthful Bridal with the Ros [...].

Her lips like Gates of Rubies show,

And opens where two Sets of Pearl doth grow,

In Corral Sockets, bending like a Bow,

Whose worth the Lapidaries do not know.

Hence breaks a Voice such harmony,

Is able to transform a Deity,

And cause the dead to live, the living die,

Orpheu [...] and Amphion at it mute doth lie,

Have you not seen at Sacrifices

How chaffed Incence with brew'd Spikenard rises,

In Clouds of Perfumes, or in flaming Spices,

Just so her breath my senses each surprises.

But on her Breast two Hills advance,

Would cost a Pilgrim an eternal Trance,

On this the Nymphs, on that the Graces dance,

Here Cupid lays his Bow, there Mars his Lance,

Beneath this Vale's a Plain reveal'd,

Eden it self no such delight doth yield,

Where the bold Champion, though his back were steel'd,

Sounds a Retreat, but vanquisht qui'ts the field.

[[Page 270]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=138)O stay
Olympia, I have not done,

These Plains I wander are Elizium,

Oh let me herein blest for ever rome,

Whilst in a babe we met, Olympia come.

This is the Theatre of Love,

In this sweet Lab'rinth let me endless rove,

And like the Orb about thy Center move,

So I'le not change my Scene to be a Jove.

### 4.264. Song 260.

FEar not, my Genius, to unfold

thy silent thoughts of these;

Women are born to be control'd,

receive them as you please:

Their long-usurped Monarchy,

Hath made me hate such tyranny.

2\. Let them and their magnetick charms,

as Harbingers before 'um.

Possess themselves of Cupids arms,

as Baits for to adore 'um:

I'le ne're commit Idolatry,

With Subjects born, as well as I.

3\. Their Deity with them must fade [...]punc;

this cannot be deny'd;

Yet since the pretty things were made

out of old Adams side:

We'l love them still, but know as thus,

We do't because they'r part of us,

And let it then suffice the Elves,

To say we love them as our selves.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=138)

## Appendix A The Table of Letters contained in this Book.

    Page
A Tender of service to the Kings most excellent Ma­jesty▪

    25
A Tender of service to the Queens most excellent Majesty

    26
Respects from an Honourable Lady to the Queen.

    ibid.
A Person of Quality to a worthy Lady, the one a Pro­testant, the other a Roman
Catholick.

    27
One Lady to another with Complements of extream kind­ness.

    ibid.
A Letter of kindness from one friend to another.

    28
Another from friend to friend.

    ibid.
A Lady to a Gentleman, concerning his sick Mistriss.

    29.
The Gentlemans answer.

    ibid.
The Lovers first address to his Lady.

    30
The Lovers Complemental Letter to his Mistriss.

    ibid.
The Ladies return to her servants lines.

    31
A Ladies forewarning her friend of another Ladies So­ciety.

    ibid.
One Lad [...] advi [...] to another near Marriage.

    32
A Lover to his false Misstriss,

    33
A Letter on sending a Book.

    34
A Lady to her discourteous Lover,

    35
A Brother on occasion of his Brothers not writing.

    ibid.
A Gentleman to a Lady on his friends behalf.

    36
Another to the same purpose.

    ibid.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=139)Complements
from one frieud to another.

    37
An Answer to the former Letter.

    ibid.
The Lover to his deliberating Mistress.

    38
Civil Complements from one friend to another.

    ibid.
A Gentleman to his Lady, whom he fears would make a new choice.

    39
A Rich old Gentleman to a fair young Virgin.

    40
The Answer of a fair young Virgin, to a decrepit old Gen­tleman.

    41
A Letter of Courtesie from friend to friend.

    42
One Gentlewoman to another in behalf of a friend.

    ibid.
The forsaken Maid to her treacherous friend.

    ibid.
The Lady to her importunate Lover.

     [...]
The Answer of a Lover to his threatning Lady.

    44
A Letter of Enquiry from friend to friend.

    ibid.
Comfortable advice to a friend, on the death of a Son or other near Relation,

    ibid.
A Tender of service to a Mistriss.

    45
The Answer of a disdainful Lady to her servant.

    46
A sick Lady to a Gentleman.

    
The Answer of a Gentleman to a sick Lady.

    ibid.
The Lover to his unbelieving Mistriss.

    48
The Answer of a Lady to her Lover.

    ibid.
The Lover to his Mistriss, having gained her affection.

    49
A Gentleman to his Lady, on his taking a journey.

    50
The Answer of a Lady to her Lover, upon his taking of a journey,

    ibid.
A crackt Virgin to her deceitful friend, who hath for­sook her for the Love of
a Strumpet.

    51
The Lady to her slandered servant.

    52
The Answer of the slandered Lover to his Lady.

    53
The jealous Lover to his beloved.

    ibid.
T [...] Answer of a Lady to her jealous Lover.

    54
Civilities from one Lady to another.

    55
A Gentlemans request (for a sum of money) to his friend.

    56
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=139)A Lady to a
Gentleman on his recovery from sickness.

    56
The Answer of the Recovered Gentleman.

    57
The Lover to his Mistriss, upon his fear of her entertain­ing a new servant.

    58
A fair young Virgin, to an old Rich Miser, whom her Guardian had designed
should wed her.

    59
The ingratiating Gentleman to his angry Mistriss.

    ibid.
A Gentleman of good Birth, but small fortune, to a worthy Lady, after she had
given a denyal.

    60
A Lover to his Mistriss who had lately entertained ano­ther servant to her
Bosom and her Bed.

    61
The Answer of the Lady to her Lover in defence of her own Innocency.

    62
A Lady to him whom she affects.

    63
The Answer of a Lover to his Amorous Lady.

    ibid.
The affected Lover to his Mistriss.

    64
The Answer of a Lady to her affected Lover.

    65
A Lady to her despairing Lover, who had deserted his Suit at the first
repulse.

    ibid.
A Gentleman to a fair Lady, whom he accidentally disco­vered at a window.

    66
A Sick Lady to her Lover, enjoyning him to forbear his visits she being
infected with some malignant distemper.

    67
The fearful Lover to his supposed, unconstant M [...]striss.

    ibid.
The  [...]nswer of a Lady to her fearful Lover.

    6 [...]
A wife to her extravagant Husband.

    69
A Lover to his distempered Lady.

    70
A Lady to her servant, that for some private reasons concealed his Birth and
Fortunes.

    71
The absent Lover, to his supposed unconstant Mistriss.

    ibid.
A Gentlemans advice to his M [...]striss how she should blind the eyes of her
watchful friends.

    72
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=140)A Gentleman
to his new Mistriss, upon his relinquish­ing an old one.

    73
A Captious Lover to his Vertuous Lady.

    ibid.
The Answer of a Vertuous Lady, to her Captious Lover.

    74
A Lover in Commendation of his Mistriss.

    75
A Ladies thanks to a Gentleman for a civility lately received.

    ibid.
A Gentleman to a sick Lady.

    76
The Answer of a sick Lady to a Gentleman.

    77
A Husband to his lascivious wife.

    ibid.
A Gentleman to his friend, returning thanks for send­ing him a Book.

    78
A Gentlemans request to his friend for a sum of Money.

    ibid.
The Answer of a Gentleman to his friend, that sent to borrow Money.

    79
A Lover to his Mistriss.

    ibid.
The Answer of a Lady to her Lover.

    80
A Gentleman to his Rival.

    ibid.
A Virgin to her Parents, that would have her matched to one whom she cannot
love.

    81
A Gentlemans first Address to his Mistriss.

    ibid.
Another to the same effect.

    82
A Courteous Lass to her Paramour, who had gotten her with Childe.

    ibid.
A Gentleman to his (once scornful but) now affectionate Mistriss.

    83
A kinde hearted Gentlewoman to her boasting favorite

    ibid.
The Lover to his unconstant Mistriss.

    84

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=140)

## Appendix B The Table of Songs contained in this Book.

### Appendix B.1

A

    Page
AS in those Nations where they yet adore,

    85
Amarillis told her Swain.

    92
A womans rule should be in such a fashion.

    120
A pox on the Jayler and on his fat Jowls.

    ibid.
Amintas he once went astray.

    122
All in vain, turn again, why should I love her.

    129
All the Materials are the same.

    133
Among Rose-buds slept a Bee.

    147
About the sweet bag of a Bee.

    ib.
Alas poor Cupid, art thou blind?

    148
A Tripe well broyl'd cannot be ill,

    157
Arm, Arm, Arm, arm, the Scouts are all come in.

    161
A curse upon thee for a slave.

    162
A silly poor Shepherd was folding his Sheep.

    174
After the pangs of a desperate lover.

    178
A maid I dare not tell her name.

    181
A young man lately in our town.

    185
A King lives not a braver life.

    295
A maiden fair I dare not wed,

    196
Ah Chloris that I now could sit.

    207
All Joy unto the happy pair.

    ib.
A maiden of late, whose name was sweet Kate.

    212
At dead low ebb of night, when none

    217
A Beggar got a Bayliff, a Bayliff got a Y [...]oman.

    233
Ah Celia leave that cruel art.

    245
A Beggar, a Beggar, a Beggar I'le be.

    263

### Appendix B.2

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=141)

B

BReak, Break, distracted heart.

    87
Beyond the malice of abusive fate.

    89
Be thou that art, my better part.

    96
Bess black as charcoal, was found in a dark hole.

    103
Be gone, be gone thou perjur'd man.

    107
Be not proud pretty one, for I must love thee.

    145
Bring back my comforts and return.

    149
Bright Aurelia I do owe.

    152
Beauty and Love once fell at odds.

    153
Brightest since your pittying eye

    154
Bright Cynthia scorns, alone to wear horns,

    214
By Heaven I'le tell her boldly that 'tis she.

    236
Be not thou so foolish nice.

    237
Bonny Kate, Kenny Kate, lay thy leg o're me.

    257

### Appendix B.3

C

CAll for the master, Oh, this is fine.

    94
Courtiers, Courtiers, think it no scorn.

    103
Chloris it is not in your power.

    105
Celemana of my heart, none shall e're bereave you.

    106
Chloris farewel, I now must go

    110
Commit thy Ship unto the winde

    137
Cast your caps and care away

    142
Cupids no God, a wanton childe

    146
Chloris, my Chloris, comes in yonder Bark

    148
Chloris when e're you do intend

    151
Come fill with wine this lusty bowl

    159
Come let us be friends, and most mendly agree

    160
Calm was the Evening, and clear was the skie

    179
Come hither sweet melancholy

    193
Chloris forbear a while, do not o'rejoy me

    204
Come away, bring on the bride

    217
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=141) Charon, O
Charon, thou wafter of the soul

    221
Come Iack lets drink a pot of Ale

    238
Come Chloris hie we to the bower

    241
Cook Laurel would have the Devil his guest

    246

### Appendix B.4

D

DEar give me a thousand kisses

    109
Down in a Garden sate my dearest love

    125
Drink to me boy, here's to thee boy

    150
Disputes daily arise, and errors grow bolder

    154
Dear love, let me this ev'ning die

    253

### Appendix B.5

F

FAirest Nymph, my delay shames me a lover

    85
Fine young folly though you wear

    96
Fair Phydelia tempt no more

    123
Fly, Oh fly, sad sighs and bear

    133
Fear not dear love, that I'le reveal

    160
Fear not my Genius

    270
Fond love what dost thou mean

    171
Fain would I wake you sweet, but fear

    172
From the fair Lavinian shore

    177
Fear no more the heat o'th' Sun

    185
Fair mistriss I would gladly know

    220
Farewel fond Love, under whose childish whip

    291

### Appendix B.6

G

GOod Simon, how comes it your Nose looks so­red

    119
Good Susan, be as secret as you can

    ib.
Give me more love, or more disdain

    163
Good people give ear, whilst a story I tell

    190
Go happy heart, for thou shalt lie

    206
Gaze not on thy beauties pride

    232
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=142)Go with thy
staff, the Sea divide

    262
Go treacherous hopes, by whose uncertain fire

    265

### Appendix B.7

H

HElp, Help, Oh Help, divinity of love

    114
Hang sorrow, cast away care

    117
Have you any work for a Tinker

    ib.
Have you observ'd the wench in the street

    118
How merrily looks the man that hath Gold

    119
He that will win a widows heart

    121
How happy and free is the plunder

    130
He that marries a merry Lass

    136
He deserved much better than so

    147
He that will look for a swallows nest

    155
How long shall I pine for love

    158
How happy art thou and I

    165
He that a Tinker, a Tinker will be

    174
Help love or else I sink, for know

    116
Have you any work for a Sowgelder Ho

    197
Haste sluggish morn, why dost thou stay

    202
Hold, Hold, thy Nose to the pot, Tom, Tom.

    223
Hang fear, and cast away care

    258

### Appendix B.8

I

I Dote, I dote, but am a sot to show it

    98
If any so wise is, that Sack he despises

    118
If she be not kinde as fair

    121
In the merry month of May

    125
I'm sick of love, Oh let me lie

    131
I feed a flame within which so torments me

    132
I keep my Horse, I keep my Whore

    1 [...]5
I won' not go to't, I mun not go to't

    ib.
I lov'd a lass, a fair one

    143
I love thee for thy sickleness

    149
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=142)I am the
Evening dark as night

    150
Jo Hymen, Jo Hymen, Jo Hymen

    162
In faith 'tis true, I am in love

    169
I happy saw, and faithful lov'd

    ib.
I can love for an hour when I'm at leasure

    182
I courted a lass, my folly

    190
In love away, yu do me wrong

    166
I am a Rogue, and a stout one

    198
If she be fair I fear the rest

    231
I le sing you a sonnet that ne'r was in print

    234
I marvel Dick that having been

    239
I went to the Alehouse as an honest woman shoo'd

    257
I dream'd we both were in a bed

    264

### Appendix B.9

L

LEt Votaries rearing up Altar and Shrine

    88
Look, see how unregarded now

    108
Little love serves my turn, 'tis so enflaming

    109
Ladies though to your conquering eyes

    121
Love is a sower delight, a sugred grief

    127
Last night I dreamed of my Love

    131
Like to the falling of a Star

    137
Like a ring without a finger

    ib.
Love and Wenches are toys

    154
Loves empire, as the world, is wide

    166
Let the Bells ring, and the boys sing

    173
Lawn as white as driven Snow

    184
Let's have a dance upon the heath

    201
Look out bright eyes, and bless the Air

    222
Love, I must tell thee, I'le no longer be

    251
Love is a Bauble, no man is able

    252

### Appendix B.10

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=143)

M

MMy Lodging it is on the cold ground

    146
Make ready fair Lady to night

    187
May I finde a woman fair

    189
My Muse denies to Apollogize

    201

### Appendix B.11

N

NEver more will I protest

    102
Now fie on foolish Love, it not besits

    ib.
No more, no more, I must giive o're

    109
Now, Now, Lucatia, now make haste

    115
No, No, thou all of red and white

    167
Now that the Spring hath fill'd our veins

    175
Now by my love, the greatest oath that is

    127
No man loves fiery passion can approve

    213
Now I confess I am in love

    224
Nay prethee don't fly me, but sit thee down by me

    258

### Appendix B.12

O

ON yonder hill a Beacon stands

    90
Oh Chloris 'twas unkindely done

    113
Oh how I hate thee now, and my self too

    116
Oh Chloris, would the Gods allow

    166
Our ruler hath got the Vertigo of State

    170
Oh Cupid turn away thy Bow

    172
Once was I sad, till I grew to be mad

    187
Oh love whose power and might

    229
Oh the little house that lies under the Hill

    249
On a Hill there grows a flower

    
Oh Anis quoth he, well Thomas quoth she

    256

### Appendix B.13

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=143)

P

PHillis though your powerful charms

    122
Peace and silence be the guide

    162
Poor Artaxander long hath woo'd

    171
Pish modest sipper, to't agen

    175
Phillis on the new made Hay

    237
Poor Ienny and I, we toyled

    244
Phillis I pray, why did you say

    241
Pompey was a mad man, a mad man

    256

### Appendix B.14

S

SWeetest Bud of Beauty, may

    93
Sweet Iane, sweet Iane, I love thee wondrous well

    104
Strait my green gown into breeches I'le make

    108
Shall I wasting in despair

    111
See, see, Chloris my Chloris comes

    148
Silly heart forbear, those are murdering ey [...]s

    171
Sigh no more Ladies, sigh no more

    180
Stay, shut the gate, 'tother quart

    1 [...]8
Strephon, what envious cloud hath made

    103
Sure 'twas a dream, how long fond man

    222
Since life's but short, and time amain

    250
Swift as the feet of Laeda, I

    268

### Appendix B.15

T

TEll me gentle Strephon, why

    91
'Tis not i'th' power of all thy scorn

    93
The thirsty earth drinks up the rain

    95
To friend and to foe, to all that I know

    96
Turn Amarillis to thy swain

    102
Take a pound of butter made in May

    103
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=144)The glories
of our birth and State

    103
Twelve sorts of meats my wife provides

    107
To little or no purpose, I've spent many days

    111
The wise men were but seven

    1 [...]0
The morning doth waste, to the meadows let's haste

    125
The pot, and the pipe, the cup, and the can

    127
Then our musick is in prime

    ib.
There was three cooks of Colebrook

    131
'Tis true fair Celia that by thee I live

    134
The parcht earth drinks the rain

    136
The wit hath long beholden been

    140
The silver swan who living had no note

    146
Thy love is chaste, they tell thee so

    15 [...]
This is not the Elizian grove

    151
The master, the swabber, the boatswain and I

    152
Tell me, where is fancy bred

    156
Take her and hug her, then turn her, and tug her

    158
'Tis late, and cold, stir up the fire

    160
Tell me prethee faithless swain

    163
Tell me no more you love, in vain

    164
Thou deity, swift winged love

    172
The Spanyard loves his ancient steps

    176
Take, oh take, those lips away

    180
Tom, and Will, were shepherds swains

    183
'Tis a merry life we live

    186
The Beard thick, or thin,

    218
The hunt is up, the hunt is up

    229
There's none but the glad man

    232
'Twas then we had a thriving Trade

    240
Though I am young and cannot tell

    242
Thirsis, I wish, as well as you

    249
The Springs coming on, and our spirits begin

    251
The Maypole is up, now give me the cup

    261

### Appendix B.16

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=144)

V

VIctorious beauty, though your eyes

    105
Under the green-wood Tree

    156
Upon the Change where Merchants meet

    242

### Appendix B.17

W

WElcome blest hand, whose white outvies

    87
When Phillis watcht her harmless Sheep

    89
When cold winters withered brow

    90
When Celadon gave up his heart

    93
Why should we not laugh and be jolly

    100
Wh [...]n as Leander young, was drown'd

    115
When wives do hate the husbands friends

    120
Were Celia but as chaste, as fair

    124
Why should I not dally, my dear

    128
Where the Bee sucks, there suck I

    154
Who is Silvia, what is she

    155
What shall he have that kill'd the Deer?

    157
Wedding is great Iuno [...]s Crown

    ib.
Why should only man be ty'd

    165
Wake all ye dead, what Ho, what Ho

    168
When Dasies pied, and Violets blew

    178
When Isicles hang by the wall

    180
When Orpheus sweetly did complain

    204
When Celia I intend to flatter you

    211
What creatur [...]s on earth, can boast freer mirth

    213
When I see the young men play

    214
With an old motly coat, and a malmsy Nose

    224
With an old song made by an old ancient pate

    225
With a new Beard, but lately trim'd

    228
When I drein my goblets deep

    137
Why should you swear, I am forsworn

    260
Why should we boast of Arthur and his Knights

    265

### Appendix B.18

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=145)

Y

YOur merry Poets old boys, of Aganippes well

    95
Yonder he goes, takes corns from your Toes

    116
You spotted Snakes with double tongue

    155
You that chuse not by the view

    156
You say you love me, nay you swear it too

    205
Ye Fiends and Furies come along

    206
Your Letter I receiv'd

    231
Yes I could love, if I could finde

    245
You Maidens, and Wives, and young Widdows rejoyce

    255

## Appendix C Books Printed for Samuel Speed Book-seller, be­tween the Two
Temple Gates in Fleet-street.

  * PHaramond, the fam'd Romance, written by the Au­ther of those other two Eminent Volumns, Cas­sandra and Cleopatra, in Folio.
  * Palmerin of England, in three Parts, in Quarto.
  * The destruction of Troy, in three Parts, in quarro.
  * Quintus Curti [...]s his life of Alexander the Great in English, in quarto.
  * Montelion Knight of the Oracle, in quarto.
  * Primaleon of Greece, in quarto.
  * The Jewel-House of Art and Nature by Sir Hugh Plat, in quarto.
  * The Womans Lawyer by Sir Iohn Dodridge, in quarto.
  * Divine Law; or the Patrons Purchaser, by Alexan­der Huck-ston, in quarto.
  * The compleat Parson, by Sir Iohn Dodridge, in quarto.
  * Star-Chamber Cases, in quarto.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=145)Actions of the Case for Deeds, by William Sheppard Esq in Folio.
  * The life of Henry the Great in English, written by the Bishop of Rhodez, in Octavo.
  * The Villian: a Tragedy, by Tho. Porter Esq in quarto.
  * Observations of the Statesmen and Favorites of Eng­land, since the Reformation, their Rise, and Growths, Prudence, and Policies, Miscarriages, and Falls, du­ring the Reigns of K. Henry the Eight, K. Edward the Sixth, Qu. Mary. Qu. Elizabeth. K. Iames, and K. Charles the first. By David Lloyd. A.M. in Octavo
  * The Precedency of Kings, by Iames Howel Esq in Folio.
  * The Description of Tangier, with an account of the life of Gayland the Usurper of the Kingdom of Fez. in quarto.
  * The Golden Coast, or a Description of Guinney, in quarto.
  * An Abridgement, of the Reports of Sir George Crook, three Volumes, in Octavo.
  * An Abrigements of the Reports of Sir Frances More' in Octavo.
  * The Compleat Lawyer, by William Noy of Lincolnes Inn, in Octavo.
  * The Tenants Law, a Treatise of great use for Tenants and Farmers of all kindes, and all other persons whatsoever. Wherein the several Natures, Differen­ces, and Kindes of Tenures, and Tenants are discussed, and several Cases in the Law touching Leases, Rents, Distresses, Replevins, and other Accidents between Landlord and Tenant, and Tenant and Tenant be­tween themselves, and others, especially such who have suffered by the late conflagration in the City of London; with Rules for Determination of Dif­ferences, without troubling the most Honourable Court of Judicature by R. T. Gent: in Twelves.
  * Memoires of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings, and Deaths [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=146) of those Noble, Reverend, and Excellent Persona­ges that suffered by Death, Sequestration, Decima­tion, or otherwise, for the Protestant Religion, and the great principle thereof, Allegiance to their So­veraign, in our late intestine Wars; by David Lloyd A. M, in Folio.
  * Arithmetical Recreations by W. Leybourn, in Twelves
  * The Reports of Sir Henry Hobert, in Folio.
  * The Compleat Coppy-Holder by the Lord Cook, in quarto.
  * Machiavels Discourses, and Prince, in Twelves.
  * The Roman History of Lucius Flerus, in Octavo.
  * The City and Country Purchaser, and Builder, with Directions for Purchasing, Building, and improving of Lands, and Houses, in any part of England, by Stephen Primate Gent. in Octavo.
  * A brief Chronicle of the late intestine War, in the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. From the years of our Lord 163 [...]. to the year 1663. by Iames H [...]ath Gent. now reprinting, in Folio.
  * The new Academy of Complements erected for Ladies and Gentlemen, containing Variety of Complements and Letters fitted to the occasions of all persons of both Sexes, with an exact Collection of the Newest and Choicest Songs Alamode, both Amorous and Jovial, in Twelves.
  * Systema Agricultura: Being the whole Mystery of Hus­bandry, made known by I. W. Gent. in Folio.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=63258&page=146)

[Home](/)

Date: 1669  

