---
layout: default
---

## (unknown project)

# A poem to His most Excellent Majesty Charles the Second. By H. Beeston
Winton'. Together with another by Hen. Bold olim Winton'.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119182&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119182&page=1)

A POEM To His moſt Excellent Majeſty Charles the Second.

Ego Beneficio tuo (Caeſar) quos ante Audie­bam hodiè vidi Deos: Nec feliciorem
ul­lum vitae meae aut Optavi, aut ſenſi Diem. Paterc', &c.

By H. BEESTON Winton'. Together with another By HEN. BOLD olim Winton'.

DVM PREMOR ATTOLLOR

LONDON: Printed by Edward Husbands, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the
Commons Houſe of Parliament, 1660.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. [Figure]
  * 2\. To His Sacred Majeſty Charles the Second, at His happy RETURN.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119182&page=2)

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119182&page=2)

## 1\.

_[emblems of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland]_

SIR,

THe Buſineſs on Our Language is too great:

Our Mother Tongue ſtutters be­neath the weight

Of Soveraignty: To ſpeak You, ſhe muſt ligue

With all the Neighbor Nations, and beg

Their Dialects which Your Majeſty can frame

Slaves to Your Ʋſe, as them unto Your Fame:

So that Your Praiſe is Yours; You muſt allow

Matter, and Form: Theme, and Expreſsion too.

ON which ſide ſhall we trace Your Stock? beyond

The Loyns of Egbert, or of Pharamond:

Low ſunk in Adam's Entrails it is found,

And thence ſhoots throw the World, to You, all crown'd.

Vain Boldneſs of the Age, (Age of Deceits)

Knew this, and therefore coyn'd Prae-Adamites!

This Blood (then) iſſuing from that diſtant ſource,

Exalted, Maturated in its courſe,

In Veins of ſundry Monarchs Rectifid,

(Made All Elixir) through Your Heart does glide.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119182&page=3) (Not Wine
All, nor All Milk, but) mingled ſo,

That Courage thence, and Innocence do flow,

To animate th' exactest Fabrick, Heaven

Has, ſince its Mould, to wondring mankinde given.

And ſeeing Beauties chiefeſt part does lie

In Shapes and Lines (not fading Colours) I

(Too low to praiſe, too true to flatter) dare

Aver this truth, That You are CHARLES the Fair.

Such Grace in Your Heroick Meen we ſpie,

Where, all the ſtrokes are ſharp, and maſterly.

Be You then CHARLES the Fair, and Great, and Good,

Your Sire bought CHARLES the Martyr with His Blood.

—Stay forward Nymph of Helicon!

And with thine un-dy'd Buskins, go not on!

Thou'lt weep thine Eyes out, into ſorrows hurl'd,

And I ſhall lead thee blinde about the World.

(Thus) Rich Your Blood is, and Your Make is Free,

Compleateſt Product of the Noblest Tree,

Shrining a Soul (to favor our weak ſight)

Pure, Active, Subtile, as a Beam of Light.

And here we're loſt, 'leſs ſome Intelligence

Be ſetled 'twixt Divinity and Sence.

My Quil's no Jacobs Staff, or if it were,

It could not take Your Height, nor reach Your Sphere.

Your Minde's a Conſtellation fixt above

The Orbes, where Kepler, and where Tycho rove.

Your Intellectual, and Your Moral Parts

(Vast Comprehenſions of Arms and Arts)

Are for Your Peoples Veneration fit:

Fit for Your Wonder, not ſo for their Wit.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119182&page=3)

Courage inhabits there ſo quick and clear,

It warm'd an Army (once) from Van to Rear;

(Cold as the North that form'd it, bleak and thin,

Cover'd and lin'd with nought, but fear and ſin)

And made it stand—The brave Guſtavus ſo

Oppos'd his naked Fins to th' armed foe,

And ſhew'd the World, His gallant Breſt alone

Was Currace, Gauntlet, Gorget, Morion.

But had You Conquer'd, You had been ſubdu'd,

Loſt Your peculiar part of Fortitude,

Your Patience; which You may ſingly own,

Since none (but You) ſuffer'd into a Throne.

This was Your way; old Heroes cannot ſhare,

E'en let them paſs for Barreters in War.

The Wiſdom and Experience of Your Soul

Is ſuch, as no Diſaſter could controul.

The Flitting French, and the Ʋnable Dane,

The Trade-led Dutch, Remote Iberian,

Nor Honeſt German did Your Cauſe reſtore;

You knew their ſtrength, and knew Your own was more.

Firm as a Tabled Diamond and ſquare,

'Gainſt coldneſs, force, or treachery You are.

Of Dubious Friends You ſcan'd the various Clues,

What meant Your Courtſhips, Treaties, Enterviews?

Of open Enemies You skill'd th' Intents,

The Cauſes, Counſels, Progreſſes, Events:

No Prince ſo intimately vers'd has been

In the Reſorts of Buſineſs, and of Men.

You are Your Self a Senate, Diet, One,

A ſingle Council, Parliament alone.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119182&page=4) In You, ſo
juſtly conſtituted, we

Safely enchace our Jewel Liberty,

Handed before to many a Roytelet,

Sometimes in Steel, ſometimes in Lead twas ſet.

The dusky Intricks of Your Enemies

May be ſuppos'd: All Cunnings, Not one wiſe.

Each of our Rulers had more Worms in's Head,

Then a Male Deer before he's Caboſſed.

So all their Projects brake, not any held,

One by another out-Achitophel'd.

The ſeveral Fore-parts through the Hedge make way,

Behinde the Hated Tayl is forc'd to ſtay,

Till Hedge and Tayl the Bonfire overtakes;

(The Fore-parts will be ſeen on Poles and Stakes.)

They think the Veſſel of the Nation will

Sayl tight, if cun'd by Confidence, not skill:

Boldneſs is Goſpel, Law, and Policy,

Joynture, Debt, Intereſt, and Legacy.

The Frontleſs Swine with Impudence ſo tan'd,

Were (in the Face) high Car'bin-proof at hand.

I purpoſe not to violate this Page

With the unhallowed Monſters of this Age,

Whoſe due Deſcription ſhould I dare to write,

My Paper would appear a Sanbenite.

The Guards of Heaven, Your ſubjects care and love,

Such Objects from Your Royal Eyes remove!

Not from Your Word—

—As th' Ocean does move

About Your Land, ſo let Your Peace above:

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119182&page=4) And by
Your Mighty Pardon let us gueſs,

How Good th' Almighty is—for him You bleſs.

A readier ſtep to Him, may through You ſhine,

Then any in the Scale of Bellarmine.

Theſe Beaſts a Grateful Sacrifice can't be,

They come to th' Altar ſo unwillingly.

Let the Grand Seignior in peeces rive;

Let the Defender of the Faith forgive.

Reward them with the Chriſtians Amends,

Make thoſe that pierc't Your Bowels through, Your Friends.

So when the Greedy Operator ſounds

The Wealthy Entrails of unſearched Grounds,

The powerful Mine will change into it's ſelf

(In time) the very Tools that digg'd the Pelf.

Your Fathers Lovers, and Your own ſo croſs'd,

Committee-ſcourg'd, Rump-rid, and Safety-toſs'd,

Tempted, or ſcar'd by Force, or by Conſent,

Part one, part t'other, ſcarce are Innocent.

The Nation's Criminal! Almoſt each one

Lep'rous by Nature or Contagion:

Yet now are cleanſed by the tears they ſhed,

(Tears due to CHARLES his Crown recovered.)

Shed Tears; which like Oyl-Bennet, did increaſe

The Flames of that Triumphant Night of peace:

Night! that turn'd out the Day! The Welkin ſhone;

Lighted with thouſand fires beſides it's own:

And where's the Roman, or the Greek Parade,

Can march with Glorious Tueſdays Cavalcade?

—Day of Your Birth and State! from every Eye

Strictures of unſuborned Joy did flie.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119182&page=5) Poets (but
Male factors until now)

Reſume their wit and ſpirit under You;

Soaring about Your Throne with freer Wing,

Working themſelves in Your Palace, will ſing

Such Prophecies, ſhall make wiſe Annaliſts

Attent to heed, and Regiſter Your Geſts;

Which, will the Orbe in ſervitude engage

Rapt and Enamour'd of its Vaſſalage.

Bold with Allegiance, and with Duty rude,

With theſe brisk happy thoughts, we may conclude,

Sit ſtill and taſte the Bleſsings of Your Reign:

Ʋnited ſo as not to ſtart again.

Our Hearts directed unto You our North,

Shall never vary from our Faith. Henceforth

The Volatil ſpirits of this Region

Shall here be fixt beyond Reduction.

So the keen winde (as Muſcovites relate)

Quick with Refining Force does operate

And make a Gem, which can't Apoſtatize

From ſolid Chryſtal, into Brittle Ice.

H. BEESTON.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119182&page=5)

## 2\. To His Sacred Majeſty Charles the Second, at His happy RETURN.

SO comes the Sun after a half-years night,

To the be-numb'd, and frozen Muſco­vite,

As we (Great Britain's Influence!) wel­come You

Who are our Light, our Life, and Glory too.

Your Preſence is ſo Soveraign, counter Fate,

It makes, alone, our Iſland Fortunate:

Whilſt we (like Eaſtern Priests) the night being done,

Fall down, and Worſhip You, our Riſing Sun.

But!—

As Devotes (of old) did uſe to ſtay

Below the Font, nor durſt approach to lay

Their Duties on the Sacred Shrine, ſo I

(Not qualifi'd for the ſolemnity

Of Offering at Your Altar) ſtand at door,

And wiſh as much as they, who give you more.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=119182&page=6)

May You live long and happy, to improve

In Strangers, Envy; in Your Subjects, Love!

And marry'd may Your Computation run

Even, as Time; for every year a Son!

Until Your Royal Off-ſpring grow to be

The Hope, and Pride of all Poſterity!

May every Joy, and every choice Content,

Be trebled on You! and what e'er was meant

My Soveraign's care and trouble, may it prove

Quiet, and Calm, as are th' Effects of Love!

Laſt, having liv'd a Patern of ſuch worth,

As never any Age did yet bring forth,

Aſcend to Heaven; where th' Eternal Throne

Crowns You with Grace, ſhall Grace You with a Crown.

HEN. BOLD olim Winton.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Winton, H. Beeston (Henry Beeston), ca. 1630-1701.. Date: 1660  

