---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The. xi. bookes of the Golden asse conteininge the Metamorphosie of Lucius
Apuleius, enterlaced with sondrie pleasaunt and delectable tales, with an
excellent narration of the mariage of Cupide and Psiches, set out in the.
iiii. v. and vj. bookes. Translated out of Latine into Englishe by VVilliam
Adlington. — Metamorphoses. English

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=1)

The .xi. Bookes of the Golden Aſſe, Conteininge the Metamorphoſie of Lucius
Apuleius, enterlaced with ſondrie pleaſaunt and delecta­ble Tales, with an
excellent Narration of the Mari­age of Cupide and Pſiches, ſet out in the
.iiij. v. and vj. Bookes.

Tranſlated out of Latine into Engliſhe by VVilliam Adlington.

Imprinted at London in Fleetſtreate, at the ſigne of the Oliphante, by Henry
VVykes. Anno. 1566.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=2)

## To the right Honorable, and Mightie Lorde, Thomas, Earle of Suſſex, Viſcont
Fitz­waltre, Lorde of Egremont and of Burnell, Knight of the moſt noble Order
of the Garter, Iuſtice of the Foreſtes and Chaſes, from Trente sowthwarde, and
Capi­taine of the Gentlemen Pen­tioners, of the houſe of the Queene out
So­ueraigne Lady.

AFter that I had ta­ken vpon me (right Hono­rable) in manner of that
vn­learned and fooliſh poet Che­rillus, (who raſhly, and vn­aduiſedly, wrote a
bigge vo­lume in verſes of the geſtes and valiant proweſſe of A­lexander the
great) to tranſ­late this preſent booke, con­teyninge the Metamorphoſy of
Lucius Apuleius: beynge moued therunto by the right pleaſant paſtime, and
de­lectable matter therein: I eftſones conſulted with my ſelfe, to whome I
might beſt offer ſo pleaſant and woor­thy a woorke, deuiſed by the Author, it
beyng now bar­barouſly and ſimply framed in our Engliſhe tongue.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=3) And after
longe deliberatiō had, your Honorable Lord­ſhippe came to my remembrance, a
man muche more woorthy then to whome ſo homely and rude a tranſla­tion ſhould
be preſented. But when I againe remem­bred the ieſtinge and ſportfull matter
of the booke vn­fitte to be offred to any man of grauitie and wiſedome, I was
wholly determined to make no Epiſtle dedica­tory at all: till as now of late,
perſwaded thereunto by my fréendes, I haue boldly enterpriſed to offer the
ſame to your Lordſhippe, who as I truſt will with no leſſe good will accept
the ſame, then if it did entreate of ſome ſerious & loftie matter, conſideryng
that although the matter therein ſéeme very light, and mery, yet the effect
thereof tendeth to a good and vertuous morall, as in the followynge Epiſtle to
the Reader may be cléerly perceaued. For ſo hath all wryters in times paſte
em­ployed their trauell and labours, that their poſteritie might receaue ſome
fruictfull profite by the ſame. And therefore the Poetes feigned not their
fables in vaine, conſideringe that children in time of their firſt ſtudies,
are muche allured thereby to procéede to more graue and déepe diſciplines,
whereas otherwiſe their mindes would quickly lothe the wiſe and prudent
woorkes of learned men, wherein in ſuche vnripe yéeres they take no ſparke of
delectation at all. And not onely that pro­fite arriſeth to children by ſuche
feigned fables, but al­ſo the vertues of men are couertly thereby commen­ded,
and their vices diſcommended and abhorred. For by the fable of Actaeon, where
it is feigned, that when he ſawe Diana waſhinge her ſelfe in a well, he was
imme­diatly [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=3)
turned into a Hart and ſo was ſlayne of his owne Dogges: may be ment that when
a man caſteth his eies, on the vaine and ſoone vadynge beautie of the worlde,
conſentinge thereto in his minde, he ſeemeth to be tur­ned into a brute beaſt,
and ſo to be ſlayne thorough the inordinate deſire of his owne affectes. By
Tantalus that ſtandeth in the middeſt of the floode Eridan hauynge before him
a tree laden with pleaſant apples, he beyng neuertheleſſe alwaies thurſty and
hungry, betokeneth the inſatiable deſire of couetous perſons. The Fa­bles of
Atreus, Thieſtes, Tereus and Progne ſignifieth the wicked and abhominable
factes wrought and attemp­ted by mortall men. The fall of Icarus is an example
to proude and arrogant perſons that weeneth to clymbe vp to the Heauens. By
Mydas, who obteined of Bacchus that all thinges whiche he touched mought be
Golde, is carped the foule ſinne of auarice. By Phaeton, that vnſkilfully toke
in hande to rule the Charriot of the Sunne, are repreſented thoſe perſons
whiche attempt thinges paſſinge their power and capacitie. By Caſtor and
Pollux, turned into a ſigne in Heauen called Gemini, is ſignified, that
vertuous and godly perſons ſhalbe rewarded after life with perpetuall bliſſe.
And in this fable or feigned ieſte of Lucius Apuleius is comprehended a figure
of mans life, miniſtringe moſte ſwéete and de­lectable matter, to ſuch as
ſhalbe deſirous to Reade the ſame. The whiche if your Honorable Lordſhippe
ſhal accept and take in good parte, I ſhall not onely thinke my ſmall trauell
and labour well employed, but alſo receaue a farther comforte to attempt ſome
more ſe­rious [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=4)
matter whiche may be more acceptable to your Lordſhippe: deſiring the ſame, to
excuſe my raſhe and  [...]olde enterpriſe, at this time, as I nothinge doubte
in your Lordſhippes goodneſſe. To whome I beſéeche Al­mighty God to imparte
longe lyfe with increaſe of much Honour.

From Vniuerſitie Colledge in Oxforde the .xviij. of September. 1566.

Your Honors moſt bounden William Adlington.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=4)

## To the Reader.

WHen that I had (gen­tle Reader) ſlightly here & there runne ouer the
plea­ſaunt and delectable ieſtes of Lucius Apuleius (a man of auncient
diſcent, & en­dewed with ſinguler lear­ninge) written in ſuche a franke &
flouriſhing ſtile, as he ſéemed to haue the Muſes alwaies at will, to féede
and maineteine his penne: And when againe I perceiued the matter to miniſter
ſuch excéedinge plen­tie of myrth, as neuer (in my iudgement) the like hath
bene ſhowed by any other, I purpoſed accordinge to my ſclender knowledge
(though it were rudely, and farre diſagréeyng from the fine and excellent
dooinges now a dayes) to tranſlate the ſame into our vulgar tongue, to the
ende, that amongeſt ſo many ſage and ſerious woorkes (as euery man welny,
endeuor dayly to encreaſe) there might be ſome freſhe and pleaſante matter, to
recreate the mindes of the Readers withal. Howbeit I was efteſoones driuen
from my purpoſe by two cauſes: Firſt, perceiuinge that the Authour had written
his woorke in ſo darke and highe a ſtile, in ſo ſtrange and abſurde woordes,
and in ſuch newe inuen­ted phraſes, as he ſéemed rather to ſet it foorth, to
ſhow his magnifency of proſe, then to participate his doo­inges to other:
Secondly, fearinge leſt the tranſlati­on of this preſent booke (which ſéemeth
a méere ieſt and fable, and a woorke woorthy to be laughed at, by reaſon
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=5) of the
vanitie of the Authour, mighte be contemned & deſpiſed of all men, and ſo
conſequently, I to be had in deriſiō, to occupy my ſelfe in ſuch friuolous
and tri­fling toyes: but on the other ſide, when I had through­ly learned the
intent of the Author, and the purpoſe why he inuented ſo ſportfull a ieſt: I
was verely per­ſwaded, that my ſmall trauell, ſhould not onely be ac­cepted of
many, but the matter it ſelfe allowed, & prai­ſed of all. Wherfore I intend
(God willinge) as nighe as I can, to vtter and open the meaning thereof to the
ſimple and ignorant, whereby they may not take the ſame, as a thing onely to
ieſt and laugh at (for the Fa­bles of Eſope, & the feigninge of Poetes, weare
neuer writen for that purpoſe) but by the pleaſauntnes ther­of, be rather
induced to the knowledge of their pre­ſent eſtate, and therby trāſforme them
ſelues into the right and perfect ſhape of men. The argument of the booke is:
How Lucius Apuleius the Author him ſelfe, traueled into Theſſaly (being a
region in Grece, where all the women for the moſt parte, be ſuch wonderfull
witches, that thei can tranſfourme men into the figure of beaſtes) wheare
after he had cōtinued a fewe daies, by the mighty force of a violent
confection, he was chaunged into a miſerable Aſſe, and nothinge might reduce
him to his wonted ſhape, but the eatinge of a Roſe, whiche after endurāce of
infinite ſorow, at lēgth he obteined by praier. Verely vnder the wrappe of
this tranſformation, is taxed the life of mortall men, when as we ſuffer our
mindes ſo to be drowned in the ſenſu­all luſtes of the fleſhe, and the beaſtly
pleaſure therof: (whiche aptly may be called, the violent confection of
witches) that we léeſe wholy the vſe of reaſon and ver­tue (which proprely
ſhould be in man) & play the partes
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=5) of bruite and
ſauage beaſtes. By like occaſion we reade how diuers of the compaignions of
Vliſſes, weare tur­ned by the meruelous power of Circe, into Swine. And finde
we not in the Scripture, that Nabuchodo­noſer the ninth King of Babylō, by
reaſon of his great dominiōs and roialmes, fell into ſuch excéedyng pride,
that he was ſodenly tranſformed of almighty God, in­to an horrible monſter,
hauyng the head of an Oxe, the féete of a Beare, and the taile of a Lion, and
did eate heye as a beaſt? But as Lucius Apuleius was chaun­ged into his
humaine ſhape by a Roſe, the compaigni­ons of Vliſſes by great interceſſion,
and Nabuchodo­noſer by the continuall prayers of Daniell, whereby they knewe
them ſelues, and liued after a good & ver­tuous life: So can we neuer be
reſtored to the right fi­gure of our ſelues, except we taſte and eate the
ſwéete Roſe of reaſon and vertue, which the rather by media­tion of prayer, we
may aſſuredly attaine. Againe, may not the meaning of this woorke, be altered
& turned in this ſorte. A man deſirous to apply his minde to ſome excellent
art, or giuen to the ſtudie of any of the ſcien­ces, at the firſt appeareth to
him ſelfe an Aſſe without witte, without knowledge, & not much vnlike a bruite
beaſt, till ſuch time as by muche paine and trauell, he hath atchieued to the
perfectnes of the ſame, & taſtinge the ſwéete floure and fruicte of his
ſtudies, doth thinke him ſelfe well brought to the right and very ſhape of a
man. Finally, the Metamorphoſie of L. Apuleius, may be reſembled to youth
without diſcretion, and his re­duction, to age poſſeſſed with wiſedome and
vertue. Now ſince this booke of Lucius, is a figure of mās life, and toucheth
the nature and manners of mortall men, egginge them forward from their Aſinall
fourme, to [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=6)
their humaine and perfect ſhape, beſide the pleaſaunt & delectable ieſtes
therein conteined, I truſt if my ſimple tranſlatiō be nothing accepted, yet
the matter it ſelfe, ſhalbe eſtéemed by ſuch, as not onely delight to pleaſe
their fancie in readinge the ſame, but alſo take a pat­tern thereby, to
regenerate their mindes from brutiſh and beaſtly cuſtome. How be it, I haue
not ſo exactly paſſed thorough the Author, as to pointe euery ſentēce
accordinge as it is in Latine, or ſo abſolutely tranſla­ted euery woorde, as
it lieth in the proſe, (for ſo the French and Spaniſh tranſlators haue not
done) conſi­dering the ſame in our vulgar tongue would haue ap­peared very
obſcure and darke, & thereby cōſequently, lothſome to the Reader, but nothing
erringe as I truſt from the giuen and naturall meaninge of the author, haue
vſed more commo [...] and familiar woordes (yet not ſo muche as I might doo)
for the plainer ſettinge foorth of the ſame. But how ſo euer it be (gentle
Reader) I pray thée take it in good part, conſidering that for thée I haue
taken this paine, to the intent, that thou maiſt, Reade the ſame with
pleaſure.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=6)

## THE LIFE OF LVCIVS Apuleius, briefly expreſſed.

LVcius Apuleius African, an excellent folower of Plato his ſect, borne in
Maudara, a countrey ſometime inha­bited by the Romaines, and vnder the
iuriſdiction of Syphar, ſituate, and li­yng vpon the borders of Numidia &
Getulia, whereby he calleth him ſelfe, halfe a Numi­dian, and halfe a
Getulian: And Sidonius named him the Platonian Madaurēce: his father called
Theſeus, had paſſed all offices of dignitie in his countrey, with much honour:
his mother named Saluia, was of ſuch excellent vertue, that ſhe paſſed all the
dames of her time, borne of an auncient houſe, & deſcended from the noble
Philoſopher Plutarche, & Sextus his Nephew. His wife called Pudētila was
endowed with as much vertue and richeſſe as any woman might be. He him ſelfe
was of high & comely ſtature, gray eied, his heare yellow, & a beawtifull
perſonage: he floriſhed in Car­thage in the time of Iolianus Auitus, and
Claudius Maximus procōſules, where he ſpent his youth in lear­ning the
liberall ſciences, and much profited vnder his maiſters there, whereby not
without cauſe, he glori­ouſly calleth him ſelfe, the nourice of Carthage, &
the Cleſtial Muſe and venerable miſtres of Affrick, ſone after at Athenes
(wheare in times paſt the well of all doctrine flouriſhed) he taſted many of
the cuppes of the Muſes, he learned Poetry, Geometry, Muſike, Lo­gicke, and
the vniuerſall knowledge of Philoſophie, and ſtudied not in vaine the nine
Muſes, that is to ſay, the nine noble & roiall diſciplines. Immediatly after
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=7) he went to
Rome, & ſtudied there the Latine tongue, with ſuch labour and continuall
ſtudie, that he atchie­ued to great eloquēce, and was knowen and approued to
be excellently learned, whereby he might woorthily be called Polyhiſtor, y• is
to ſay, one that knoweth much or many thinges. And beinge thus no leſſe
endewed with eloquēce, than with ſingular learning, he wrote many bookes for
them that ſhould come after: Wherof parte by negligence of times be
intercepted, and parte now extant, doo ſufficiently declare with how muche
wiſedome and doctrine he floriſhed, & with how much vertue he excelled emongſt
the rude and barbarous people. The like was Anacharſis emōgſt the moſt
luſ­kiſhe Scythes: but emongſt the bookes of Lucius Apu­leius which are
periſhed & preuented, howbeit greatly deſired of vs now a daies, was one
entituled Banke­ting queſtions, an other entreatinge of the nature of Fiſhe,
an other of the generation Beaſtes, an other conteininge his Epigrāmes, and
an other called Her­magoras: but ſuche as are now extant, are the fower bookes
named Floridorum, wherein is conteined a flo­riſhinge ſtile, and a ſauery
kinde of learninge, whiche delighteth, holdeth, and reioyſeth the Reader
merue­louſly, wherein you ſhall finde a great varietie of thinges, as leapinge
one from an other: One excellent and copious oration conteininge all the grace
and ver­tue of the art Oratorie, whereby he cléereth him ſelfe of the crime of
art Magicke, which was ſclaunderouſly obiected againſt him by his enuious
aduerſaries, wher­in is conteined ſuch force of eloquence and doctrine, as he
ſéemeth to paſſe and excell him ſelfe. There is an o­ther booke of the God or
ſpirit of Socrates, whereof S. Auguſtine maketh often mētion in his booke of
the [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=7)
definition of Spirites and deſcription of men, twoo o­ther bookes of the
opinion of Plato, wherein is briefly conteined that which before was largely
expreſſed: one booke of Coſmographie, compriſinge many thinges of Ariſtoteles
Meteors: the Dialogue of Triſmegiſtus, tranſlated by him out of Gréeke into
Latine, ſo fine, that it rather ſéemeth with more eloquence turned in­to
Latine, then it was before writen in Greke: but principaly, theſe eleuen
bookes of the Golden Aſſe, are enriched with ſuch pleaſaunt matter, with ſuch
excel­lencie and variety of floriſhinge Tales, that nothing may be more ſwéete
and delectable, whereby woorthely they may be intituled: The bookes of the
Golden Aſſe, for the paſſinge ſtile & matter therein. For what can be more
acceptable than this Aſſe of Gold in déede: How be it there be many whiche
would rather Intitle it Metamorphoſis, that is to ſay, a tranſfiguration or
tranſformation, by reaſon of the Argument and mat­ter therein.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=8)

## THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOVR, to his ſonne Fauſtinus, and vnto the Readers of
this booke.

THat I to thee ſome ioyous ieſtes, may ſhow in gentle gloſe:

And frākly feede thy bēded eares, with paſsing pleaſāt proſe.

So that thou daine in ſeemely ſorte, this wāton booke to view

That is ſet out and garniſht fine, with writen Phraſes newe.

I will declare how one by happe, his humaine figure loſt,

And how in brutiſhe fourmed ſhape, his lothed life he toſt:

And how he was in courſe of time, from ſuch eſtate vnfold.

Who eftſoones turnd to priſtine ſhape, his lot vnlucky told.

WHat and who he was, attend a while and you ſhall vnderſtand, that it was euen
I, the wri­ter of mine owne Metamorphoſie, & ſtraunge alteration of figure.
Hymettus, Athens, Iſthmia, E­phire, Tenaros, and Sparta, beinge fat & fertill
ſoiles (as I pray you giue credit to the bookes of more euerla­ſting fame) bée
places where mine auncient progenie & lignage did ſometime flouriſhe: there I
ſay, in Athens when I was yonge, I went firſt to ſchoole. Sone after (as a
ſtranger) I arriued at Rome, wheras by great in­duſtrie & without inſtruction
of any ſcholemaſter I at­chieued to the full perfection of the Latine tongue:
be­holde, I firſt craue & begge your pardon, leaſt I ſhould happen to
diſpleaſe or offend any of you by the rude & ruſtike vtterance of this
ſtraunge & forrein language. And verely, this new alteration of ſpeach doth
corre­ſpond to the enterpriſed matter whereof I purpoſe to entreate, I wil ſet
foorth vnto you a pleaſant Grecian leſt. Wherunto gentle Reader if thou wilt
giue atten­dāt eare, it wil miniſter vnto thée ſuch delectable mat­ter, as
thou ſhalt be well contented withall.

FINIS.

## Table of contents

  * To the right Honorable, and Mightie Lorde, Thomas, Earle of Suſſex, Viſcont Fitzwaltre, Lorde of Egremont and of Burnell, Knight of the moſt noble Order of the Garter, Iuſtice of the Foreſtes and Chaſes, from Trente sowthwarde, and Capitaine of the Gentlemen Pentioners, of the houſe of the Queene out Soueraigne Lady.
  * To the Reader.
  * THE LIFE OF LVCIVS Apuleius, briefly expreſſed.
  * THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOVR, to his ſonne Fauſtinus, and vnto the Readers of this booke.
  * 1\. The firſt booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.
    * 1.1. cap. 1.
    * 1.2. Cap. 2.
    * 1.3. Cap. 3
    * 1.4. Cap. 4.
    * 1.5. Cap. 5.
    * 1.6. Cap. 6.
    * 1.7. Cap. 7.
  * 2\. The ſeconde Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.
    * 2.1. Cap. 8.
    * 2.2. Cap. 9.
    * 2.3. Cap. 10.
    * 2.4. Cap. 11.
  * 3\. The thirde Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.
    * 3.1. Cap. 12.
    * 3.2. Cap. 13.
    * 3.3. Cap. 14.
    * 3.4. Cap. 15.
    * 3.5. Cap. 16.
    * 3.6. Cap. 17.
  * 4\. The fourth Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.
    * 4.1. Cap. 18.
    * 4.2. Cap 19.
    * 4.3. Cap. 20.
    * 4.4. Cap. 21.
    * 4.5. Cap. 22.
  * 5\. The fifth Booke of Lucius Apuleius
  * 6\. The ſixth Booke of Lucius Apuleius
    * 6.2. Cap. 23.
  * 7\. The ſeuenth Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.
    * 7.1. Cap. 24.
    * 7.2. Cap. 25.
    * 7.3. Cap. 26.
    * 7.4. Cap. 27.
    * 7.5. Cap. 28.
    * 7.6. Cap. 29.
    * 7.7. Cap. 30.
    * 7.8. Cap 31.
  * 8\. The eight Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.
    * 8.1. Cap. 32.
    * 8.2. Cap. 33.
    * 8.3. Cap. 34.
    * 8.4. Cap. 35.
    * 8.5. Cap. 36.
  * 9\. The ninth Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.
    * 9.1. Cap. 37.
    * 9.2. Cap. 38.
    * 9.3. Cap. 39.
    * 9.4. Cap. 40.
    * 9.5. Cap. 41.
    * 9.6. Cap. 42.
    * 9.7. Cap. 43.
  * 10\. The tenth Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.
    * 10.1. Cap. 44.
    * 10.2. Cap 45.
    * 10.3. Cap. 46.
  * 11\. The eleuenth Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.
    * 11.1. Cap. 47.
    * 11.2. Cap. 48.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=8)

## 1\. The firſt booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.

¶How Apuleius ridinge into Theſſalie, fortuned to fall into companie with twoo
ſtraungers, that reaſoned toge­ther of the mighty power of Witches.

### 1.1. cap. 1.

AS I fortuned to take my voiage into Theſſalie,A countrey where are many
Inchantereſſes and Witches. about certaine affaires whiche I had to doo (for
there mine aunceſtrie by my mothers ſide inha­biteth, deſcended of the ligne
of that moſte excellent perſon Plutarche, & of Sextus the philoſopher his
Ne­phew, whiche is to vs a great woorſhippe and honour:The vertue of parentes
makes the children ho­nored. And after that by much trauell aud great paine, I
had paſſed ouer the high mountaines and ſlipperie valleis, and had ridden
thorough the cloggy fallowed fieldes, perceiuinge that my horſe did waxe
ſomewhat ſlowe, & to the intent likewiſe, I might repoſe and ſtrengthen my
ſelfe, (beinge wery with ridinge) I lighted of my horſe, and wipinge away the
ſweate from euery parte of his bodie, I vnbridled him, and walked him ſoftly
in my hande, to the ende he might piſſe, and eaſe him ſelfe of his werines,
and trauell: And while he wente gra­ſinge freſhly in the fielde (caſtinge his
head ſometimes aſide as a token of reioyſing and gladnes) I perceiued a litle
before me twoo compaignions ridinge, & ſo I o­uertakinge them made the third:
And while I liſtened to heare their communicatiō, the one of them laughed and
mocked his fellow: ſaiyng, leaue of I pray thée and ſpeake no more, for I
cannot abide to heare thee tell
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=9) ſuch abſurde
& incredible lies: Which when I heard, I deſired to heare ſome newes, and
ſaid: I pray you Mai­ſters make me partaker of your talke, that am not ſo
curious, as deſirous to know all your communication: So ſhall we ſhorten our
iourney, and eaſely paſſe this high hill before vs, by merry and pleaſant
talke: but he that laughed before at his felowe, ſaid againe: verely this tale
is as true, as if a man would ſay, that by Sor­cerie and inchauntment the
floodes might be enforced to run againſt their courſe:VVitches in old time
weare ſuppoſed to be of ſuch power that they coulde pull downe the Moone by
their inchauntment. the ſeas to be immoueable: the ayre to lacke the blowinge
of windes: the Sunne to be reſtrained from his naturall race: the Moone to
purge his ſkumme vpon hearbes and trées, to ſerue for ſorceries: the Starres
to be pulled from heauen, the day to be darkened, and the darke night to
continew ſtill. Then I, beinge more deſirouſe to heare his talke then his
companions, ſaid: I pray you, that beganne to tell your tale euen now, leaue
not of ſo, but tell the re­ſide we. And turning to the other, I ſaide: You
perhaps that are of an obſtinate minde and groſſe eares, mocke and contemne
thoſe thinges whiche are reported for truth, know you not, that it is
accoūted vntrew by the praue opinion of men, which either is rarely ſéene,
ſel­dome heard, or that paſſeth the capacitie of mans rea­ſon, whiche if it be
more narrowly ſkanned, you ſhalt not onely finde it euident & plaine, but alſo
very eaſie to be brought to paſſe.

¶How Apuleius tolde to the twoo ſtraungers, what he ſawe a Iuglar doo in
Athens.

### 1.2. Cap. 2.

THe other night, beinge at ſupper with a ſorte of hūgry fellowes, while I did
gréedely put a great [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=9) morſell of meate
in my wouth, that was fried with the flower of chéeſe and barley, it cleaued
ſo faſt in the paſ­ſage of my throate, and ſtopped my winde, in ſuch ſort that
I was welnie choked. And yet at Athens before the porche there, called Peale,
I ſawe with theſe eies, a Iugler that ſwalowed vp a twoohand ſwoorde with a
very keene edge, and by & by, for a litle money that we, that looked on, gaue
him, he deuoured a chaſing ſpeare, with the pointe downward. And after that he
had cō ­uaide the whole ſpeare within the cloſure of his bodie, and brought
it out againe behinde, there appeared on the toppe thereof (whiche cauſed vs
all to maruell) a fayre boye, pleaſaunt and nimble, windinge and tur­ninge him
ſelfe in ſuch ſorte, that you would ſuppoſe that he had neither bone nor
griſtle, and verely thinke that he were the naturall Serpent, crepinge &
ſlidinge on the knotted ſtaffe,The God of me­dicine is called Aſculapius.
whiche the God of Medicine is feigned to beare. But turninge me to him that
began his Tale, I pray you (ꝙ I) follow your purpoſe, and I alone will giue
credite vnto you, and for your paines will pay your charges at the next Inne
we come vnto. To whome he aunſweared, Certes ſir, I thanke you for your gentle
offer, and at your requeſt, I will pro­ceade in my tale: but firſt I will
ſweare vnto you by the light of this Sunne y• ſhineth here, y• thoſe thinges
whiche I ſhall tell be trewe, leaſt when you come to the next Citie called
Theſſalie, you ſhould doubte any thinge, of that whiche is rife in the mouthes
of euery perſon, and done before the face of all men: And that I may firſt
make relation vnto you, what, & who I am, and whither I goe, & for what
purpoſe: know ye, that I am of Egin; trauelinge theſe countries about from
Theſſaly to Etolia, and from Etolia to Beotia, to pro­uide
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=10) for hony,
chéeſe, and other victuales to ſell againe: And vnderſtāding, that at Hippata
(which is the prin­cipall Citie of all Theſſalie) is accuſtomed to be ſolde
newe chéeſes of excéedinge good taſte and reliſhe, I for­tuned on a day to goe
thither, to make my market there, but (as it often happeneth) I came in an
euill houre, for one Lupus a purueiour had bought and en­groſſed vp all the
daie before, and ſo I was deceaued. Wherefore, towardes night (being very
wery) I went to the baines to refreſhe my ſelfe, and beholde, I fortu­ned to
eſpie, my compaignion Socrates ſittinge vpon the grounde, couered with a torne
and courſe mantell, who who ſo meigre and of ſo ſallowe and miſerable a
countenance, that I ſcantly knew him: for fortune had brought him into ſuch
eſtate and calamitie, that he ve­rely ſéemed as a common begger, that ſtandeth
in the ſtréetes to craue the beneuolence of the paſſers by: To­wardes whome
(how be it he was my ſinguler friende & familiar acquaintance,Miſerie maketh
ſome men forget acquaintance. yet halfe in deſpayre) I drewe me, and ſaid:
Alas my Socrates, what meaneth this? how fareth it with thée? what crime haſt
thou commit­ted? verely there is great lamentation and wéepinge made for thée
at home: Thy childrē are in warde by de­crée of the prouinciall iudge: thy
wife (hauinge ended her mourninge time in lamentable wiſe with face and viſage
bloubered with teares, in ſuche ſorte that ſhe hath welny wept out both her
eies) is cōſtrained by her parentes to put out of remembrance the vnfortunate
loſſe and lacke of thée at home, and (againſt her will) to take a newe
huſbande. And doeſt thou liue here as a ghoſt or hegge, to our great ſhame &
ignomie? Then anſweared he to me, & ſaide: O my friende Ariſtome­nus, now
perceaue I well that you are ignorant of the [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=10) whirlinge
chaunges, the vnſtable forces, and ſlipperie inconſtance of fortune: and
therewithall he couered his face (euen then bluſhing for very ſhame) with his
rug­ged mātell, in ſo much that from his nauell downward he appeared al
naked. But I (not willing to ſée him any lenger in ſuche great miſerie and
calamitie) toke him by the hande and lifted him vp from the grounde: who
(hauing his face couered in ſuch ſorte) let fortune (ꝙ he) triumphe yet more,
let her haue her ſway, and finiſhe that whiche ſhe hath begunne. And
therwithall I put of one of my garmentes and couered him, and immedi­atly I
brought him to the baine, and cauſed him to be annointed, wiped, and the
filthie ſkurfe of his body to be rubbed away, whiche done (although I weare
very wery my ſelfe) yet I ledde the poore miſer to my Inne, where he repoſed
his bodie vpon a bedde, and then I brought him meate and drinke, and ſo we
talked toge­ther: for there we might be mery & laugh at our plea­ſure, and ſo
we weare, vntill ſuche time as he (fetching a pitifull ſighe from the bottom
of his harte, and bea­tinge his face in miſerable ſorte) began to ſay.

¶How Socrates in his returne from Macedonie to Lariſſa, was ſpoiled and
robbed, and how he fell acquainted with one Meroe, a Witche.

### 1.3. Cap. 3

ALas poore miſer that I am, that for the onely de­ſire to ſée a game of triall
of weapons, am fallen into theſe miſeries and wretched ſnares of miſ­fortune.
For in my retorne from Macedonie, whereas I ſolde all my wares, and plaied the
marchant by the ſpace of tenne monethes, a litle before that I came to
Lariſſa, I turned out of the way to v [...]ew the ſituation
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=11) of the
countrey there, and beholde in the bottom of a deepe valley, I was ſodenly
enuironed with a compa­ny of théeues, who robbed & ſpoiled me, of ſuch thinges
as I had, and yet woulde hardely ſuffer me to eſcape. But I (beinge in ſuch
extremitie) in the ende, was hap­pely deliuered from their cruell handes: and
ſo I for­tuned to come to the houſe of an old woman that ſolde wine, called
Meroe: who had her tongue ſufficiētly in­ſtructed to flattery: vnto whome I
opened the cauſes of my longe pexegrination and carefull trauell, and of nune
vnlucky abuēture, and after that I had declared vnto her ſuch thinges as then
preſently came to my re­membraunce, ſhe gentely entertained me, and made me
good chere, and by and by beinge pricked by carnall deſire, ſhe brought me to
her owne bedde chamber, where as I (poore miſer) (the very firſt night of our
li­yng together) did purchaſe to my ſelfe this miſerable face,To vſe and haūt
women maketh mē haue meigre and palc  [...]aces. and for her lodging I gaue
her ſuch apparell, as the théeues left to couer me withall.

Then I (vnderſtanding the cauſe of his miſerable eſtate) ſaid vnto him: In
faith, thou art woorthy to ſu­ſtaine the moſt extreme miſerie and calamitie,
whiche haſt defiled and maculate thine òwne bodie, forſaken thy wife
traitorouſlie, and diſhonoured thy children, parentes, and friendes, for the
loue of a vile harlot and olde ſtrumpet. When Socrates harde me raile againſt
Meroe in ſuch ſorte, he helde vp his finger to me, and as halfe abaſhed, ſaid:
peace, peace, I pray you, and (lo­kinge about leaſt any perſon ſhould here,) I
pray you (ꝙ he) take héede what you ſay againſt ſo venerable a woman as ſhe
is, leſt by your intemperate tongue you  [...]che ſome harme. Then (with
reſemblance of admi­ration) what (ꝙ I) is ſhe ſo excellent a perſon as you
[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=11) name her
to be? I pray you tell me. Then anſweared he, verely ſhe is a Magicien, whiche
hath power to rule the Heauens, to bringe downe the ſkie, to beare vp the
earth, to turne the waters into hilles, and the hilles into runninge waters,
to lift vp the terreſtiall ſpirites into the ayre, & to pull the Goddes out of
the heauens, to ertinguiſhe the Planetes, and to lighten the d [...]epe
darkenes of hell. Then ſaid I vnto Socrates, I pray thée leaue of this high
and myſticall kinde of talke, and tell the matter in a more plaine and ſimple
faſhion. Then anſweared he, will you heare one or twoo, or mo of her factes,
which ſhe hath done, for where as ſhe en­forceth, not onely the inhabitantes
of ye countrey here, but alſo the Indians and the Aethiopes the one and the
other, and alſo the Antictons, to loue her in moſte raginge ſorte, ſuch are
but trifles and chippes of her oc­cupation, but I pray you giue eare, and I
will declare of more greater matters whiche ſhe hath done openly and before
the face of all men.

¶How Meroe the witche turned diuers perſons into miſe­rable Beaſtes.

### 1.4. Cap. 4.

IN faith Ariſtomenus, to tell you the truth, this wo­man had a certaine louer,
whome by the vtterance of one onely woorde, ſhe turned him into a Beuer,
becauſe he loued an other woman beſide her, and the reaſon why ſhe tranſformed
him into ſuche a beaſt, is, for that it is his nature, when he perceiueth the
hun­ters and houndes to drawe after him, to bite of his mē ­bers, and lay
them in the way, that the houndes may be at a ſtoppe when they finde them, and
to the intent it might ſo happen vnto him, (becauſe he fancied an
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=12) other woman)
ſhe turned him into that kinde of ſhape. Semblably ſhe chaunged one of her
neighbours, being an olde man and one that ſolde wine, into a frogge, in that
he was one of her occupation, and therefore ſhe bare him grudge, and now the
poore miſer ſwimminge in one of his pipes of wine, and welny drowned in the
dregges, doth crie and call with a hoarſe voice, for his olde geſtes and
acquaintance that paſſe by. Likewiſe ſhe turned one of the Aduocates of the
courte (becauſe he pleaded and ſpake againſt her in a rightfull cauſe) into a
horned Ramme, and now the poore Rāme is be­come and Aduocate. Moreouer ſhe
cauſed that the wife of a certaine louer that ſhe had, ſhould neuer be
deliue­red of her childe, but accordinge to the computation of all men, it is
eight yéeres paſt ſince the poore woman began firſt to ſwell, and now ſhe is
increaſed ſo bigge, that ſhe ſéemeth as though ſhe would bring foorth ſome
great Oliphant, whiche when it was knowen abroade and publiſhed thorough out
al the towne, they toke in­dignation againſt her, and ordeined that the next
day ſhe ſhould moſt cruelly be ſtoned to death, whiche pur­poſe of theirs ſhe
preuented, by the vertue of her en­chauntmentes, and as Medea (who obtained of
kinge Creon but one daies reſpite before her departure) did burne all his
houſe, him and his doughter, ſo ſhe (by her coniurations and inuocations of
ſprites, whiche ſhe v­ſeth in a certaine hole in her houſe, as ſhe her ſelfe
de­clared vnto me the next day followinge) cloſed all the perſons of the towne
ſo ſure in their howſes, and with ſuch violence of power, that for the ſpace
of twoo daies, they coulde not come foorth, nor open their gates nor doores,
nor breake downe their walles, whereby they weare enforced by mutuall conſent,
to crie vnto her, [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=12) and to binde them
ſelues (ſtreictly) by othes, that they would neuer afterwardes moleſt or hurt
her, & more­ouer if any did offer her any iniurie they would be rea­dy to
defende her, wherevpon ſhe (moued at their pro­miſes, and ſtirred by pitie)
releaſed all the towne. But ſhe conueied the principall Authour of this
ordinance, about midnight, with all his houſe, the walles, the grounde, and
the foundation, into an other towne di­ſtant from thenſe a hundred miles,
ſituate and beinge on the toppe of a high hill, and by reaſon thereof
deſti­tute of water, and becauſe the edifices & houſes, weare ſo nighe builded
together, that it was not poſſible for the houſe to ſtande there, ſhe threwe
downe the ſame before the gate of the towne. Then ſpake I and ſaid: O my
friende Socrates, you haue declared vnto me many meruelous thinges and
ſtraunge chaunces, and moreouer ſtroken me with no ſmall trouble of minde, yea
rather with great feare, leaſt the ſame old woman vſinge the like practiſe,
ſhould fortune to here all ourWitches are ſuppoſed tobeare whatſoeuer is
ſaide. communication: wherefore let vs now ſléepe, and after that we haue
taken our reſt, let vs riſe betime in the morninge and ride away from hens
before day, as far as we may poſſible.

¶How Socrates and Ariſtomenus ſlept together in one cham­ber, and how they
were handled by Witches.

### 1.5. Cap. 5.

IN ſpeakinge theſe woordes, and deuiſinge with my ſelfe of our departing the
next morrow, leaſt Meroe the Witche ſhould play by vs, as ſhe had donē by
di­uers other perſons: It fortuned that Socrates did fall a ſleape, and ſlept
very ſoundly, by reaſon of his trauell and plentie of meate and wine,
wherewithall he had
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=13) filled him
ſelfe. Wherefore I cloſed and barred faſt the doores of the chamber, and put
my bedde behinde the doore, [...]are and care  [...] mē wa­  [...]nge. and ſo
laide me downe to reſt, but I could in no wiſe ſleape for the great feare
which was in my harte, vntill it was about midnight, & then I began to
ſlom­ber: but alas, beholde ſodenly the chamber doores brake open, the lockes,
boltes and poſtes fell downe, that you would verely haue thought, that ſome
théeues had ben preſently come to haue ſpoiled and robbed vs. And my bedde
whereon I laye beinge a trockle bed, faſhioned in forme of a cradle, and one
of the féete broken & rot­ten, by violence was turned vpſide downe, and I
like­wiſe was ouerwhelmed and couered liyng in the fame. Then perceaued I in
my ſelfe, that certaine affectes of the minde by nature doth chaunce
contrarie. For as teares oftentimes trickleth downe the chéekes of him that
ſeeth or heareth ſome ioyfull newes, ſo I being in this fearfull perplexitie,
could not forbeare laughinge, to ſée how of Ariſtomenus I was made like vnto a
ſnayle in his ſhell. And while I lay on the grounde co­uered in this ſorte, I
péeped vnder the bed to ſée what would happen. And behold there entered in
twoo olde wemen, the one bearinge a burninge torche, and the o­ther a ſponge
and a naked ſwoorde: And ſo in this ha­bite they ſtoode aboute Socrates beinge
faſt a ſteape. Then ſhe (which bare the ſwoorde) ſaid vnto the other, behold
ſiſter Panthia this is my déere and my ſwéete harte, whiche both daie and
night hath abuſed my wā ­ton youthfulnes. This is he (who litle regardinge my
loue) dothe not onely diffame me with reprochfull woordes, but alſo intendeth
to runne away: And I ſhal be forſaken by like craſ [...]e as Vliſſes did vſe,
and ſhall continually bewaile my ſolitarines as Calipſo, (which [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=13) ſaid) ſhe pointed
to wardes me, that lay vnder the bed, and ſhowed me to Panthia. This is he (ꝙ
ſhe) which is his counſeler, and perſwadeth him to forſake me, and now (being
at the pointe of death) he lieth proſtrate on the grounde couered with his
bedde, and hath ſéene all our dooinges, and hopeth to eſcape (ſkotfrée) from
my handes, but I will cauſe that he ſhall repent him ſelfe too late, nay
rather forthwith of his former vntēperate language, and his preſent
curioſitie. Whiche woordes when I harde, I fell into a colde ſweate, and my
harte trembled with feare, in ſo much that the bed ouer me did like wiſe
rattle & ſhake. Then ſpake Panthia vnto Meroe, and ſaid: Siſter, let vs by and
by teare him in péeces, or els tie him by the members and ſo cutte them of.
Then Meroe (being ſo named becauſe ſhe was a ta­uernerMeroe, ſo called of
Meris, which in Engliſ he is ſtronge wine vntempred. and loued well good
wines) anſweared: nay ra­ther lette him liue, and burie the Corps of this
poore wretche in ſome hole of the earth, and therewithall ſhe turned the head
of Socrates on the other ſide, & thruſt her ſwoorde vp to the hiltes into the
lefte parte of his necke, and receaued the bloud, that guſhed out, with a
potte, that no droppe thereof fell beſide, which thinges I ſawe with mine owne
eies, and (as I thinke) to the intent ſhe might alter nothinge that pertained
to ſa­crifice, whiche ſhe accuſtomed to make, ſhe thruſt her hande downe into
the entrailles of his bodie, & (ſearch­inge aboute) at length brought foorth
the harte of my miſerable compaignion Socrates, who (hauinge his throte cut in
ſuch ſorte) yéelded out a dolefull crie, and gaue vp the ghoſte. Then Panthia
ſtopped the wide wounde of his throate with the ſponge, and ſaid: O Sponge
ſpronge and made of the ſea, beware that thouThe ſponge  [...] meth of the
[...] paſſe not by the runninge riuer. This being ſaide, the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=14) one of them
moued and turned vp my bedde, and their they ſtridde ouer me, and slapped
their buttockes vpō my face, and all bepiſſed me, till I was wringing wet:
when this was ended, they went their waies, and the doores cl [...]ſed faſt,
the poſtes ſtoode in their olde places, and the lockes & boltes were ſhut
againe. But I, that l [...]ye vpon the grounde, like one without ſoule, naked
and colde, and wringinge wette with piſſe, like to one that weare more then
halfe dead, yet reuiuinge my ſelfe, and apointed as I thinke for the gallowes,
began to ſay: Alas what ſhall become of me to morrow, when my compaignion
ſhalbe founde murdred here in the chamber?The preſumpti­ons of Magi­ſtrates.
To whom ſhall I ſéeme to tell any ſimilitude of truth, when as I ſhall tell
the truth in déede? They will ſay if thou weareſt vnable to reſiſt the
violence of the wemē, yet ſhouldeſt thou haue cried for helpe, wile thou
ſuffer the man to be ſlaine before thy face and ſay nothinge? Or why did not
they ſlea thée like wiſe? why did they ſpare thée that ſtoode by and ſaw them
cōmitte that horrible facte? Wherefore although thou haſt eſca­ped their
hādes, yet thou ſhalt not eſcape ours. While I pondred theſe thinges with my
ſelfe, the night paſſed on: And ſo I thought beſt to take my horſe before day,
and got forwarde in my iourney. How be it the waies were vnknowen vnto me, and
thereupō I toke vp my pacquet, vnlocked and vnbarred the doores, but thoſe
good and faithfull doores which in the night did open of their owne accorde,
coulde then ſcantly be opened with their keies. And when I was out I cried
hoſſra, Oſteler, where arte thou, open the ſtable doore, for I will ride away
by and by.Suche drouſie ſeruaeuntes haue ready anſweres The Oſteler liyng
behinde the ſtable doore vpon a pallet, and halfe a ſleape, what (ꝙ he) doo
not you know that the waies he very dange­rous? [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=14) what meane you to
riſe at this time of night? If you perhaps (giltie of ſome heynous crime) be
werie of your life, yet thinke you not that we are ſuche ſottes that we will
die for you. Then ſaid I, it is welny day, & moreouer what can théeues take
from him that hath nothinge? doeſt not thou know (foole as thou arte) thatThe
wayfaring man that hath no monie may ſinge merely be­fore the theefe if thou
be naked, if tenne Giantes ſhould aſſaile thée, they coulde not ſpoile or
robbe thée? Whereunto the drowſie Oſteler halfe a ſleape, & turninge on the
other ſide, anſweared: what know I whether you haue mur­dred your compaignion
whome you brought in yeſter­night or no, and now ſeke the meanes to eſcape
away. O Lord, at that time I remēber, that the earth ſée­med to open, and
that I ſawe at hell gate the dogge Cerbe­rusCerberus is the dogge of, hell
feigned by the Poetes to ſtād a [...] Plutoes gates gaping to deuoure me, and
then I verely belieued, that Meroe did not ſpare my throate, moued with
pi­tie, but rather cruelly pardoned me to bringe me to the gallowes. Wherfore,
I returned to my chamber, and there deuiſed with my ſelfe in what ſorte I
ſhould fi­niſhe my life. But when I ſawe that fortune woulde miniſter vnto me
no other inſtrumēt, then that whiche my bedde proffred me, I ſaid: O bedde, O
bedde, moſte déere vnto me at this preſent, whiche haſt abode and ſuffred with
me ſo many miſeries, iudge and arbiter of ſuch thinges as were done here this
night, whome onely I may call to witneſſe for mine innocencie, ren­der (I ſay)
vnto me ſome holſome weapon to ende my life that am moſt willinge to die. And
therewithall I pulled out a piece of the rope wherwith the bedde was corded,
and tied one ende thereof about a rafter by the window, and with the other
ende I made a ſlidinge knotte, and ſtoode vpon my bedde, and ſo put my necke
into hit. A [...]d when I leped from the bedde, thinkinge
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=15) verel [...]
to ſtrangle my ſelfe and ſo die, beholde the rope beinge olde and rotten braſt
in the middle, and I fell downe tomblinge vpon Socrates that lay vnder. And
euē at that ſame very time, the Oſteler came in criyng with a lowde voice,
and ſaid where are you that made ſuch haſt at midnight, & now lies wallowinge
a bedde, whereupon (I know not whether it was by my fall or by the great crie
of the Oſteler) Socrates (as waking out of a ſleape) did riſe vp firſt and
ſaid: It is not with­out cauſe that ſtrangers doo ſpeake euill of all ſuche
Oſtelers, for this captife in his comminge in, & with his criyng out, I thinke
vnder a colour to ſteale away ſomething, hath waked me out of a ſound ſleape.
Then I roſe vp ioyfull, with a mery countenaunce, ſa [...]ynge: Beholde good
Oſteler, my friende, my compaignion & my brother whome thou diddeſt falſely
affirme to be murdred by me this night. And therewithall I embra­ſed my
friende Socrates and kiſſed him, but he ſmel­lyng the ſtinke of the piſſe
wherwith thoſe hegges had embrued me, thruſt me away and ſaid clenſe thy ſelfe
from that filthy odour, and then he began gentely to enquire how that noyſome
ſente happened vnto me, but I (finely feigninge and couloringe the matter for
the time) did breake of his talke, and toke him by the hande and ſaide, why
tarrie we? why leeſe we the plea­ſure of this faire morning? Let vs goe, and
ſo I toke vp my pacquette, and paide the charges of the houſe and departed:
and we had not gone a mile out of the towne but it was broade day, & then I
diligently looked vpon Socrates throate to ſée if I could eſpie the place
where Meroe thruſt in her ſwoorde, but when I could not per­ceaue any ſuch
thinge, I thought with my ſelfe what a madde man am I, that (beinge ouercome
with wine [[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=15)
yeſternight) haue dreamed ſuch terrible thinges: Be­hold I ſee Socrates is
ſound, ſalue & in health, where is his woūde? where is the ſponge? where is
his great and newe cutte? and then I ſpake to him and ſaide: ve­rely it is not
without occaſion that Phiſitions of expe­rience doth affirme, that ſuch as
fill their gorges abun­dantly with meate and drinke ſhall dreame of dire and
horrible ſightes, for I my ſelfe (not tempryng mine ap­petite yeſternight from
the pottes of wine) did ſéeme to ſée this night ſtrange and cruell viſions,
that euen yet I thinke my ſelfe ſprinkled & wette with humaine bloud:
whereunto Socrates laughing, made anſweare and ſaide: Nay thou arte not wette
with the bloud of men, but thou art embrued with ſtinkinge piſſe: and verely I
my ſelfe dreamed this night, that my throate was cutte and that I felt the
paine of the wounde, and that my harte was pulled out of my bellie, and the
re­membrance thereof makes me nowe to feare, for my knées doo tremble that I
can vneth goe any further, & therefore I would faine eate ſomewhat to
ſtrengthen and reuiue my ſpirites: then ſaid I, beholde here is thy
breakefaſt, and therwithall I opened my ſkrippe, that hanged vpō my ſhoulder,
and gaue him bread & chéeſe, and we ſatte downe vnder a great plane tróe and I
eate parte with him: And while I behelde him eatinge gréedely, I perceaued
that he waxed meigre and pale, & that his liuely colour vaded away, in ſo much
that (be­inge in great feare and remembringe thoſe terrible fu­ries of whome I
lately dreamed) the firſte morſell of bread that I put in my mouth (whiche was
but very ſmall) did ſo ſticke in my iawes that I could nether ſwallowe it
downe nor yet yelde it vp, and moreouer the ſmall time of our beinge together
encreaſed my [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=16)
feare, and what is he, that ſeinge his compaignion die in the high waie before
his face, will not greatly lamēt and be ſorie: but when that Socrates had
eaten ſuffi­ciently he wared very thirſtie, for in déede he had wel­nie
deuoured all a whole chéeſe, and beholde euill for­tune, there was behinde the
plane trée a pleaſant run­ninge water as cleere as Cri [...]tall, and I ſaid
vnto him: come hither Socrates to this water and drinke thy fil. And then he
roſe and came to the riuer, and knéeled downe vpon the ſide of the banke to
drinke, but he had ſkaſe touched y• water with his lippes, whē as behold, the
woūde of his throate opened wide, [...]anthia ſaide before beware ſpoge that
thou paſſe not by the runninge riuer. and the ſponge ſodenly fell into the
water and after iſſued out a litle remnant of bloud, and his bodie (beinge
then without life) had fallen into the riuer, had not I caught him by the
legge, and ſo pulled him vp. And after that I had lamented a good ſpace the
death of my wretched com­paigniō, I buried him in the ſandes there by the
riuer. Which done, in great feare I rode through many out­waies and deſerte
places, and as culpable of the death of Socrates, I forſoke my countrey, my
wife, and my children, and came to Aetolia where I maried an other wife. This
tale tolde Ariſtomenus, and his fellowe whiche before obſtinately would giue
no credite vnto hi, begā to ſay: Verely there was neuer ſo fooliſh a tale,
nor a more abſurde lie tolde then this: & then he ſpake vnto me, ſaiyng: Ho
ſir, what you are I know not, but your habite and countenāce declareth,He
ſpeaketh to Apulcius. that you ſhould be ſome honeſt gentleman, doo you
beléeue his tale? yea verely (ꝙ I) why not? for what ſo euer the fates hath
apointed to men, that I beléeue ſhall happen. For ma­ny thingès chaunce vnto
me, and vnto you, and to di­uers others, which beinge declared vnto the
ignorant [[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=16)
be accompted as lies. But verely I giue credite vnto his tale, and render
entier thankes vnto him in that (by the pleaſant relatiō thereof) we haue
quickly paſſed and ſhortned our iourney, and I thinke that my horſe alſo was
delighted with the ſame, and hath brought me to the gate of this Citie without
any paine at all. Thus ended both our talke and iourney, for they twoo turned
on the lefte hande to the next villages, and I rode into the Citie.

¶How Apuleius came to a Citie called Hipate, and was lodged in one Mil [...]s
houſe, and brought him letters from Demea of Corinthe.

### 1.6. Cap. 6.

AFter that thoſe twoo compaigniōs were depar­ted, I entred into the Citie,
where I eſpied an old woman, of whome I enquired whether that Citie was called
Hypata, or no, who anſweared yeas: Then I demaunded whether ſhe knewe one Milo
an Alderman of the Citie, whereat ſhe laughed, and ſaid: verely it is not
without cauſe that Milo is called an el­der man, and accompted as chiefe of
thoſe whiche dwel without the walles of the Citie: To whome I ſaide againe, I
pray thée good mother doo not mocke, but tell me what manner of man he is, and
where he dwelleth: Marry (ꝙ ſhe) doo not you ſée thoſe baye windowes whiche on
the one ſide abutte to the gate of the Citie, and on the other ſide to the
next lane, there Milo dwel­leth, very riche both in money & ſubſtance,Auarice
maket [...] men ill ſpok [...] of but by rea­ſon of his great Auarice and
inſatiable couetouſnes, he is euill ſpoken of, & he is a man that liueth all
by Vſu­rie, and lendinge his money vpon pledges. Moreouer he dwelleth in a
ſmall houſe, and is euer countinge his
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=17) money, and
hath a wife that is a compaigniō of his ex­treme miſerie,Couet ouſnes is
extreme miſery. neither kepeth he any more in his houſe then one onely maide
who goeth appareled like vnto a begger: which when I heard, I laughed with my
ſelf, & thought: in faith my fréende Demeas hath ſerued me well, which hath
ſent me (being a ſtraunger) vnto ſuch a man, in whoſe houſe I ſhall not be
afearde either of ſmooke or of the ſent of meate, & therewithall I rode to the
doore whiche was faſt barred, and knocked aloude, thēn there came foorth a
maide whiche ſaide, Ho Sira, that knockes ſo faſte, in what kinde of ſorte
will you borrow money, know you not that we vſe to take no gage vnleſſe it be
either plate or Iuelles? To whome I anſweared, I pray thée maide ſpeake more
gētle & tel me whether thy maiſter be within or no. Yes (ꝙ ſhe) that he is,
why doo you aſke? Marry ſaid I, I am come from Corinthe, and haue brought him
letters frō De­meas his fréende. Then ſaide the maide, I pray you tarry here
till I tell him ſo,The n [...]ggarde kepeth cloſe his doores alwaies. and
therewithall ſhe cloſed faſte the doores, and went in, and after a while ſhe
re­turned againe, & ſaid, my maſter deſireth you to alight and come in: and ſo
I did, whereas I found him ſitting vpon a litle bedde, goinge to ſupper, and
his wife ſatte at his féete, but there was no meate vpon the table, & ſo (by
apointment of the maide) I came to him, and ſalu­ted him, & deliuered the
letters whiche I brought from Demeas: whiche when he had redde, he ſaid,
verely I thanke my fréende Demeas much, in that he hath ſent vnto me ſo
woorthie a ge [...]t as you are: And therewithal he commaunded his wife to
ſitte away, and bidde me ſitte in her place, whiche when I refuſed, by reaſon
of courteſie, he pulled me by the garment and willed me to ſitte downe, for we
haue (ꝙ he) no other ſtoole here, [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=17) nor no other
great ſtore of houſehold ſtuffe for feare of robbinge. Then I (accordinge to
his commaundement) ſat downe: and he fell in further communication with me,
and ſaide: Verely I doo coniecte by the comely fea­ture of your bodie, and by
the maidenly ſhame faſtnes of your face, that you are a gentle man borne, as
my fréende Demeas hath no leſſe declared the ſame in his letters: Wherefore I
pray you take in good parte our poore lodginge, and behold, yonder chamber is
at your cōmaundement, vſe it as your owne, and if you be con­tented
therewithall, you ſhall reſemble and follow the vertuous qualities of your
good father Theſeus, who diſdeigned not the ſlēder and poore cotage of
Hecades. And then he called his maide, whiche was named Fo­tis, and ſaid:
Tarry this gentlemans pacquette into the chamber, and lay it vp ſafelie, and
bringe quickely water to waſhe him, and a towell to rubbe him, & other thinges
neceſſarie: and then bringe him to the next baines, for I knowe that he is
very werie of trauell. Theſe thinges when I harde, I partly perceaued the
manners of Milo, and (endeuouring to bringe my ſelfe further in his fauour) I
ſaide, Sir there is no néede of any of theſe things, for they haue ben euery
where mi­niſtred vnto me by the way, how be it I will goe vnto the baines, but
my chiefeſt care is that my horſe be wel loked too, for he brought me hither
roundly, and there­fore I pray thée Fotis take this money & by ſome heye and
Dates for him.

¶How Apuleius goinge to bie fiſ [...]e mette with his com­paignion Pithias.

### 1.7. Cap. 7.

WHen this was done, & all my thinges brought into the chamber, I walked
towardes the [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=18)
vaines, but firſt I went to the market to bie ſome vic­tualles for my ſupper,
where as I ſaw great plentie of fiſh ſet out to be ſolde: and ſo I cheapened
parte therof, and that whiche they firſt helde at a hundred pence, I bought at
length for twenty: whiche when I had done and was departinge away, one of mine
olde compaig­nions, and fellow at Athens, named Pithias, fortuned to paſſe by,
and viewinge me a good ſpace, in the ende brought me to his remembraunce, and
gentely came and kiſſed me, ſaiyng: O my déere fréende Lucius, it is a great
while paſte ſithens we twoo ſawe eche other, and moreouer from the time that
we departed frō our maiſter Veſtius, I neuer harde any newes of you, I pray
you Lucius tell me the cauſe of your peregrinatiō hither: Then I anſweared
and ſaid: I will make rela­tion thereof vnto you to morrow: but I pray you
tell me, what meaneth theſe ſeruitours that follow you, & theſe roddes or
verges whiche they beare: and this ha­bite whiche you weare, [...]o vſed
Magi­ſtrates to goo ſometime in  [...]ome. like vnto a Magiſtrate: verely I
thinke that you haue obteined your owne deſire, wherof I am right gladde. Then
anſweared Pithias, I beare the office and rule of the clarke of the market, &
therefore if you will haue any pittance for your ſup­per, ſpeake and I will
puruey it for you: Then I than­ked him hartely, and ſaid I had bought meate
ſufficiēt already. But Pithias when he eſpied my baſket wher­in my fiſhe was,
toke it and ſhaked it, and demaun­ded of me what I payed for all my ſprottes:
in faith (ꝙ I) I could ſkaſe enforſe the fiſhmonger to ſell them for twentie
pence, whiche when he harde, he brought me backe againe into the market, and
enquired of me of whome I bought them, I ſhowed him the olde man which ſatte
in a corner, whome by and by (by reaſon of [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=18) his office) he
did greatly blame and ſaid. Is it thus that you ſerue and handle ſtraungers?
and ſpecially our fréendes? wherefore ſell you this fiſhe ſo déere which is
not woorth a halfpennie? Now perceaue I wel that you are an occaſion to make
this place, which is the princi­pall Citie of al Theſſalie to be forſaken of
all men, & to reduce it into an inhabitable deſert, by reaſon of your
exceſſiue prices of victuales, but aſſure your ſelfe that you ſhall not eſcape
without puniſhment, and you ſhal know what mine office is, and how I ought to
puniſh ſuch as doo offend. Then he toke my baſket and caſt the fiſhe on the
grounde, and commaunded one of his ſer­geantes to treade them vnder his féete:
this done he perſwaded me to departe, & ſaid that that onely ſhame and
reproche done vnto the olde caitife did ſuffiſe him, ſo I went away all amaſed
and aſtonied, towardes the bames (conſidering with my ſelfe, and deuiſinge of
the grace of my compaignion Pythias) where when I had waſhed and refreſhed my
bodie, I returned againe to Milos houſe both without money and meate, and ſo
gotte into my chamber, then came Fotis immediatly vnto me, and ſaid that her
maiſter deſired me to come to ſupper, but I (not ignorant of Milos abſtinence)
prayed that I might be perdoned, ſince as I thought beſt to eaſe my weary
bones rather with ſleape & quiet­nes, than with meate: when Fotis had tolde
this vnto Milo, he came him ſelfe, and toke me by the hande, and while I did
modeſtly excuſe me, I wil not (ꝙ he) depart from this place, vntill ſuche time
as you ſhall goo with me, and to confirme the ſame he bounde his woordes with
an othe, whereby he enforced me to follow him and ſo he brought me into his
chamber, where he ſatte him downe vpon the bedde, and demaūdes of me how
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=19) his fréende
Demeas did, his wife his children and all his familie: & I made him anſweare
to euery queſtion, ſpecialy he enquired the cauſes of my peregrination &
trauell, whiche when I had declared, he [...] yet buſilie de­maunded of the
ſtate of my countrie, and of the chiefe Magiſtrates there, and principaly of
our Lieutenant and Viceroye, who when he perceaued that I was not onely weried
by trauel, but alſo with talke, and that I fell a ſleape in the middeſt of my
tale, and further that I ſpake nothinge directly or aduiſedly, he ſuffred me
to departe to my chamber. So ſcaped I at length from the pratlinge and hungry
ſupper of this ranke olde man,Such ſuppers v­ſeth vſerers to make. and beinge
compelled by ſleape and not by meate (as hauinge ſupped onely with talke) I
returned into my chamber and there be toke me to my quiet and longe deſired
reſt.

¶Here endeth the firſte booke of Lucius Apuleius.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=19)

## 2\. The ſeconde Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.

¶How Apuleius fortuned to meete with his coſin Byr­rhena.

### 2.1. Cap. 8.

AS ſoone as night was paſſed, and the day began to ſpringe, I fortuned to
awake and roſe out of my bedde as halfe amaſed, and (very deſirous to knowe
and ſée ſome meruelous and ſtrange thinges, remembringe with my ſelfe that I
was in the middeſt part of all Theſſalie, whereas, by the common reporte of
all the world, the ſorceries and enchauntmentes are moſt vſed) I oftentimes
repeted with my ſelfe the tale of my compaignion Ariſtomenus touchinge the
man­ner of this Citie, and (beinge moued by great deſire) I viewed the whole
ſituation thereof, neither was there any thinge which I ſawe there, that I did
beléeue to be the ſame whiche it was in déede, but euery thinge ſéemed vnto me
to be tranſformed and altered into other ſhapes by the wicked power of
ſorcerie and inchaunt­ment, in ſo much that I thought that the ſtones which I
founde, were indurate & turned from men into that figure, and that the birdes
whiche I harde chirpinge, and the trées without the walles of the Citie, and
the runninge waters were chaunged from men into ſuche kinde of likeneſſes: And
further I thought that the ſta­tues, images, and walles could goe, and the
oxen and other brute beaſtes could ſpeake & tel ſtraunge newes, and that
immediatly I ſhould ſée and here ſome Oracle
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=20) from the
Heauen, and from the gléede of the Sunne. Thus beinge aſtonied or rather
diſmaide & vexed with deſire, knowinge no certaine place whither I enten­ded
to goe, I wente from ſtreate to ſtreate, & at length (as I curiouſly gaſ
[...]d on euery thinge) I fortuned vn­wares to come into the market place,
where as I eſpied a certaine woman accompaignted with a great many ſeruantes,
towardes whome I drewe nie and vlewed her garmentes  [...]eſette with golde
and pretious ſtone, in ſuche ſorte that ſhe ſéemed to be ſome noble Matron:
And there was an olde man whiche followed her: who (as ſone as he had eſpied
me) ſaid to him ſelfe, verely this is Lucius, and then he came and embraſed
me, and by and by he went vnto his miſtres, and whiſpered in her eare, & came
to me againe, ſaiynge: How is it Lu­cius, that you will not ſalute your déere
coſin and ſin­guler fréende? To whome I anſwered: Sir I dare not be ſo bolde
as to take acquaintance of an vnknowen woman: how be it as halfe aſhamed I
drewe towardes her, and ſhe turned her ſelfe and ſaid: Beholde how he
reſembleth the very ſame grace as his mother Saluia doth, beholde his
countenaunce and ſtature agreyng thereto in eche point, beholde his comely
ſtate, his fine ſelendernes, his vermilion colour, his heare yellow by nature,
his graye and quicke eies like vnto the Egle, and his trimme and comely gate
which doo ſufficiently proue him to be ye naturall childe of Saluia: And
more­ouer ſhe ſaide: O Lucius I haue nouriſhed thée with mine owne proper
handes, and why not? For I am not onely of kinr [...]de vnto thy mother by
bloude, but alſo by nourice, for we both deſcended of the ligne of Plutarche,
lay in one belly, ſucked the ſame pappes, & brought vp together in one houſe:
And further there is [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=20) no other
difference betwene vs twoo, but that ſhe is married more honorably then I: I
am the ſame Byr­rhena whome you haue often harde named, emongeſt your freendes
at home. Wherefore I pray you to take the paines as to come with me to my
houſe, and vſe it as your owne, at whoſe woordes I was partely aba­ſhed, and
ſaid: God forbid coſin that I ſhoulde forſake mine hoeſt Mylo without any
iuſte & reaſonable cauſe, but verely I will (as often as I haue occaſion to
paſſe by your houſe) come and ſée how you doo: And while we went talkinge thus
together, by litle & litle, we came to her houſe, and beholde the gate of the
ſame very beautiful ſet with pillors quadrāglewiſe, on the toppe whereof
weare placed carued ſtatues and images, but principallie the goddeſſe of
Victorie was ſo liuely and with ſuch excellencie portraide and ſet foorth,
that you would verely haue thought that ſhe had flied, and ho­  [...]ered with
her winges hither and thither. On the con­trary parte, y• image of y• goddeſſe
Diana was wrought in white marble, whiche was a meruelous ſight to ſée, for
ſhe ſéemed as though the winde did blowe vp her garmentes, and that ſhe did
encounter with them that came into the houſe: on eche ſide of her, were Dogges
made of ſtone, that ſéemed to menace with their firie eies, their pricked
eares, their bended noſethrilles, and their grinning téeth, in ſuch ſorte that
you would haue thought they had bayed and barked: And moreouer (which was a
greater meruell to beholde) the excellent caruer & deuiſer of this worke had
faſhioned y• dogges to ſtande vp fierſly with their former féete, and their
hinder féete on the ground readie to fight. Behinde the backe of the Goddeſſe
was carued a ſtone in manner of a cauerne, enuironed with moſſe, hearbes,
leaues, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=21)
Sprigges, gréene braunches, and bowes, growingi [...] and aboute the ſame, in
ſo muche that within the ſtone it gliſtened and ſhone meruelouſly, vnder the
brimme of the ſtone hanged appels and grapes carued finely, wherein arte
(enulynge nature) ſhowed his great cun­ninge: For they were ſo liuelie ſet
out, that you would haue thought (if Sommer had bene come) they might haue
bene pulled and eaten, and while I behelde the runninge water, whiche ſéemed
to ſpringe and leape vnder the féete of the Goddeſſe, I marked the grapes
whiche hanged in the water, whiche were like in eue­rie point to the grapes of
the vine, and ſéemed to moue and ſtirre by violéce of the ſtreame, moreouer
emongſt the braunches of the ſtone appeared the image of Ac­teon, And how that
Diana (whiche was carued with­in the ſame ſtone ſtandinge in the water becauſe
he did ſée her naked) did tourne him into a harte, and ſo he was torne and
ſlayne of his owne houndes. And while I was greatly delighted with the view of
theſe thinges, Birrhena ſpake to me and ſaide: Coſin, all thinges here be at
your commaundement. And there, withall ſhe willed ſecretely the reſidewe to
departe, who being gone ſhe ſaid: My moſt déere coſin Lucius I ſweare by this
goddeſse Diana that I doo greatly ten­der your ſafetie, and am as carefull for
you, as if you were mine owne natural childe, beware I ſay, beware of the
euill artes & wicked allurementes of that Pam­philes that is the wife of Milo,
whome you call your hoſte, for ſhe is accompted the moſte chiefe and
princi­pall Magicien and enchantereſſe liuing, who by brea­thinge out certaine
woordes and charmes ouer bowes, ſtones, and other friuolous things, can throwe
down all the powers of the Heauens into the déepe bottome [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=21) of Hell, and
reduce all the whole worlde againe to the olde Chaos: For as ſoone as ſhe
eſpieth any comely yonge man, ſhe is foorthwith ſtroken with his loue, and
preſently ſetteth her whole minde and affection on him: She ſoweth her ſéede
of flatterie,Yonge men are prone to fall in­to the daunger of loue. ſhe
inuades his ſprite, and entangleth him with continuall ſnares of vnmeaſurable
loue. And then, if any accorde not to her filthie deſire, or if they ſéeme
lotheſome in her eye, by and by in the moment of an hower ſhe either turneth
them into ſtones, ſhéepe, or ſome other beaſte as ſhe her ſelfe pleaſeth, and
ſome ſhe preſentely ſ [...]eaeth and murdreth, of whome I woulde you ſhould
earneſtly beware. For ſhe burneth continually, and you, by reaſon of your
tender age and comely beawtie are capable of her fire and loue: This with
great care Birrhena gaue me in charge, but I (that alwaies co­ueted and
deſired, after that I harde talke of ſuche Sorcerye and Witchecrafte, to be
experienced in the ſame) litle eſtéemed to beware of Pamphiles, but willingely
determined to beſtowe my money in lear­ninge of that arte, and nowe whollie to
become a Witche: And ſo I wared ioyefull and wringinge my ſelfe out of her
companie, as out of linkes or chaines, I badde her farewell, and departed
towardes the houſe of mine hoſte Milo, by the waye I reaſoned thus with my
ſelfe: O Lucius, nowe take héede, be vigilant, haue a good care, for nowe thou
haſte time and place to ſatiffie thy deſire, nowe ſhake of thy shil­diſhneſſe
and ſhowe thy ſelfe a man, but ſpecially temper thy ſelfe from the loue of
thine Oſteſſe, and abſtayne from violation of the bedde of Milo, but hardely
attempte to winne the maiden Fotis for ſhe is beautifull, wanton, and pleaſant
in talke. And ſon [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=22) when thou
goeſt to ſleape,Time, place, and occaſion tēpteth a man muche. and when ſhe
bringeth thée gently into thy chamber, & tenderly layeth the downe in thy
bedde, and louingly couereth thée, and kiſſeth thée ſweetly, and departeth
vnwillingly, and caſteth her eies oftentimes backe and ſtandes ſtill, then
haſte thou a good occaſion miniſtred vnto thée, to proue and trie the minde of
Fotis. Thus while I reaſoned with my ſelfe, I came to Milos doore perſeueringe
ſtill in my purpoſe, but I founde nether Milo nor his wife at home.

¶How Apuleius fell in loue with Fotis.

### 2.2. Cap. 9.

WHen I was within the houſe I foūd my déere and ſwéete loue Fotis minſing of
meate, and makinge potage for her Maſter and Miſtris, the cupborde was all ſet
with wines, and I thought I ſmelled the ſauer of ſome deintie meates, ſhe had
about her middle a white and cleane apron, and ſhe was gir­ded about her bodie
vnder her pappes with a ſwathell of redde ſilke, and ſhe ſtirred the potte and
turned the meate with her fayre and white handes, in ſuch ſorte that with
ſtirringe and turninge the ſame, her loines, and hippes did likewiſe moue and
ſhake, whiche was in my minde a comely ſight to ſée. Theſe thinges when I
ſawe, I was halfe amaſed, and ſtoode muſinge with my ſelfe, and my courage
came then vpon me, whiche before was ſkant. And I ſpake vnto Fotis merely, and
ſaid: O Futis, how trimly you can ſtirre the potte, and how finelie (with
ſhakinge your buttockes) you can make potage. O happy and twiſe happy is he to
whom you giue leaue & licence but to touche you there: Then ſhe being likewiſe
merely diſpoſed gan anſweare: De­part [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=22) I ſay miſer from
me, departe from my fire,The like ſaying hath Terence. for if the  [...]ame
thereof doo neuer ſo litle blaſe foorth, it will burne thée e [...]tremely:
and none can extinguiſhe the heate therof, but I alone who in ſtirring the
potte, and makinge the bedde can ſo finely ſhake my ſelfe: when ſhe had ſaied
theſe woordes, ſhe caſt her eies vpon me and laughed, but I did not departe
from thence vntill ſuch time as I had viewed her in euery point: but what
ſhould I ſpeake of others? when as I doo accuſtome a­broade to marke and viewe
the face and heare of euery dame, and afterwardes delight my ſelfe therwith
pri­uately at home, and thereby iudge the reſidew of their ſhape, becauſe the
face is the principall parte of all the bodie, and is firſte open to our eies:
And whatſoeuer flouriſhyng and gorgeous apparell doth worke and ſet foorth in
the corporal partes of a woman, the ſame doth the naturall and comely beautie
ſet out in the face. Moreouer there be diuers, that (to the intent to ſhowe
their grace and feature) will caſt of their partlettes, collars,
habillimentes, frontes, cornettes & krippins, and doo more delight to ſhowe
the fairenes of their ſkinne, then to decke them ſelues vp in golde and
pre­tious ſtone. But becauſe it is a crime vnto me to ſay, ſo and to giue no
example thereof, know ye: that if you ſpoile and cut of the heare of any womā
or depriue her of the colour of her face, though ſhe weare neuer ſo ex­cellent
in beautie, though ſhe weare throwen downe from heauen, ſpronge of the ſeas,
nouriſhed of the floudes, though ſhe weare Venus her ſelfe, though ſhe weare
accōpanied with the Graces, though ſhe weare wayted vpon of all the courte of
C [...]pide, though ſhe weare grided with her beautifull ſkarfe of loue, and
though ſhe ſmelled of perfumes and muſkes, yet if ſhe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=23) appered
balde: ſhe coulde in no wiſe pleaſe,  [...]o, not her owne Vulcanus. O how
well doth a fayre colour, and a ſhininge face agrée with glitteringe heare?
Beholde it encoūtereth with the beames of the ſunne, and plea­ſeth the eie
meruelouſly. Sometimes the beautie of the heare reſembleth the colour of Golde
and honie, ſome­times the blewe plume and aſured feathers about the neckes of
dooues, eſpecially when it is either annoin [...] ­ted with the gumme of
Arabia, or trimlie tufte out with the téeth of a fine combe, whiche if it be
tied vp in the pole of the necke, it ſéemeth to the louer (that behol­deth the
ſame) as a glaſſe that yeldeth foorth a more pleaſant and gratious comelines
then if it ſhoulde be ſparſed abroade on the ſhoulders of the woman or hāge
downe ſcatteringe behinde. Finally, there is ſuche a dignitie in the heare,
that what ſo euer ſhe be, though ſhe neuer be ſo brauely attired with golde,
ſilkes, pre­tious ſtones, and other riche & gorgeous ornamentes, yet if her
heare be not curiouſly ſet foorth, ſhe cannot ſéeme faire. But in my Fotis,
her garmentes vnbraſte and vnlaſte, did encreaſe her beautie, her heare hanged
aboute her ſhoulders, and was diſparſed abroade vpon her partlette, and in
euery parte of her necke, howbeit the greater parte was truſſed vp in her pole
with a lace: Then I vnable to ſuſtaine the broylinge heate, whiche I was in,
ranne vpon her and kiſſed the place, where ſhe had thus layd her heare,
whereat ſhe turned her face, and caſt her rollinge eies vpon me, ſaying: O
ſchollar thou haſt taſted now both hony and galle, take héede that thy
pleaſure doo not turne into repentance: tuſhe (ꝙ I) my ſwéete harte, I am
contented for ſuch an other kiſſe to be broyled here vpō this fier,
wherwithal I embraſed & kiſſed her more often, and ſhe embraſed [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=23) and kiſſed me
likewiſe, and moreouer her breath ſmel­led like ſinnamome, and the licour of
her tongue was like vnto ſwéete Nectar, wherewith when my minde was greatly
delighted, I ſaide: beholde Fotis I am yours, & ſhall preſently die, vnleſſe
you take pitie vpon me, which when I had ſaid, ſhe eftſoones kiſſed me and
bidde me be of good courage, and I will (ꝙ ſhe) ſatiſfie your whole deſire,
and it ſhalbe no lenger delaied then vntill night, when as (aſſure your ſelfe)
I will come and lie with you, wherefore goe your waies & prepare your ſelfe,
for I entende valiantly, and couragiouſly to encounter with you this night:
Thus when we had lo­uingly talked and reaſoned together, we departed for that
time.

¶How Birrhena ſente victuales vnto Apuleius, and how he talked with Milo, of
Diophanes, and how be laye With Folis.

### 2.3. Cap. 10.

WHen noone was come Birrhena ſent vnto me a fatte pigge, fiue hennes, and a
flagon of old wine. Then I called Fotis and ſaide,Such meate f [...] ­reth vp
[...] excidingh. beholde how Bacchus the egger and ſtirrer of venerie doth of
fer him ſelfe of his owne accorde, let vs therfore drinke vp this wine, that
we may prepare our ſelues, and get vs courage againſt ſoone, for Uenus wanteth
no other prouiſion then this, that the lampe may be al the night replemſhed
with oyle, & the cuppes filled with wine: The reſidewe of the day I paſſed
away at the baines, and in banquettinge, and towardes eueninge I went to
ſupper, for I was bidde by Milo, and ſo I ſat downe at the table, out of
Pāphiles ſight as much as I could, beinge mindefull of the commaundement of
Birrhena [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=24) and
ſometimes I wonlde caſte mine eies vpon her, as if I ſhoulde loke vpon the
furies of Hell, but I (eſ [...] ­ſones turninge my face behinde me, and
beholding my Fotis miniſtringe at the table) was againe refreſhed and made
merie. And beholde when Pamphiles did ſee the candell ſtandinge on the table,
ſhe ſaide, verely we ſhall haue muche raine to morrow, whiche when her
huſbande did here, he demaunded of her, by what reaſon ſhe knew it: Marry (
[...] ſhe) the light on the table doth ſhowe the fame:then Milo laughed and
ſaide, vs­rely we neuriſhe and bringe vp a Sibelle prophecier, whiche by the
viewe of a candell doth diuine of Cele­ſtiall thinges, and of the Sunne it
ſelfe: Then I mu­ſed in my minde and ſaide vnto Milo: Of truth it is a good
experience and proufe of diuination, neither is it any maruell, for although
this light is but a ſmall light and made by the handes of man, yet hath it a
re­membrance of that great and heauenly light, as of his parent, and dothe
ſhowe vnto vs, what will happen in the ſkies aboue: For I knewe at Corinthe a
cer­taine man of Aſſiria, who woulde giue anſweares in euery parte of the
Citie, and for the gaine of money woulde tell euery man his fortune, to ſome
he would tell the daies of their marriages, to other he woulde tell when they
ſhould builde, that their edifices ſhould continue: to other, when they ſhould
beſt goe about their aſſayres: to other when they ſhould trauell by lande: to
other when they ſhould goe by ſeas: and to me (purpoſinge to take my iourney
hither) he decla­red many thinges ſtraunge and variable. For ſome­times he
ſaide that I ſhould winne glory  [...]nough, ſom­times he ſaide, I ſhoulde
write a great Hiſtorie, ſome­times againe he ſaide, that I ſhould deuiſe an
incredi­ble [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=24) tale, and
ſometimes, that I ſhould make B [...]okes. Whereat Milo laughed againe, and
enquired of me of what ſtature this man of Aſſiria was, and what he was named:
In faith (ꝙ I) he is a talle man, and ſome­what blacke and he is called
Diophanes. Then ſayde Milo the ſame is he and no other, who ſemblablie hath
declared many thinges here vnto vs, whereby he gotte and obtained great
ſubſtance and treaſure. But the poore miſer fell at length into the handes of
vnpi­tifull and cruell fortune. For beinge on a day emongſt a great aſſemblie
of people, to tell the ſimple ſorte their fortune, a certayne Cobler came vnto
him,A pretie tale. and deſired him to tell when it ſhoulde be beſt for him to
take his voiage, the which he promiſed to doo: the Cob­ler opened his purſe,
and tolde a hundred pence to pay him for his paines, whereupon came a certaine
yonge Gentleman, & toke Diophanes by the garment: Then he turninge him ſelfe
embraſed and kiſſed him, and de­  [...]ired the Gentelman (who was one of his
acquain­tance) to ſitte downe by him. And Diophanes beinge aſtonied with this
ſodaine chaunce forgatte what he was doyng, & ſaid: O déere fréend you are
hartely wel­come, I pray you when arriued you into theſe partes: then
anſweared he I will tell you ſoone, but brother I pray you to tell me of your
comminge from the Iſle of Euboea, and how you ſpedde by the way, whereunto
Diophanes (this notable Aſſirian, not yet come vnto his minde but halfe
amaſed) gaue anſweare and ſaide, I would to God that all our enemies and euill
willers mighte fall into the like daungerous peregrination and trouble, for
the ſhippe where we were in, (after that it was by the waues of the ſeas, and
by the great tempeſtes t [...]ſſed hither and thither, in great perill,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=25) and after
that the maſte and ſterne brake likewiſe in pieces) coulde in no wiſe be
brought vnto the ſhore, but ſonke into the water, and ſo we did ſwimme and
hard­ly eſcape to lande: and after that, what ſo euer was geuen vnto vs, in
recompence of our loſſes, either by the pitie of ſtraungers or by the
beneuolence of our fréendes, was taken away from vs by théeues,D [...]ophanes
tolde the fortune of others, but his owne he coulde not tell. whoſe violence
when my brother Ariſuatus did aſſay to re­ſiſte, he was cruelly murdered by
them before my face. Theſe thinges when he had ſadly declared, the cobler toke
vp his money againe, whiche he had tolde out to paye for the tellinge of his
fortune and ranne away: Then Diophanes cōming to him ſelfe, perceaued what he
had done, and we all that ſtoode by laughed greatly. But that, (ꝙ Milo) which
Diophanes did tell vnto you Lucius, that you ſhould be happy, and haue a
proſpe­rous iourney, was onely true: Thus Milo reaſoned with me, but I was not
a litle ſorie in that I had trai­ned him in ſuch a vaine of talke, that I loſt
a good parte of the night, and the ſweete pleaſure thereof, but at length I
boldely ſaide vnto Milo. Let Diophanes fare­well with his euill fortune, &
gette againe that whiche he loſt by ſea and lande, for I verely doo yet féele
the werines of my trauell, wherefore I pray you perdon me, and giue me licēce
to departe to hedde, wherwith­all I roſe vp & went vnto my chamber, where I
found al thinges finely prepared, and the childrens bedde (be­cauſe they
ſhould not here, what we did in the night) was remoued farre of without the
chamber doore. The table was all couered with ſuche meates as was leſte at
ſupper, the cuppes were filled halfe full with water to temper & delay the
wines, the flaggon ſtoode readdy prepared, and there did nothinge lacke which
was ne­ceſſarie [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=25) for the
preparatiō of Venus: And when I was enteringe into the bedde, beholde my
Fotis (who had brought her miſtris to ſléepe) came in & gaue me roſes and
flowers, whiche ſhe had in her apron, and ſome ſhe threwe about the bedde, and
ſhe kiſſed me ſwéetely, & tied a garlande aboute my head, and beſpred the
cham­ber with the reſidewe. Whiche when ſhe had done, ſhe toke vp a cuppe of
wine, and delaide it with whote wa­ter, and proffred it me to drinke, & before
I had drunke vp all, ſhe pulled it from my mouth, and then gaue it me againe,
and in this manner we emptied the potte twiſe or thriſe together. Thus when I
had well reple­niſhed my ſelfe with wine, and was now readie vnto Venerie not
onely in minde but alſo in bodie, I remo­ued my clothes, and (ſhowinge to
Fotis my great im­paciencie) I ſaid, O my ſwéete harte take pitie vpon me and
helpe me: for as you ſée, I am now prepared vnto the battaile whiche you your
ſelfe did appointe, for af­ter that I felte the firſt arrow of cruell Cupide
within my breſt, I bent my howe very ſtronge, and now feare (becauſe it is
bended ſo harde) leaſt the ſtringe ſhould breake, but that thou maiſt the
better pleaſe me, vn­dreſſe thy heare and come and embraſe me louingly,
wherewithall (ſhe made no longe delaye) but ſet aſide all the meate and wine,
and then ſhe vnapparelled her ſelfe, and vnatired her heare, preſentinge her
amiable bodie vnto me, in manner of fayre Venus, when ſhe goeth vnder the
waues of the ſea. Now (ꝙ ſhe) is come the howre of iuſtinge, now is come the
time of warre, wherefore ſhowe thy ſelfe like vnto a man, for I will not
retire, I will not flie the fielde, ſée then thou be va­liant, ſée thou be
couragious ſince, there is no time ap­pointed when our ſkirmiſhe ſhal ceaſe:
In ſaying theſe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=26) woordes ſhe
came to me to bedde, and embraſed me ſwéetely, and ſo we paſſed all the night
in paſtime and pleaſure, and neuer ſlept till it was day: but we would
eftſoones refreſhe our werines, and prouoke our plea­ſure, and renewe our
Venerie by drinkinge of wine. In whiche ſorte we pleaſauntly paſſed away many
other nightes followinge.

¶How Apuleius ſupped with Birrhena, and what a ſtraunge tale Bellephoron tolde
at the table.

### 2.4. Cap. 11.

IT fortuned on a daie that Birrhena deſired me ear­neſtly to ſuppe with her,
and ſhe woulde in no wiſe take any excuſation. Whereupon I went vnto Fo­tis to
aſke counſell of her as of ſome diuine, who (al­though ſhe was vnwilling y• I
ſhould departe one foote from her companie) yet at length ſhe gaue me licence
to be abſent for a while, ſaying: beware that you  [...]acry not longe at
ſupper there, for there is a rabblement of commō barrators and diſturbers of
the publique peace that roueth about in the ſtreates, and murdreth al ſuch as
they may take, neither can lawe nor iuſtice redreſſe them in any caſe. And
they will the ſooner ſette vpon you, by reaſon of your comelines and
audacitie, in that you are not affeard at any time to walke in ye ſtréetes.
Then I anſweared and ſaide, haue no care of me Fo­tis, for I eſtéeme the
pleaſure whiche I haue with thée, aboue the deintie meates that I eate
abroade, & there­fore I will returne againe quickely. Neuertheleſſe I minde
not to come without companie, for I haue here my ſwoorde, whereby I hope to
defende my ſelfe. And ſo in this ſorte I went to ſupper, and beholde I founde
at Birrhenas houſe a great companie of ſtraungers, [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=26) and of the
chiefe and principall of the Citie, the beddes (made of Citorne and Yuorie)
were richly adornde and ſpredde with clothe of Golde, the cuppes were
garni­ſhed pretiouſly, and there was diuers other thinges of ſondrie faſhion,
but of like eſtimation and price: here ſtoode a glaſſe gorgeouſly wrought,
there ſtoode an o­ther of Criſtall finely painted, there ſtoode a cuppe of
glitteringe Siluer, and here ſtoode a nother of ſhinyng Golde, and here was an
other of Ambre artificially carued, and made with pretious ſtones: Finally
there was all thinges that might be deſired, the Seruiters waited orderly at
the table in riche apparell, the pages arrayed in ſilke robes did fill great
gemmes, & pearles made in forme of cuppes with excellent wine, then one
brought in candelles and torches: and when we weare ſette downe and placed in
order, we began to talke, to laugh and be merie. And Birrhena ſpake vnto me,
and ſaide: I pray you Coſin how like you our countrey? Verely I thinke there
is no other Citie which hath the like Temples, Baynes, and other commodities
as we haue here: Further we haue aboundance of houſehold-ſtuffe, we haue
pleaſure, we haue eaſe, and when the Romaine marchantes doo arriue in this
Citie, they are gentely and quietly entertained, and all that dwell within
this prouince (when they purpoſe to ſolace and repoſe them ſelues) doo come to
this Citie. Whereunto I anſweared: Verely (ꝙ I) you tell truthe, for I can
finde no place in all the worlde, whiche I like better then this, but I
greatly feare, the blinde and incuita­ble trenches of Witchcrafte, for they
ſay that the dead bodies ar digged out of their graues, & the bones of thē
that are burned be ſtolen away, & the toes & fingers of ſuch as are ſlaine, be
cut of to afflicte and torment ſuch
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=27) as li
[...]e: And the olde Witches aſſone as they heare of the death of any perſon,
doo foorthwith goe & vncouer the hearſe, & ſpoile the corpſe, to worke their
enchaunt­mentes: Then an other ſittinge at the table ſpake and ſaide, in faith
you ſay true, neither yet doo they ſpare or fauour the liuinge. For I know one
not farre henſe that was cruelly handled by them, who (being not con­tented
with cuttinge of his noſe) did likewiſe cut of his eares, whereat all the
companie laughed hartely, and looked vpon one that ſatte at ye boordes ende,
who being amaſed at their ga [...]inge, and ſomewhat angry withal, would haue
ryſen from the table, had not Birrhena ſpake vnto him & ſaide: I pray the
fréende Telepheron ſitte ſtill, and accordinge to thy accuſtomed curteſie,
declare vnto vs the loſſe of thy noſe and eares, to the ende that my coſin
Lucius may be delighted with the pleaſauntnes of the tale: To whome he
anſweared, a dame you in the office of your bountie ſhall preuaile herein, but
the inſolencie of ſome is not to be ſuppor­ted. This he ſpake very angerly,
but Birrhena was earneſt vpon him & aſſured him that he ſhould haue no wronge
at no mans hande, whereby he was enforced to declare the ſame: And ſo
(lappinge vp the ende of the table cloth and carpette together) he leaned with
his elbow thereon, and helde out the thrée forefingers of his right hande in
manner of an Oratour, and ſaide: When I was a yonge man I wente vnto a
certayne Citie called Milet,A pl [...]aſant tale. to ſée the games and
triūphes there called Olympia, and beinge deſirous to come into this famous
prouince, after that I had traueled ouer all Theſſalie, I fortuned in an euell
houre to come to the Citie Lariſſa, where (while I went vp and downe to
[...]ewe the ſtréetes, to ſéeke ſome reliefe for my poore [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=27) eſtate, (for I
had ſpent al my money) I eſpied a talle old man ſtanding vpon a ſtone, in the
middeſt of the mar­kette place, cryinge with a loude voice, and ſayinge: that
if any mā would watche a dead corpſe that night, he ſhould be reſonably
rewarded for his paines: which when I harde, I ſaid to one that paſſed by:
what is here to doo, doo dead men vſe to runne away in this coun­trie. Then
anſweared he: holde your peace for you are but a babe and a ſtraunger here,
and not without cauſe you are ignorant how you are in Theſſalie, where the
women Witches doo bite of by morſelles the fl [...]ſhe of the faces of dead
men, and thereby woorke their Sorce­ries and enchauntmentes. Then (ꝙ I) in
good fellow­ſhippe tell me the order of this cuſtodie and how it is: Marry (ꝙ
he) firſt you muſt watche all the night, with your eies bent continuallie vpon
the corpſe, neuer loo­kinge of nor mouinge aſide: For theſe Witches doo turne
them ſelues into ſundry kinde of beaſtes, wher­by they deceaue the eies of all
men, ſometimes they are tranſformed into birdes, ſometimes into dogges, and
myce, & ſomtimes into flies, moreouer they wil charme the keapers of the
corpſe a ſleape, neither cā it be decla­red what meanes and ſhiftes theſe
wicked women doo vſe to bring their purpoſe to paſſe: and the rewarde for ſuch
daungerous watchinge is no more then fower or fire ſhillinges: but herken
further, which I had welny forgotten, if the keper of the dead bodie doo not
render (on the morninge following) the corps whole & ſounde as he receaued y•
ſame, he ſhalbe puniſhed in this ſorte. That is: if the corpſe be diminiſhed
or ſpoyled in any parte of his face handes or toes, the ſame ſhalbe
dimi­niſhed and ſpoyled in the keper. Whiche when I harde I toke a good harte
and went vnto the crier, and bidde
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=28) him ceaſſe,
for I would take the matter in hande, and ſo I demaunded what I ſhould haue:
Marry (ꝙ he) a thouſand pence, but beware I ſay yonge man that you doo well
defende the dead corps from the wicked Wit­ches, for he was the ſonne of one
of the chiefeſt of the Citie: Tu [...]he (ſaid I) you ſpeake you can not tell
what, beholde I am a man made all of yron, and haue neuer deſire to ſleape,
and am more quicke of ſight then Lynx or Argus. I had ſkarſe ſpoken theſe
woordes, when he toke me by the hande, and brought me to a certaine houſe, the
gate whereof was cloſed faſte, ſo that I went thorough the wicket, then he
brought me into a chamber ſomewhat darke, and ſhowed me a matron clothed in
mourninge veſture and wepinge in lamen­table wiſe: And he ſpake vnto her and
ſaide: Beholde, here is one that will enterpriſe to watche the corpſe of your
huſbande this night, whiche when ſhe harde, ſhe turned her bloubered face
couered with her heare vnto me, ſaiyng: I pray you yonge mā take good héede,
and ſée well to your office: haue no care (ꝙ I) ſo that you will giue me any
thinge aboue that which is dewe to be giuen, wherewith ſhe was contented: And
then ſhe roſe and brought me into a chamber whereas the corpſe lay couered
with white ſhéetes, and ſhe called ſeuen witneſſes, before whome ſhe ſhowed
the dead bodie, and euery parte and parcell thereof, and (with wéepinge eies)
deſired them all to teſtifie the matter, whiche done ſhe ſaide theſe woordes
of courſe as fol­lowe: Beholde his noſe is whole, his eies ſalue, his eares
without ſcarre, his lippes vntoucht, & his chinne ſounde: All whiche was
written and noted in tables, & ſubſcribed with the hādes of the witneſſes to
confirme the ſame: which done, I ſaid vnto the matron: Madame [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=28) I pray you that
I may haue all thinges here neceſſa­rie: what is that? (ꝙ ſhe) marry ſaide I a
great lampe repleniſhed with oyle, pottes of wine, and water to delaye the
ſame, and ſome other drinke and deintie diſhe that was lefte at ſupper, then
ſhe ſhaked her head, and ſaide: Away foole as thou arte, thinkeſt thou to
playe the glutton here, and to looke for deintie meates, where ſo longe time
hath not bene ſéene any ſmoke at all? comeſt thou hither to eate, where we
ſhould wéepe and lament? and there withall ſhe turned backe and commaunded her
mayden Mirrhena to de­liuer me a lampe with oyle, which when ſhe had done,
they cloſed the chamber doore and departed. Nowe when I was alone I rubbed
mine eies, and armed my ſelfe to kéepe the corpſe, and to the intent I would
not ſleape, I beganne to ſinge, and ſo I paſſed the time till it was midnight,
when as beholde there crepte in a Weaſell into the chamber, and ſhe came
againſt me & put me in very great feare, in ſo muche that I marue­led greatly
of the audacitie of ſo little a beaſte. To whome I ſaide, gette thée hence
thou whore, and hie thée to thy fellowes, leaſt thou féele my fingers? why
wilt not thou goe? Then incontinently ſhe ranne a­way, and when ſhe was gonne,
I fell on the grounde ſo faſte a ſléepe, that Apollo him ſelfe could not
diſcerne whether of vs twoo was the dead corpſe, for I lay pro­ſtrate, as one
without lyfe, and néeded a keper like­wiſe. At length the cockes beganne to
crowe declaring that it was daye, wherewithall I waked and (beynge greatly
affeard) ran vnto the dead bodie with the lāpe in my hande, and I viewed him
roūde about: And im­mediatly came in the Matron wéepinge with her wit­neſſes,
& ranne vnto the corpſe & eftſones kiſſinge him,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=29) turned his
body and found no parte diminiſhed: Then ſhe commaunded one Philodeſpotus her
ſtewarde to pay me my wages foorthwith, which whē he had done, he ſaide: we
thanke you gentle yonge man for your paines, and verely for your diligence
herein, we will accompte you as one of the familie. Whereunto I (be­inge
ioyeous of my vnhoped gaine, and ratlinge my money in my hande) did anſweare:
I pray you ma­dame eſtéeme me as one of your ſeruitours, and if you néede my
ſeruice at any time I am at your commaūde­ment. I had not fully declared
theſe woordes, when as beholde all the ſeruauntes of the houſe were aſſembled
with weapōs to driue me away, one buffeted me about the face, an other about
the ſhoulders, ſome ſtroke me in the ſides, ſome kicked me, and ſome tare my
gar­mentes, and ſo I was handled emongeſt them and dri­uen from the houſe (as
the proude yonge man Adonis who was torne by a Bore). And when I was come
in­to the next ſtreate, I muſed with my ſelfe and remem­bred mine vnwiſe and
vnaduiſed woordes which I had ſpoken, whereby I cōſidered that I had deſerued
much more puniſhmēt, and that I was woorthely beaten for my follie: And by
and by the corpſe came foorth, whiche (becauſe it was the bodie of one of the
chiefe of the Ci­tie) was carried in funerall pompe rounde aboute the markette
place, accordinge to the rite of the countrie there. And foorthwith ſtepped
out an olde man weping and lamentinge and ranne vnto the biere and embra­ſed
it, and with déepe ſighes & ſobbes cried out in this ſorte: O maiſters I pray
you by the faith whiche you profeſſe, and by the dutie whiche you owe vnto the
weale publique, take pitie and mercie vpon this dead corps, who is miſerablie
murdred, and doo vengeaunce [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=29) on this wicked
and curſed woman his wife, whiche hath committed this facte. For it is ſhe and
no other, that hath poyſoned her huſbande, my ſiſters ſonne, to the intent to
maintaine her whoredome and to get his heritage. In this ſorte the olde man
complained before the face of all the people. Then they (aſtonied at theſe
ſayinges and becauſe the thing ſéemed to be true) cried out, burne her, burne
her, and thei ſought for ſtones to throwe at her, and willed the boies in the
ſtreate to doo the ſame: but ſhe (wepinge in lamentable wiſe) did ſweare by
all the goddes that ſhe was not culpable of this crime. No (ꝙ the olde man)?
Beholde here is one ſente by the prouidence of God to trie out the matter,
euen Zachlas an Egiptian, who is the moſt principall Prophecier in all this
countrie, and who was hired of me for money to reduce the ſoule of this mā
from Hell, and to reuiue his bodie for the triall hereof. And there­withal he
brought foorth a certaine yonge man clothed in linnen rayment, hauing on his
féete a payre of pan­toffles, and his crowne ſhauen, who kiſſed his handes and
knées, ſaying: O Prieſt haue mercie, haue mercie, I pray thée by y• celeſtiall
Planetes, by the powers in­fernall, by the vertue of the naturall Elementes,
by the ſilences of the night, by the buildinges of ſwal­lowes nigh vnto the
towne of Copton, by the increaſe of the floode Nilus, by the ſecreate
miſteries of Mem­phis, and by the inſtrumentes and trumpettes of the Iſle
Pharos, haue mercie I ſay, and call againe to life this dead bodie, and make
that his eyes whiche be clo­ſed and ſhutte, may be opened & ſée, howbeit we
meane not to ſtriue againſt the lawe of death, neither entend we to depriue
the yearth of his right, but (to the ende this facte may he knowen) we craue
but a ſmall time
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=30) and ſpace of
life, whereat this Prophete was moued, and toke a certaine hearbe, & laide it
thrée times vpon the mouth of the dead, and he toke an other, and laide it
vpon his breſt in like ſorte: Thus when he had done, he turned him ſelfe int
[...] the Eaſt, and made certaine Oraiſons vnto the Sunne, which cauſed all
the people to maruell greatly, & to loke for this ſtraunge miracle that ſhould
happen: Then I preſſed in emongeſt them nigh vnto the biere, and gotte vpon a
ſtone to ſée this miſterie, and beholde incontinently the dead bodie be­gan to
receaue ſpirite, his principall vaines did moue, his life came againe and he
helde vp his head, & ſpake in this ſorte. Why doo you call me backe againe to
this tranſitorie life, that haue already taſted of the water of Leche, and
likewiſe bene in the deadlie denne of Stir? leaue of I pray, leaue of, and
lette me lie in quiet teſte: when theſe woordes were vttered by the dead
corpſe, the Prophete drewe nighe vnto the biere, and ſaide: I charge thée to
tell (before the face of all the peo­ple here) y• occaſion of thy death, what
doeſt thou thinke that I cannot by my comurations cal vp the dead? and by my
puiſſance tormēt thy bodie? Then che corps mo­ued vp his head againe, and
made reuerence vnto the people, & ſaid: Verely I was poiſoned by the meanes of
my wicked wife, & ſo thereby yelded my bedde vnto an adulterer. Whereat his
wife taking preſent audacitie, & reprouing his ſayings with a curſed minde,
did denie it: the people were bēt againſt her ſondry waies, ſome thought beſt
y• ſhe ſhould be buried aliue wt her huſbād, but ſome ſaid y• there ought no
credite to be giuen vnto the dead bodie, which opinion was cleane taken away
by the woordes that the corpſe ſpake againe, & ſaid: Be­holde I will giue you
ſome euident token, which neuer [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=30) yet any other
man knew, wherby you ſhall perceaue y• I declare the truth, & by and by he
pointed towardes me that ſtoode on the ſtone, & ſaide: when this, the good
gardian of my bodie watched me diligently in ye night, & that the wicked
Witches & enchantereſſes came into the chamber to ſpoile me of my limmes, & to
bryng ſuch their purpoſe to paſſe, did trāſforme them ſelues into ye ſhape of
beaſtes: And when as thei could in no wiſe de­ceaue or beguile his vigilant
eies, they caſt him into ſo dead & ſounde a ſleape that by their Wicthcrafte
he ſée­med without ſpirite or life. After this thei called me by my name, &
did neuer ceaſe till as the colde members of my bodie began by litle & litle
to reuiue: then he (being of more liuely ſoule, howbeit buried in ſleape, in
y• he & I weare named by one name, and becauſe he knew not that they called
me) roſe vp firſt, & as one without ſence or perſenerāce paſſed by the doore
faſt cloſed vnto a cer­taine hole, whereas the Witches cut of firſt his noſe,
& then his eares, & ſo that was done to him, whiche was appointed to be done
to me. And that ſuch their ſubtil­tie might not be perceaued, they made him a
like payre of eares and noſe of waxe, wherefore you may ſée that the poore
miſer for lucre of a litle money, ſuſtayned loſſe of his membres. Whiche when
he had ſaide, I was greatly aſtonied, and (mindinge to proue whether his
woordes were true or no) put my hande to my noſe, & my noſe fell of, and put
my hande to mine eares, and mine eares fel of. Whereat al y• people wondred
great­ly, and laughed me to ſkorne? but I (beinge ſtroken in a colde ſweate)
crept betwéene their legges for ſhame, & eſcaped away. So I diſfigured
returned home again, & couered the loſſe of mine eares, with my longe heare,
and glewed this cloute to my face to hide my ſhame.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=31) Aſſone as
Telephoron had tolde his tale, they whiche ſatte at the table, (repleniſhed
with wine) laughed har­telie. And while they drāke one to an other, Birrhena
ſpake to me, and ſaide: From the firſt foūdation of this Citie, we haue had a
cuſtome to celebrate the feſtiuall day of the God Kiſus, & to morrow is the
feaſt, when as I pray you to be preſent to ſette out the ſame more honorably,
and I would with all my harte that you could finde or deuiſe ſomwhat of your
ſelfe, that might be in honor of ſo great a God: to whome I anſweared: Verely
Coſin I will doo as you commaunde me, & right gladde would I be if I might
inuent any laughinge or mery matter to pleaſe or ſatiſfie Kiſus withall:Kiſus
the God if ſporte. Then I roſe from the table, and toke leaue of Birchena and
departed, and when I came into the firſte ſtreate my torche went out, that
with great paine I coulde ſkarſe gette home, by reaſon it was ſo darke, and
for feare of ſtomblinge. And when I was welny come vnto the doore, beholde I
ſaw thrée men of great ſtature heuinge and liftinge at Milos gates to gette
in. And when they ſawe me, they weare nothing affeard, but aſſaide with more
force to breake downe the doores, whereby they gaue me occaſion and not
without cauſe to thinke that thei weare ſtronge théeues. Wherupon I, by and
by, drew out my ſwoorde which I carried for that pur­poſe vnder my cloke, and
ranne in emongſt them, and wounded them in ſuch ſorte that they fell downe
dead before my face. Thus when I had ſlaine them all, I knocked, ſweating and
breathyng at the doore, till Fo­tis lette me in. And then full weary with the
ſlaugh­ter of theſe théeues, like Hercules when he fought a­gainſt the King
Gerion, I wente to my chamber and laide me downe to  [...]leape.

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=31)

## 3\. The thirde Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.

¶How Apuleius was taken and put in priſon for Murder.

### 3.1. Cap. 12.

WHen morninge was come, and that I was awaked from ſléepe, my harte burned
ſore, with remembraunce of the murder which I had committed the night before:
and I roſe and ſat downe on the ſide of the bedde, with my legges a croſſe,
and wringinge my handes, wepinge in miſerable ſorte. For I imagi­ned with my
ſelf, that I was brought before the iudge in the iudgement place, and that he
awarded ſentence againſt me, & that the hangeman was readdie to leade me to
the gallowes. And further I imagined, and ſaid: Alas what iudge is he that is
ſo gentle or benigne that will thinke that I am vugiltie of the ſlaughter &
mur­der of theſe thrée men? How be it, the Aſſirian Diopha­nes did firmely
aſſure vnto me, that my peregrination and voiage hither ſhould be proſperous.
But while I did thus vnfolde my ſorrowes, and greatly bewayle my fortune,
beholde, I harde a great noyes and crie at the doore, and in came the
Magiſtrates and Officers, who cōmaunded twoo ſergeantes to binde me, & leade
me to pryſon, whereunto I was willingly obedient, and as they ledde me
thorough the ſtreate, all the Ci­tie gathered together and followed me, and
although I looked alwaies on the grounde for very ſhame, yet ſometimes I caſt
my head aſide, and merueled greatly
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=32) that amongſt
ſo many thouſand people there was not one but laughed excéedingly. Finally,
when they had brought me thorough all the ſtréetes of the citie, in mā ­ner
of thoſe as goe in proceſſion, & doo ſacrafice to miti­gate the Ire of the
Gods, they placed me in the iudge­mēt hall, before the ſeate of the iudges: &
after that the crier cōmaunded all men to kéepe ſilence, the people de­ſired
the iudges to giue ſentence in the great Theatre by reaſon of y• great
multitude that was there, wherby thei weare in daunger of ſtifling. And
beholde y• preaſe of people encreaſed ſtil, ſome climed to the toppe of the
houſe, ſome gotte vpon the beames, ſome vpō the ima­ges, and ſome thruſt in
their heades through the win­dowes, litle regardyng the daunger they were in,
ſo they might ſee me. Then the officers brought me forth opēly into the midle
of the hall y• euery man might be­holde me. And after that the crier had made
an oies & willed all ſuche as would bringe any euidence againſt me ſhoulde
come forth, there ſtepped out an olde man, with a glaſſe of water in his
hande, droppyng out ſoft­ly, who deſired that he might haue libertie to ſpeake
duringe the time of the continuance of the water, which when it was graunted
he beganne his Oration in this ſorte.

¶How Apuleius was accuſed by an olde man, and how he anſweared for him ſelfe.

### 3.2. Cap. 13.

O Moſt reuerēde and iuſt iudges, the thinge which I purpoſe to declare vnto
you, is no ſmal matter but toucheth the eſtate and tranquillitie of this whole
Citie, and the puniſhment therof may be a right good example to others.
Wherefore I pray you moſte venerable fathers to whome, and to euery of whome
it [[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=32) doth
appertaine to prouide for the dignitie & ſafetie of the common weale, that you
would in no wiſe ſuffer this wicked homicide, embrewed with the bloud of ſo
many murdred Citizens to ſcape vnpuniſhed. And thinke you not y• I am moued
hereunto by enuie or ha­tred, but by reaſon of mine office in y• I am
capitaine of the night watche, and becauſe no man aliue ſhould ac­cuſe me to
be remiſſe in the ſame I will declare all the whole matter, orderly, as it was
done this laſt night.

This night paſt when as at our accuſtomed howre IThe inuectiue  [...] a­gainſt
Apuleius. diligently ſearched euery parte of the Citie: Behold, I fortuned to
eſpie this cruell yonge man, drawinge out his ſwoorde againſt thrée Citizens,
& after a longe com­bate foughten betwene them, he murdred one after an other
miſerably, which whē he had done (moued in his conſcience at ſo great a
crime) he ranne away, & ayded by reaſon of darkenes, ſlipt into a houſe &
there lay hid­den all night, but by the prouidence of the Gods, which
ſuffereth no heynous offences to remaine vnpuniſhed, he was takē by vs this
morninge before he eſcaped any further, & ſo brought hither to your honorable
preſence to receaue his deſert accordingly. So haue you here a giltie perſon,
a culpable homicide, & an accuſed ſtraun­ger, wherefore pronounce ye iudgement
againſt this man being an alien, when as you would moſt ſeuerely & ſharpely
reuenge ſuch an offence found in a knowen Citizen. In this ſort y• cruel
accuſer finiſhed & ended his terrible tale: then the crier commaunded me to
ſpeake, if I had any thinge to ſay for my ſelfe, but I could in no wiſe vtter
any woorde at all for wéepinge. And on the other ſide I eſtéemed not ſo much
his rigorous ac­cuſation, as I did conſider mine owne miſerable con­ſcience.
Howbeit (beinge inſpired by diuine audacitie)
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=33) at length I
ganne ſay:The anſweare of Apuleius. Verely I know that it is a hard thinge for
him, that is accuſed to haue ſlayne thrée per­ſons, to perſuade you that he is
not innocent although he ſhould declare the whole truth, & confeſſe the matter
how it was in déede, but if your Honours will vouch­ſalue to giue me audience,
I will ſhow you that if I be cōdemned to die, I haue not deſerued it by mine
owne deſerte, but that I was moued by fortune, and reaſo­nable cauſe to doo
that facte. For returninge ſomewhat late from ſupper yeſternight (beinge well
tippled with wine, whiche I will not denie) and approchinge nighe vnto my
common lodginge, which was in the houſe of one Milo a Citizen of this Citie, I
fortuned to eſpie thrée great Théeues attemptinge to breake downe his walles &
gates, and to open the lockes to enter in. And whē they had remoued the
doores out of the hookes, thei conſulted emongſt them ſelues, how they would
hādle ſuch as they founde in the houſe: And one of them be­yng of more
courage, & of greater ſtature then the reſt, ſpake vnto his fellowes, and
ſaide: Tuſhe you are but boyes, take mens hartes vnto you, and let vs enter
in­to euery parte of the houſe, & ſuche as we finde a ſléepe let vs ſlea, and
ſuch likewiſe as reſiſt let vs kill, and ſo by that meanes we ſhall eſcape
without daunger. Ve­rely, ye iudges, I confeſſe that I drew out my ſwoorde
againſt thoſe thrée citizens, but I thought that it was the office & duetie of
one that heareth good will to this weale publique ſo to doo, ſpecially ſince
they put me in great feare, and aſſayed to robbe and ſpoile mine hoſte Milo.
But when thoſe cruell and terrible men woulde in no caſe rūne away, nor feare
my naked ſwoorde, but boldly reſiſt againſt me, I ranne vpō them and fought
valiantly. One of them which was the Capitaine in­uaded [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=33) me ſtrongly, and
drewe me by the heare, with both his handes, and beganne to beate me with a
great ſtone, but in the ende I proued the hardier man, and threwe him downe at
my féete and killed him. I toke likewiſe the ſeconde that claſped about my
legges and bitte me, and ſlewe him alſo. And the thirde that came running
violently againſt me, after that I had ſtrokē him vnder the ſtomake fell
downe dead. Thus when I had deliuered my ſelfe, the houſe, mine hoſte, & all
his familie from this preſent daunger, I thought that I ſhould not onely
eſcape vnpuniſhed, but alſo haue ſome great rewarde of the Citie for my
paines. Moreouer I, that haue alwaies béene cléere and vnſpotted of crime, and
that haue eſtéemed mine innocencie aboue all the treaſure of the worlde, can
finde no reaſonable cauſe why vpon mine accuſation I ſhould be condemned to
die: ſince, Firſt I was moued to ſet vpō the théeues by iuſt occaſion:
Secondly, becauſe there is none that can affirme, that there hath bene at any
time either grudge or hatred betwene vs: Thirdly, we were men mere ſtraungers
and of no acquaintance: Laſt of all, no man can proue that I committed that
facte for any lucre or gaine. When I had ended my woordes in this ſort.
Be­holde, I wéeped againe pitiouſly, and holdinge vp my handes, I prayed all
the people by the mercie of the cō ­mon weale, and for the loue of my poore
infantes and children, to ſhowe me ſome pitie and fauour. And whē I ſawe
their hartes ſomewhat relented and moued by my lamentable teares, I called all
the Goddes to wit­neſſe that I was vngiltie of the crime, and ſo to their
diuine prouidence I committed my preſent eſtate, but turninge my ſelfe againe,
I perceaued that all the peo­ple laughed encéedingly, and eſpecially my good
fréende [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=34) and
hoſte Milo. Then thought I with my ſelfe: Alas where is faith? where is
remorſe of cōſcience? Beholde I am condemned to die as a murderer, for the
ſalue­garde of mine hoſte Milo and his familie. Yet is he not contented with
y•, but likewiſe laugheth me to ſkorne, where otherwiſe he ſhould comfort and
helpe me.

¶How Apuleius was accuſed by twoo women, and how the ſlaine bodies were founde
blowen bladders.

### 3.3. Cap. 14.

WHen this was done, out came a woman we­pinge into the middle of the Theatre
arrayed in mourninge veſture, and bearinge a childe in her armes. And after
her came an olde woman in ragged robes cryinge and howlinge likewiſe: And thei
brought with thē the Oliue bowes wherwith the thrée ſlaine bodies were
couered on the biere, and cried out in this māner: O right Iudges we pray you
by the iu­ſtice & humanitie whiche is in you, to haue mercie vpon theſe ſlaine
perſons, and ſuccour our widowhed and loſſe of our déere huſbandes, and
eſpecially this poore infant, who is now an orphan and depriued of all good
fortune: And execute your iuſtice by order & lawe vpon the bloud of this
théefe who is the occaſion of all our ſo­rowes. When they had ſpokē theſe
woordes, one of the moſt auncient iudges did riſe, and ſay: Touchinge this
murder which deſerueth great puniſhment, this male­factor him ſelfe cānot
denie, but our dutie is to enquire & trie out, whether he had no coadiutors to
helps him. For it is not likely, that one man alone could kill thrée ſuch
great & valiant perſons, wherefore the truth muſt be tried out by y• racke, &
ſo we ſhall learne, what other compaignions he hath, and coote out the neſt of
theſe miſcheuous murderers. And there was no long delay, [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=34) for accordinge
vnto the cuſtome of Grecia, the fire, the whele, & many other tormentes were
brought in: Thē my ſorow encreaſed or rather doubled, in y• I could not ende
my life with whole & vnperiſhed mēbers. And by & by the olde woman, who
troubled all the courte with her howling deſired the iudges that (before I
ſhould be tormented on the racke) I might vncouer the bodies which I had
ſlaine, y• euery man might ſée their comely ſhape & youthfull beautie, & that
I might receaue con­digne & woorthy puniſhment, according to y• qualitie of
the offence, and therewithall ſhe made a ſigne of ioye. Then y• iudge
cōmaūded me foorthwith to diſcouer the bodies of the ſlaine, liynge vpon the
biere, with mine owne handes, but whē I refuſed a good ſpace, by reaſon I
would not make my facte apparant to the eies of all men, the ſergeantes
charged me by cōmaundement of the iudges, and thruſt me forwarde to doo the
ſame: I then (beyng enforced by neceſſitie) though it weare againſt my will,
vncouered their bodies: but O good Lord, what a ſtraunge ſight did I ſée? what
a monſter? what ſodeine chaunge of all my ſorrowes? I ſéemed as though I weare
one of the houſe of Proſerpina, & of the familie of death, in ſo much y• I
could not ſufficiently expreſſe y• forme of this new ſight, ſo far was I
amaſed & aſtonied thereat: For why, the bodies of y• thrée ſlaine men were no
bodies, but thrée blowen bladders man­gled in diuers places, and they ſéemed
to be wounded in thoſe partes, where I remember I wounded the théeues the
night before: Whereat the people laughed excéedingely. Some reioyſed
meruelouſly with the re­membraunce thereof, ſome helde their ſtomakes that
aked with ioye, but euery mā delighted at this paſſyng ſporte, and ſo
departed out of the Theatre. But I from
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=35) the time
that I vncouered the bodies ſtoode ſtill as cold as iſe, no otherwiſe then as
the other ſtatues & images there, neither came I vnto my right ſenſes vntill
ſuch time as Milo mine hoſte came and toke me by the  [...]hād, and with
ciuill violence ledde me away wepinge and ſobbinge where I would or no: &
becauſe that I might not be ſéene, he brought me through many blind waies and
lanes to his houſe, where he wente about to com­fort me beinge ſadde and yet
fearefull, with gentle en­treatie of talke: but he coulde in no wiſe mitigate
my impaciencie of the iniurie whiche I conceiued within my minde. And behold,
by and by the Magiſtrates and Iudges with their enſignes entred into the houſe
and endeuored to pacifie me in this ſorte, ſaying: O Lucius we are aduertiſed
of your dignitie, and know the Ge­nelogie of your auncient lignage, for the
nobilitie of your kinne doo poſſeſſe the greateſt parte of al this pro­vince.
And thinke not that you haue ſuffred the thinge wherefore you wéepe, to any
your reproche or igno­minie, but put away all care and ſorrowe out of your
minde: For this day whiche we celebrate once a yéere in honour of the God
Riſus, is alwaies renoumpned with ſome ſolempne Nouell, and the god doth
cōtinu­ally accōpanie with the inuentor thereof, and will not ſuffer that he
ſhould be ſorowfull, but pleaſantly beare a ioyfull face. And verely al the
Citie for the grace that is in you, entende to rewarde you with great honours
& to make you a patron. And further that your ſtatue or image ſhalbe ſet vp
for a perpetuall remembraunce. To whome I anſweared: As for ſuche benefites as
I haue receaued alreadie of this famous Citie of Theſſa­lie, I yéelde and
render moſte entier thankes, but as  [...]ouchinge the ſettinge vp of any
ſtatues or images, I [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=35) would wiſhe that
they ſhould be reſerued for mine aū ­cientes and ſuch as are more woorthy
then I. When I had ſpoken theſe woordes ſomewhat grauely, & ſhowed my ſelf
nore merry then I was before, the Iudges and Magiſtrates departed, and I
reuerently toke my leaue of them and bidde them farewell. And beholde, by and
by there came one runnyng to me in haſt, and ſaid: Sir, your coſin Birrhena
deſireth you to take the paines, ac­cordinge to your promiſe yeſternight, to
come to ſup­per, for it is ready. But I greatly fearing to goe any more to her
houſe in the night, ſaid vnto y• meſſenger: My fréende I pray you to tell my
coſin your Miſteris that I would willingly be at her commaūdement, but for
breakinge my troth & credite. For mine hoſte Milo enforced me to aſſure him,
and cōpelled me by the feaw of this preſent day, that I ſhould not departe
from his companie, wherefore I pray you to excuſe me and to differ my promiſe
to an other time. And while I was ſpeakinge theſe woordes, Milo toke me by the
hande & ledde me towardes the next baine, but by the way, I went couchinge
vnder him to hide my ſelfe from the ſight of men, becauſe I had miniſtred ſuch
an occaſion of laughter: And when I had waſhed & wiped my ſelfe and returned
home againe, I neuer remembred any ſuch thing, ſo greatly was I aſhamed at the
noddinge and pointyng of euery perſon. Then I went to ſupper with Milo, where
God wotte we fared but poorely. Wherefore (feigninge that my head did ake by
reaſon of my ſobbinge & weping all the daie) I deſired licence to departe to
my chamber and ſo I went to bedde.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=36)

¶How Fotis tolde to Apuleius, what Witchcratie her Miſtris did vſe:

### 3.4. Cap. 15.

WHen I was a bedde I beganne to cal to minde al the ſorrowes and griefes that
I was in the day before vntill ſuch time as my loue Fotis (hauinge brought her
Miſtris to ſléepe) came into the chamber not as ſhe was wonte doo, for ſhe
ſéemed no­thinge pleaſant neither in countenance nor talke, but with a ſower
face & frowning looke, gan ſpeake in this ſorte. Verely, I confeſſe that I
haue bene the occaſion of all thy trouble this day, and therewithall ſhe
pulled out a whippe from vnder her apron, and deliuered it to me ſaying,
reuenge thy ſelfe of me miſchieuous har­lotte or rather ſlea me. And thinke
you not that I did willingly procure this anguiſhe and ſorrow vnto you I call
the Goddes to witneſſe. For I had rather ſuffer mine owne bodie to be
puniſhed, then that you ſhould receaue or ſuſtaine any harme by my meanes, but
that whiche I did was by the commaundement of an other, and wrought (as I
thought) for ſome other, but be­holde the vnlucky chaunce fortuned on you by
mine euil occaſion. Then I very curious & deſirous to know the matter,
anſweared: in faith (ꝙ I) this moſte peſti­lent & euill fauoured whippe
(whiche thou haſt brought to ſcourge thée withall) ſhall firſte be broken in a
thou­ſande pieces, then that it ſhould touch or hurte thy de­licate and
deintie ſkinne, but I pray you tell me, how haue you bene the cauſe and meane
of my trouble and ſorrowe. For I dare ſweare by the loue that I beare vnto
you, & I will not be perſwaded (though you your ſelfe ſhoulde endeuour the
ſame) that euer you wente about to trouble or harme me: Perhappes ſometimes
[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=36) you
imagined an euill thought in your minde, whiche afterwardes you reuoked but
that is not to be déemed as a crime. When I had ſpoken theſe woordes, I
per­ceaued by Fotis eies beinge wette with teares, and welnie cloſed vp, that
ſhe had a deſire vnto pleaſure, and ſpecially becauſe ſhe embraced & kiſſed me
ſwéete­ly. And when ſhe was ſomwhat reſtored vnto ioye ſhe deſired me that ſhe
might firſt ſhutte the chāber doore, leaſt by the vntemperance of her tongue
in vtteringe any vnſittinge woordes there might growe further in­conuenience.
Wherewithall ſhe barred and propped the doore and came to me againe, and
embraſing me lo­uingly about the necke with both her armes, ſpake wt a ſofte
voice and ſaide, I doo greatly feare to diſcouer the priuities of this houſe,
and to vtter the ſecrete mi­ſteries of my Dame: But I haue ſuche a confidence
in you and in your wiſedome, by reaſon that you ar come of ſo noble a ligne
and endewed with ſo profounde ſa­pience, and further enſtructed in ſo many
holy & diuine thinges, that you will faithfully kéepe ſilence, and that what
ſo euer I ſhall reueale or declare vnto you, you woulde cloſe them within the
bottome of your hart, and neuer diſcouer the ſame: for I enſure you the loue
that I beare vnto you enforceth me to vtter it. Now ſhall you knowe all the
eſtate of our houſe, nowe ſhall you knowe the hidden ſecreates of my Miſtris,
vnto whome the powers of Hell doo obaye, and by whome the celeſtiall Planettes
are troubled, the Goddes made weake, and the Elements ſubdued, nei­ther is the
violence of her arte in more ſtrength and force, then when ſhe eſpieth ſome
comely yonge man that pleaſeth her fancie as oftētimes it happeneth. For nowe
ſhe loueth one Beotian a fayre and beautifull
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=37) perſon, on
whome ſhe employeth all her ſorcery & en­chauntment, & I harde her ſay with
mine owne eares yeſternight, that (if the Sunne had not then preſently gone
downe, & the Hight come to miniſter conuenient time to woorke her Magicall
enticementes) ſhe would haue brought perpetuall darknes ouer all the worlde
her ſelf. And you ſhall know that when ſhe ſaw yeſter­night this Beotian
ſittinge at the barbours a polinge, when ſhe came from the baines, ſhe
ſecretely cōmaun­ded me to gather ſome of the heare of his head, whiche lay
diſperſed vpon the grounde, and to bringe it honie: whiche when I thought to
haue done, the Barbour eſpied me, and by reaſon it was bruted thorough out all
the Citie that we weare Witches and enchantreſ­ſes, he cried out, and ſaid:
Will you neuer leaue of ſtea­linge of yonge mens heares? In faith I aſſure you
vn­leſſe you ceaſe your wicked ſorceries, I will complaine to y• Iuſtices:
wherwithall he came angerly towardes me, & toke away the heare whiche I had
gathered, out of mine apron, whiche grieued me very muche. For I knew my
miſtris manners, that ſhe would not be con­tented, but beate me cruelly.
Wherfore I entended to runne away, but the remembrance of you put alwaies that
thought out of my minde, & ſo I came homewarde very ſorowfull, but becauſe I
would not ſéeme to come in my miſtris ſight with emptie handes, I ſawe a man
ſhearynge of blowen goate ſkinnes, and the heare that he had ſhorne of was
yellow, and much reſembled the heare of Beotian: And I toke a good deale
thereof, and colouringe the matter, brought it to my Miſtris. And ſo when
night came, before your retorne frō ſup­per, ſhe (to bringe her purpoſe to
paſſe) wente vp to a high gallery of her houſe, openyng to the Eaſt parte of
[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=37) the
worlde, and preparinge her ſelfe accordinge to her accuſtomed practiſe, ſhe
gathered together all her ſub­ſtance for fumigatiōs, ſhe brought forth plates
of met­tall carued with ſtraunge charecters, ſhe prepared the bones of ſuch as
were drowned by tempeſt in the ſeas, ſhe made reddy the mēbers of dead men,
as their noſe­thrilles and fingers, She ſette out the lumpes of fleſh of ſuche
as weare hanged, the bloudde whiche ſhe had reſerued of ſuch as weare ſlaine,
and the iawe bones, & téeth of wilde beaſtes, then ſhe ſaid certaine charmes
ouer the heare, and dipped it in diuers waters, as in well water, cowe milke,
mountaine hony and other li­cour, whiche when ſhe had done ſhe tied and lapped
it vp together, and with many perfumes and ſmelles threw it into a whote fire
to burne. Then by the great force of this ſorcerie, and the violence of ſo
many con­fections, thoſe bodies (whoſe heare was burnyng in the fire) receaued
humaine ſhape, and felte, hard, and wal­ked. And (ſmellinge the ſent of their
owne heare) came and rappid at our doores in ſtéede of Boetius. Thē you
beinge well tippled, & deceaued by the obſcuritie of the night, drewe out your
ſwoorde couragiouſly, like furi­ous Aiax, and killed, (not as he did the whole
hearde of beaſtes) but thrée blowen ſkinnes, to the intent that I after the
ſlaughter of ſo many enemies without effuſiō of bloud, might embrace and
kiſſe not an homicide but an Vtricide: thus when I was pleaſantly mocked and
taunted by Fotis, I ſaid vnto her: Verely, now may I for this atchieued
enterpriſe be numbred, as Hercules who by his valiaunt proweſſe perfourmed the
twelue notable labours, as Gerion with thrée bodies, and as Cerberus with
thrée heades. For I haue ſ [...]aine thrée blowen geate ſkinnes, but to the
ende that I may par­don
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=38) thée of that
whiche thou haſt committed, performe the thinge whiche I ſhall moſt earneſtly
deſire of thée, that is, bringe me that I may ſée and beholde when thy Miſtris
goeth about any Sorcerie or enchauntment, and when ſhe prayeth vnto the
Goddes, for I am ve­rie deſirous to learne that arte, and as it ſéemeth vnto
me, thou thy ſelfe haſte ſome experience in the ſame. For this I knowe and
plainely féele, that (whereas I haue alwaies yrked and lothed the embraſinges
and loue of Matrones) I am ſo ſtryken and ſubdued, with thy ſhininge eyes,
ruddy chéekes, glitteringe heare, ſwéete coſſes and lillie white pappes, that
I neither haue minde to goe home, nor to departe henſe, but eſtéeme the
pleaſure whiche I ſhall haue with thée this night, aboue all the ioyes of the
worlde: Then (ꝙ ſhe) O my Lucius how willinge would I be to fulfill your
deſire, but by reaſon ſhe is ſo hated, ſhe getteth her ſelfe into ſolitary
places, and out of the preſence of e­uerie perſon when ſhe mindeth to woorke
her enchant­mentes, how be it I regarde more to gratifie your re­queſt, then I
doo eſtéeme the daunger of my life: and when I ſée oportunitie and time I wil
aſſuredly bring you woorde, ſo that you ſhall ſée all her enchauntment, but
alwaies vpon this condicion that ye ſecreately keepe cloſe ſuche thinges as
are done: thus as we rea­ſoned together the courage of Venus aſſayled aſwell
our deſires as our members: And ſo ſhe vnrayed her ſelfe and came to bedde,
and we paſſed the nighte in paſtime and dalliance, till as by drowſie and
vnluſtie ſléepe I was conſtrained to lie ſtill.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=38)

¶Howe Fotis brought Apuleius to ſee her Miſtris Enchaunt.

### 3.5. Cap. 16.

ON a day Fotis came runninge to me in great feare, and ſaide that her Miſtris
(to worke her ſorceries on ſuch as ſhe loued) entēded, the night followinge,
to tranſforme her ſelfe into a birde, and to flie whither ſhe pleaſed,
wherefore ſhe willed me pri­uily to prepare my ſelfe to ſée the ſame. And whē
mid­night came ſhe ledde me ſoftly into a highe chamber, & bidde me looke
thorough the chinke of a doore. Where firſte I ſaw how ſhe put of all her
garmentes, and toke out of a certaine coffer ſondrie kinde of boxes, of the
which ſhe opened one and tempred the ointment ther­in with her fingers, and
then rubbed her bodie there­with frō the ſole of the foote to the crowne of
the head: And when ſhe had ſpoken priuilie with her ſelfe, ha­uinge the candle
in her hande ſhe ſhaked the partes of her bodie, and beholde I perceaued a
plume feathers did burgen out, her noſe waxed croked and harde, her nailes
turned into clawes, & ſo ſhe became an Owle: Then ſhe cried and ſkriched like
a birde of that kinde, & willinge to proue her force, moued her ſelfe from the
groūd by litle & litle, till at laſt ſhe flewe quight away: Thus by her
Sorcery ſhe tranſformed her body into what ſhape ſhe wold. Which whē I ſaw I
was great­ly aſtonied & although I was enchaunted by no kinde of charme, yet I
thought y• I ſéemed not to haue y• like­nes of Luciꝰ, for ſo was I baniſhed
frō my ſenſes ama­ſed in madnes, & ſo I dreamed wakinge, y• I felte mine eies
to know whether I weare a ſléepe or no. But whē I was come againe to my
ſelfe, I toke Fotis by y• hāde, & moued it to my face, & ſaid: I pray thée
while occaſion
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=39) doth ſerue
that I may haue the fruition of the fruictes of my deſire, and graunt me ſome
of this ointment. O Fotis I praye the by thy ſwéete pappes, to make that in
the great flames of my loue I may be turned into a birde, ſo will I euer
hereafter be boūde vnto you & obedient to your commaundement. Then ſaid Fotis
will you goe about to deceaue me now? and enforce me to worke mine owne
ſorrowe? Are you in that minde that you will not tarry in Theſſalie? if you be
a birde where ſhal I ſeeke you? and when ſhal I ſee you? Then anſweared I: God
forbidde that I ſhould commit ſuch a crime. For though I could flie into y•
ayre as an Egle, or though I were the meſſenger of Iupiter, yet would I haue
recourſe to neſt with thee. And I ſweare by the knotte of thy amiable heare,
that ſince the time that I firſte loued thée, I neuer fancied any other
perſon: moreouer this commeth to my minde, that if by vertue of the ointment I
ſhall become an Owle, I will take héede that I come nigh no mans houſe. For I
am not to learne how theſe matrones would handle their lo­uers if they knewe
that they were tranſformed into Owles: moreouer when they are taken in any
place, they are nayled vpon poſtes, and ſo they are woorthely rewarded,
becauſe it is thought that they bringe euill fortune to the houſe. But I pray
you (whiche I had al­moſt forgotten) tell me by what meanes, when I am an
Owle, I ſhall returne to my priſtine ſhape and be­come Lucius againe? Feare
not (ꝙ ſhe) for my Miſtris hath taught me the way to bringe that to paſſe,
neither thinke  [...] that ſhe did it for any good will or fauour, but to the
ende I might helpe her, & miniſter ſome re­medie when ſhe re [...]urneth home.
Conſider I pray you with your ſelfe, with what friu [...]lous trifles ſo
merue­lous [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=39) a thinge is
wrought, for by Hercules I ſweare, I giue her nothinge els, ſaue a little dill
& lawrell leaues in well water, the whiche ſhe drinketh and waſheth her ſelfe
withall: which when ſhe had ſpoken ſhe went into the chambre, & toke a boxe
out of the coffer, whiche I firſt kiſſed and embraſed, and prayed that I might
haue good ſucceſſe in my purpoſe. And then I put of all my garmentes and
gréedely thruſt my hande into the boxe, and toke out a good deale of ointment
and rubbed my ſelfe withall.

¶How Apuleius thinkinge to be turned into a Birde, was turned into an Aſſe,
and howe he was ledde away by theeues.

### 3.6. Cap. 17.

AFter that I had wel rubbed euery parte & mem­ber of my bodie, I houered with
mine armes, & moued my ſelfe, lokinge ſtill when I ſhould be chaunged into a
birde as Pamphile was, and beholde neither feathers nor apparaūce of feathers
did burgen out, but verely my heare did turne into ruggednes, & my tender
ſkinne waxed tough and harde, my fingers and toes leſing the nūber of fiue
chaunged into hoofes, and out of mine arſe grewe a great taile, now my face
became monſtruous, my noſethrilles wide, my lippes hanginge downe, and mine
eares rugged with heare: Neither could I ſée any comfort of my tranſformatiō,
for my membres encreaſed likewiſe, and ſo without all helpe (viewyng euery
parte of my poore bodie) I percea­ued that I was no birde, but a plaine Aſſe.
Then I thought to blame Fotis, but beinge depriued aſwell of language as
humaine ſhape, I loked vpon her with my hanginge lippes and watrie eies, who
(aſſone as ſhe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=40) eſpied me in
ſuche ſorte) cried out alas poore wretche that I am, I am vtterly caſte away.
The feare that I was in, & my haſt hath beguiled me, but eſpecially the
miſtaking of the boxe hath deceaued me. But it forceth not much, ſince as a
ſooner medicine may be gotten for this, then for any other thyng. For if thou
couldeſt get a Roſe and eate it, thou ſhouldeſt be deliuered from the ſhape of
an Aſſe, and become my Lucius againe. And would to God I had gathered ſome
garlādes this eue­ning paſt according to my cuſtome, then thou ſhouldeſt not
continue an Aſſe one nightes ſpace, but in the mor­ninge I will ſéeke ſome
remedie. Thus Fotis lamen­ted in pitifull ſorte, but I that was now a perfect
Aſſe, and for Lucius a bruite beaſte, did yet retaine the ſenſe and
vnderſtandinge of a man. And did deuiſe a good ſpace with my ſelfe, whether it
were beſte for me to teare this miſchieuous and wicked harlotte with my mouth,
or to kicke and kill her with my héeles. But a better thought reduced me from
ſo raſhe a purpoſe, for I feared leaſt by the death of Fotis I ſhould be
depri­ded of all remedie and helpe. Then ſhakinge my head and diſſimuling mine
yre, and takinge mine aduerſitie in good parte, I went into y• ſtable to mine
owne-horſe, where I found an other Aſſe of Miloes, ſomtime mine hoſte, and I
did verely thinke that mine owne horſe (it there were any natural cōſciēce
or knowledge in brute beaſtes) would take pitie vpō me, & proffer me lodging
for that night, but it chaunced farre otherwiſe: For ſee my horſe & the Aſſe,
as it weare, conſented together to worke my harme, & fearing leaſt I ſhould
eate vp their prouender, would in no wiſe ſuffer me to come nighe the manger,
but kicked me with their héeles from their meate, whiche I my ſelfe gaue them
the night before: [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=40) Then I, beinge
thus handled by them & driuen away, gotte me into a corner of the ſtable,
where (while I re­membred their vncourteſie, and how on the morrow I ſhould
returne to Lucius by the helpe of a Roſe, when as I thought to reuēge my
ſelfe of mine owne horſe) I fortuned to eſpie in the middle of a pillor
ſuſtainyng y• rafters of the ſtable, the Image of the Goddeſſe Hip­pone,
whiche was garniſhed and decked rounde about with faire freſh Roſes: then in
hope of preſent remedie I leaped vp with my fore féete as highe as I coulde,
and ſtretchinge out my necke, and with my lippes coueted to ſnatche ſome
Roſes. But in an euill howre did I goe aboute that enterpryſe, for beholde,
the boye to whome I gaue charge of my horſe came preſently in, and findinge me
climinge vpon the pillor, ranne freatinge towardes me, and ſaid: How longe
ſhall we ſuffer this vile Aſſe, that dothe not onely eate vp his fellowes
meate, but alſo would ſpoile the images of the Goddes? why doo I not kill this
lame théefe, and weake wretche? & therewithall lokinge about for ſome kidgel,
he eſpied where lay a faggot of woodde, & chooſinge out a crabbed trunchion of
the biggeſt he could finde, did neuer ceaſe beating of me poore wretch, vntil
ſuch time as by great noyes and rumbling, he harde the doores of the houſe
burſt open, and the neighbours crying in la­mentable ſorte, whiche enforced
him (being ſtroken in feare) to flie his way. And by and by a troope of
théeues entred in, and kepte euery parte & corner of the houſe with weapons.
And as men reſorted to ayde and helpe thē which weare within the doores, the
théeues reſiſted & kept them backe, for euery man was armed with his ſwoorde
and Targette in his hande, the glympſes whereof did yelde out ſuch light as if
it had bene daye.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=41) Then they
brake opē a great cheſte with double lockes and boltes, wherein was laide all
the treaſure of Milo, and ranſakt the ſame, which when they had done they
packed it vp, and gaue euery one a porciō to carry, but when they had more
then they could beare away, yet weare they lothe to leaue any behinde, they
came into the ſtable, and toke vs twoo poore Aſſes, and my horſe, and laded vs
with greater truſſes then we weare able to beare. And when we weare out of the
houſe, they followed vs with great ſtaues, and willed one of their fellowes to
tarry behinde, and bringe them tidinges what was done concerninge the robbery,
and ſo they beate vs forwarde ouer great hilles out of y• high way. But I,
what with my heauy burthen, and my longe iourney did nothinge differ from a
dead Aſſe, wherfore I determined with my ſelfe to ſéeke ſome ciuill reme­die,
and by inuocation of the name of the Prince of the countrie, to be deliuered
from ſo many miſeries. And on a time as I paſſed thorough a great faire, I
came a­mongſt a multitude of Gréekes, and I thought to call vpon the renoumed
name of the Emperour, & to ſay: O Ceſar, and I cried out aloude, O, but Ceſar
I could in no wiſe pronounce: the théeues little regardinge my criynge did lay
me on, and beate my wretched ſkinne in ſuch ſorte, that after it was neither
apte nor méete to make ſiues or ſarces. How be it at laſte Iupiter mini­ſterd
vnto me an vnhoped remedie. For when we had paſſed thorough many townes &
villages, I fortuned to eſpie a pleaſaunt garden, wherein, beſides many other
flowers of delectable hewe, weare newe and freſhe Roſes, and (beinge very
ioyfull and deſirous to catche ſome as I paſſed by) I drewe nerer and nerer,
and while my lippes watred vpō them, I thought of a [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=41) better aduiſe
more profitable for me: leaſt if from an Aſſe I ſhould become a man, I might
fal into the hādes of the theeues, and either by ſuſpitiō that I weare ſome
Witche, or for feare that I would vtter their thefte, I ſhould be ſlaine,
wherfore I abſtained for that time frō eatinge of Roſes. And (enduringe my
preſent aduerſi­tie) I eate hay as other Aſſes did.

## 4\. The fourth Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.

¶How Apuleius thinkinge to goe to eate Roſes, was cru­elly beaten by a
Gardener and chaſed by Dogges.

### 4.1. Cap. 18.

WHen noone was come, that the broy­linge heate of the Sunne had moſte power,
we turned into a village to certaine of the théeues acquaintāce and fréendes,
for verely their me­tinge and embraſinge together, did giue me (poore Aſſe)
cauſe to déeme ye ſame: And thei toke the truſſe from my backe, and gaue them
parte of the treaſure whiche was in it, and they séemed to whiſper & tel them
that it was ſtolen goodes, and after that we weare vnladen of our burthens,
thei lette vs loſe into a medow to paſture, but mine owne horſe, & Milos Aſſe,
would not ſuffer me to féede there with them, but I muſte ſéeke my dinner in
ſome other place. Wherefore I leaped into a gardein, whiche was behinde the
ſtable, and beinge welnie periſhed with honger, although I could finde nothing
there but raw & gréene ſallettes, yet I filled my hongry guttes there­withall
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=42) abundantly,
and praying vnto all the Goddes, I loked about in euery place if I could eſpie
any redde Roſes in the gardens by, and my ſolitarie being alone did put me in
good hope, y• if I could finde any remedie I ſhould preſently of an Aſſe be
chaunged into Lucius out of euery mans ſight, and while I conſidered theſe
thinges, I looked about, & behold I ſaw a farre of a ſha­dowed valley
adioyninge nigh vnto a woodde, where, emongſt diuers other hearbes & pleaſaunt
verdures, I thought I ſawe many floriſhinge Roſes of bright Da­maſke colour.
And I ſaid within my beſtiall minde: ve­rely y• place is the place of Venus &
the Graces, where ſecretely glittereth the royall hewe, of so liuely &
dele­ctable a flower: Then I deſiring y• helpe of the guide of my good
fortune, ranne luſtely towardes the woodde, in ſo much y• I felt my ſelf that
I was no more an Aſſe, but a ſwifte courſinge horſe, but my agilitie and
quick­nes could not preuent the crueltie of my fortune: For when I came to the
place, I perceaued that they were no Roſes, neither tēder, nor pleaſant,
neither moiſted with the heauenly droppes of dew nor celeſtiall licour, whiche
grewe out of the thicket and thornes there. Neither did I perceaue y• there
was any valley at all, but onely the banke of the riuer enuironed with great
thicke trées, which had lōg braūches like vnto Lawrel, & bearinge a flower
without any manner of ſente, and the common people call them by the name of
Lawrell roſes, whiche be very poyſon to all manner of beaſtes. Then was I ſo
entangled with vnhappy fortune, that I litle eſtéemed mine owne daunger, &
went willingly to eate of thoſe Roſes, though I knewe them to be pre­ſent
poyſon. And as I drewe nere, I ſawe a yong man that ſéemed to be the Gardener,
come vpon me, & when [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=42) he perceaued
that I had deuoured vp all his hearbes in the gardein, he came ſwearinge with
a great ſtaffe in his hande, and laide vpon me, in ſuch ſorte that I was
welnie dead, but I ſpéedely deuiſed ſome remedy for my ſelfe, for I lifte vp
my legges and kicked him with my hinder héeles, that I lefte him liynge at the
hill foote welnie ſlaine, and ſo I ranne away: incontinent­ly came out his
wife, who ſeinge her huſbande halfe dead, cried and houled in pitifull ſorte,
and wente to­warde her huſbande to the intent that by her lowde cries ſhe
might purchaſe to me preſent deſtruction: thē all the perſons of the towne,
moued and rayſed by her noyes came foorth, and cried for dogges to teare me
downe: Out came a great company of bandogges and maſties more fitte to pull
downe Beares and Lions then me, whom when I behelde, I thought verely that I
ſhould preſently die, but I turned my ſelfe aboute & ranne as faſte as euer I
might to the ſtable frō whenſe I came. Then the men of the towne called in
their dogges, and toke me, and bounde me to the ſtaple of a poſte, and
ſcourged me with a great knotted whippe till I was welny dead, and they would
vndoubtedly haue ſlaine me, had it not come to paſſe that what with the paine
of their beatinge and the gréene hearbes that lay in my guttes, I caught ſuche
a laſke that I all be ſprinkled their faces, with my liquide donge, and
en­forced them to leaue of.

¶How Apuleius was preuented of his purpoſe, and how the theeues came to their
denne.

### 4.2. Cap 19.

NOt longe after, the théeues laded vs againe, and eſpecially me, and brought
vs foorth out of the ſtable, and when we had gone a good parte of our
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=43) iourney,
what with the longe way, my great burthen, the beatinge of ſtaues, and my
worne hoofes, I was ſo weary that I could ſcantly goe: then I ſawe a litle
be­fore me a riuer, runninge with faire water, & I ſaid to my ſelfe: behold
now I haue founde a good occaſiō. For I will fall downe when I come yender,
and ſurely I will not riſe againe, neither with ſcourginge nor bea­tinge, for
I had rather be ſlaine there preſently, then goe any further. And the cauſe
why I determined ſo to doo, was this, I thought that when the théeues did ſée
me ſo féeble and weake that I could not trauell, to the intent they would not
ſtay in their iourney, they would take of the burthen from my backe, and put
it vpon my fellowes, and ſo for my further puniſhment to leaue me as a praye
to the Wolues and rauenous beaſtes: but euill fortune preuented ſo good a
conſide­ration: For the other Aſſe, beinge of the ſame purpoſe that I was of,
by feigned and coloured werines, fell downe firſt with all his burthen vpon
the grounde as though he weare dead, and he would not riſe neither with
beatinge nor prickinge, nor ſtande vpon his féete though they pulled him vp by
the taile, by his legges, and by his eares, whiche when the théeues behElde,
as without al hope, they ſaid one to an other, what ſhould we ſtande here ſo
longe, about a dead, or rather a ſtony Aſſe? let vs be gonne. And ſo thei toke
his burthen, and deuided ſome to me, and ſome to my horſe. And then they drewe
out their ſwoordes and cutte of his legges, and threwe his bodie from the
pointe of a hill downe into a great valley: then I conſidering with my ſelfe
of the euill fortune of my poore compaignion, and purpo­ſed now to forgette al
ſubtiltie and deceite, and to play the good Aſſe to gette my Maiſters fauour,
for I per­ceaued [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=43) by their talke
that we weare welny come home to our iourneis end. And after that we had
paſſed ouer a litle hil, we came to our appointed place, where, whē we weare
vnladen of our burthens, & all thinges car­ried in, I tumbled and wallowed in
the duſt, to refreſh my ſelfe, in ſtéede of water. The thing and the time cō
­pelleth me to make deſcription of the places, and ſpeci­ally of the denne
where the théeues did inhabite, I wil proue my witte what I can doo, and then
conſider you whether I was an Aſſe in iudgement and ſenſe, or no.

Firſt, there was an excéeding great hill compaſſed about with bigge trées,
very high, with many turning bottomes, full of ſharpe ſtones whereby it was
inac­ceſſible: there was many windinge and hollow valleis enuironed with
thickettes and thornes, and naturally fortreſſed round about: Frō the toppe
of the hill ranne a runninge riuer as cléere as ſiluer, and watred all the
valeis below, that it ſéemed like vnto a ſea encloſed, or a ſtandinge floode:
before the denne, where was no hill, ſtoode a highe towre, & at the foote
thereof weare ſhepe­cotes fenced and watled with clay: Before the gate of the
houſe were pathes made in ſtéede of walles, in ſuch ſorte that you would
eaſely iudge it to be a very denne for théeues, & there was nothinge elſe ſaue
a litle coate couered with thatche, wherein the théeues did nightly accuſtome
to watch by order, as after I perceaued. And when they were all crepte into
the houſe, and we faſte tied with halters at the doore, they began to chide
with an olde woman there, crooked with age, who had the gouernment and rule of
al the houſe, and ſaid: How is it olde Witche, olde trotte and ſtrumpet, that
thou ſit­teſt idely all day at home, and (hauinge no regarde to our perillous
labors) haſte prouided nothinge for our
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=44) ſuppers? but
ſitteſt eating and ſwillinge thy ſelfe from morning til night: Then the old
woman trembled and ſcantly able to ſpeake, gan ſay: Beholde my puiſant &
faithful maiſters you ſhal haue meate & potage inough by and by. Here is firſt
ſtore of bread, wine plentie, fil­led in cleane rinſed pottes, likewiſe here
is whote wa­ter prepared to bathe you. Whiche when ſhe had ſaid, they put of
all their garmentes & refreſhed them ſelues by the fire. And after thei were
waſhed & nointed with oyle, they ſatte downe at the table garniſhed with all
kinde of deinty meates: thei were no ſooner ſet downe, but in came an other
company of yonge men, more in number then was before, who ſéemed likewiſe to
be théeues: For thei brought in their praies of Golde, and Siluer, Plate,
Iuelles, & riche robes, & when they had likewiſe waſhed, they ſatte emōgſt
the reſt and ſerued one an other by ordre. Thē thei dranke & eate
exceding­ly, criyng, laughing, & making ſuch noyes, y• I thought I was emongſt
the tirannous & wilde Lapithes, The­banes, & Centaures. At length one of thē
more valiant then the reſt ſpake in this ſorte, we verely haue man­fully
cōquered the houſe of Milo of Hypata, & beſide all the richeſſe, & treaſure
which by force we haue brought away, we are all come home ſalue, and are
encreaſed the more by this horſe & this Aſſe. But you that haue roued about in
the countrey of Beotia haue loſte your valiant Capitaine Lamathus. Whoſe life
I more re­garded then all this treaſure which you haue brought. And therefore
the memorie of him ſhalbe renoumed for euer emongſt the moſte noble Kinges,
and valiant Capitaines, but you accuſtome when you goe abroade like men with
ganders hartes to créepe through eue­ry corner and hole for euery trifle. Then
one of them [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=44) that came laſte
anſweared: Why are you onely igno­rant, that the greater the number is, the
ſooner they may robbe and ſpoyle the houſe? and although the fa­milie be
diſperſed in diuers lodginges, yet euery man had rather to defende his owne
life then to ſaue the ri­cheſſe of his maiſter, but when there be but a fewe
théeues, then will they rather not onely regarde them ſelues, but alſo their
ſubſtāce, how litle or great ſo euer it be. And to the intent you may beléeue
me I wil ſhow you an example: we weare come nothinge nighe vnto Thebes, where
is the fountaine of our arte and ſciēce, but we learned where a riche chuffe
called Chryſeros did dwell, who for feare of offices in y• publique weale,
diſſimuled his eſtate, and liued ſole and ſolitary in a ſmall cote, how be it
repleniſhed with aboundaunce of treaſure, and wente dayly in ragged & torne
apparell. Wherefore we deuiſed with our ſelues to goe to his houſe and ſpoyle
him of all his richeſſe. And whē night came, we drew towardes his doore which
was ſo ſtrōg­ly cloſed y• we could neither moue it. nor lifte it out of y•
hookes, & we thought it not beſt to breake it open, leaſt by y• noyes we
ſhould raiſe vp (to our harme) the neigh­bors bie. Then our ſtronge & valiant
Capitaine Lama­thus truſtinge his owne ſtrength & force, thruſt in his hāde
through a hole of the doore, & thought to pull backe the bolte, but the
couetous caytife Chryſeros beinge a­wake & making no noyes, came ſoftely to
the doore and caught his hande, & with a great naile nailed it faſt to a
poſte, which when he had donne, he ranne vp to a high chāber, & called euery
one of his neighbours by name, deſiringe them to ſuccour him with all poſſible
ſpéede, for his houſe was a fire: Then euery one for feare of their owne
daunger came runninge out to ayde him,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=45) wherewith we
(fearinge our preſent perill) knewe not what was beſt to be done, whether we
ſhould leaue our compaignion there, or yelde our ſelues to die with him, but
we by his conſent deuiſed a better way: For we cut of his arme by the elbow, &
ſo let it hange there▪ then we boūd his wound with cloutes, leaſt we ſhould
be traced by the droppes of bloud, which done we tooke Lamathus and ledde him
away for feare we ſhould be taken, but when we weare ſo nighe purſued that we
weare in preſent daunger: And that Lamathus coulde not kéepe our companie by
reaſon of faintnes: and on y• other ſide perceauinge that it was not for his
profite to linger behinde, he ſpake vnto vs as a man of ſinguler courage &
vertue, deſiringe vs by much entreatie and prayer, and by the puiſance of the
God Mars, and the faith of our confederacie to deliuer his bodie from tor­ment
& miſerable captiuitie: And further he ſaid, how is it poſſible that ſo
couragious a Capitaine can liue without his hand? wherwith he could ſomtimes
robbe and ſlea ſo many people, I would thinke my ſelfe ſuffi­cient happy if I
might be ſlaine by one of you: but whē he ſaw that we all refuſed to cōmitte
any ſuch facte, he drewe out his ſwoorde with his other hande, and after that
he had often kiſſed it, he thruſt it cleane thorough his bodie: Then we
honored the corps of ſo puiſant a man, and wrapped it in linnen clothes and
threw him into the ſea: ſo lieth our maſter Lamathus buried and hidde in the
graue of water, & ended his life as I haue declared: but Alcinus though he
weare a man of great enterpriſe, yet could he not beware by Lamathus, nor
volde him ſelfe from euil fortune: for on a day when he had entred into an
olde womans houſe to robbe her, he went vp into a high chāber, where he
ſhould firſt haue [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=45) ſtrāgled her,
but he had more regarde to throw downe the bagges of money and Golde out at
the window to vs that ſtoode vnder: And when he was ſo gréedie that he would
leaue nothinge behinde, he went to the olde womans bedde where ſhe lay a
ſléepe, and would haue taken of the couerlet to haue throwē downe likewiſe,
but ſhe awaked & (knelyng vpon her knées) deſired him in this manner: O ſir I
pray you caſte not away ſuche torne and ragged clouſes into my neighbours
houſes, for they are riche inough & néede no ſuch thinges: then Alcinus
(thinking her woordes to be true) was brought in beliefe that ſuch thinges as
he had throwen out al­ready, and ſuch thinges as he ſhould throwe out after,
was not fallen downe to his fellowes, but into other mens houſes, wherfore he
went to the window to ſée, and as he thought to beholde the places rounde
about, thruſtinge his bodie out of the window, the old womā marked him well,
& came behinde him ſoftlie, and al­though ſhe had but ſmall ſtrength, yet with
a ſodaine force ſhe tooke him by the héeles & thruſt him out head­longe, and
ſo he fell vpon a meruelous great ſtone, and burſt his ribbes, whereby he
vomited and ſpued flakes of bloud, and preſently died: Then we threw him into
the riuer likewiſe, as we had done Lamathus before: When we had thus loſt twoo
of our compaignions, we liked not Thebes, but marched towardes the next Ci­tie
called Platea, where we founde a mā of great fame named Demochares, that
purpoſed to ſet foorth a great game, where ſhould be a triall of al kinde of
weapons: he was come of a good houſe, meruelous riche, liberall, and well
deſerued that which he had, and had prepared many ſhowes and pleaſures for the
common people: in ſo much that there is no mā can either by witte or
elo­quence [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=46)
ſhowe in woordes his woorthy preparatiōs. For firſt he had prouided all
ſortes of armes, he greatly de­lighted in huntinge and chaſinge, he ordeyned
great towres and tables to moue hither and thither: he made many places to
chaſe and encounter in: he had ready a great number of men and wilde beaſtes,
and many cō ­demned perſons were brought from the iudgement place to trie and
fight with thoſe beaſtes, but emongſt ſo great preparations of noble pryce, he
beſtowed the moſte parte of his patrimonie in biynge of Beares, whiche he
nouriſhed to his great coſte, and eſtéemed more then all the other beaſtes,
which eitheir by cha­ſinge he caught him ſelfe, or whiche he déerely bought,
or which were giuen him from diuers of his fréendes, howbeit for al his
ſumptuous coſte, he could not be frée frō the malitious eies of enuie: for
ſome of them were welnie dead, with too longe tiynge vp: ſome meigre with the
broyling heate of the Sunne: ſome lāguiſhed with liynge, but all (hauinge
ſundry diſeaſes) weare ſo afflicted taht they died one after an other, and
there was welnie none lefte, in ſuch ſorte that you might ſée them liyng in
the ſtréetes piteouſly dead: And the com­mon people hauing no other meate to
féede on, litle re­gardinge any curioſitie, would come foorth & fill their
bellies with the fleaſh of the Beares. Then by and by Babulus and I deuiſed a
pretie ſporte, we drewe one of the greateſt of the Beares to our lodging, as
though we would prepare to eate thereof, where we fleade of his ſkinne, and
kepte his vngles whole, but we medled not with the head but cutte it of by the
necke, and ſo let it hange to the ſkinne: Then we raſed of the fleaſh from the
backe, and caſt duſt thereon, and ſet it in the Sunne to drie.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=46)

¶How Thraſileon was diſguiſed in a Beares ſkinne, and how he was handled.

### 4.3. Cap. 20.

WHile the ſkinne was a driynge, we made me­ry with the fleaſhe, and then we
deuiſed with our ſelues that one of vs, being more vali­ant then the reſt
bothe in bodie and courage, (ſo that he would conſent thereto) ſhoulde put on
the ſkinne, and (feminge that he weare a Beare) ſhould be ledde to Demochares
houſe in the night, by whiche meanes we thought to be receaued and lette in.
Many were deſirous to play the Beare, but eſpecially one Thraſi­leon of a
couragious minde would take this enterpriſe in hande. Then we put him into the
Beares ſkinne, whiche fitted him finely in euery pointe, we buckled it faſt
vnder his belly, & couered the ſeame with the heare y• it might not be ſéene.
After this, we made litle holes thorough the Beares head, & thorough his
noſethrilles and cies for Thraſileon to ſée out and take winde at, in ſuch
ſorte that he ſéemed a very liuely & naturall beaſt: when this was done, we
went into a caue whiche we hired for y• purpoſe, and he crepte in after like a
Beare with a good courage. Thus we began our ſubtiltie, and then we imagined
thus, we feigned letters as though they come frō on Nicanor whiche dwelled in
the coun­trey of Thracia, which was of great acquaintāce with this
Demochares, wherein we wrote that he had ſent him, being his fréende, the
firſt fruictes of his courſing and huntinge, when night was come (whiche was a
méete time for our purpoſe) we brought Thraſileon, & our forged letters and
preſented thē to Demochares. When Demochares behelde this mightie Beare, and
ſaw the liberalitie of Nicanor his fréende, he cōmaun­ded his ſeruaunt to
deliuer vnto vs tenne crownes, as
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=47) he had great
ſtore in his coffers: Then (as the noueltie of a thing doth accuſtome to
ſtirre mens mindes to be­holde the ſame) many perſons came on euery ſide to
ſée this Beare, but Thraſileō, (leſt they ſhould by curious viewyng and
priyng perceaue the truthe) ranne vpon them to put them in feare, that thei
durſt not come nie. The people ſaid: verely Demochares is right happy, in
that, after the death of ſo many beaſtes, he hath gotten (maugre fortunes
head) ſo goodly a Beare, then Demo­chares commaunded that with great care he
ſhould be put into the parke by, emongſt the other beaſtes, but I immediatly
ſpake vnto him, and ſaid: Sir I pray you take héede how you put a beaſte tyred
with the heate of the Sunne, and with longe trauell emongſt others, whiche (as
I here ſay) haue diuers maladies & diſeaſes: let him rather lie in ſome opē
place of your houſe nighe to ſome water, where he may take ayre and eaſe him
ſelfe, for doo not you know that ſuche kinde of beaſtes doo greatly delight ot
couche vnder ſhadow of trées, & hillockes, nigh vnto pleaſant welles & waters.
Hereby Demochares admoniſhed, and remembringe how ma­ny he had before that
periſhed, was contented that we ſhould put the Beare where we would: Moreouer
we ſaide vnto him, that we our ſelues wre determined to lie all night nigh
vnto the Beare, to looke vnto him, & to giue him meate and drinke at his due
hower. Then he anſweared: Verely maiſters you néede not to put your ſelues to
ſuch paines: for I haue men taht ſerueth for nothinge but for that purpoſe: ſo
we toke leaue of him and departed, and when we weare come without the gates of
the towne, we perceaued before vs a great Sepulchre ſtandinge out of the highe
way, in a priuie and ſecreate place. And thither we wente and opened [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=47) the mouth
thereof, whereas we founde the ſides coue­red with the corruption of man, and
the aſhes and duſt of his longe buried bodie, wherein we gotte our ſelues to
bringe our purpoſe to paſſe, and (hauinge a reſpect to the darke time of the
night accordinge to our cuſtome) when we thought that euery man was a ſléepe,
we went with our weapōs and beſieged the houſe of De­mochares round about:
Then Thraſileon was reddy at hande, and leaped out of the cauerne, and wente
to kill all ſuch as he founde a ſléepe, but when he came to the porter he
opened the gates and let vs all in: and thē he ſhowed vs a large counter,
wherin he ſawe put (the night before) a great aboundaunce of treaſure, whiche
when by violence we had broken open, I bidde euery one of my fellowes take as
much Golde and Siluer as they could beare away, and carry it to the Sepulchre,
and ſtill as they caried, I ſtoode at the gate, watchinge diligently when they
would retorne. The Beare run­ned about the houſe to make ſuch of the familie
affeard as fortuned to wake and come out: For who is he that is ſo puiſant and
courageous, that at the vgly ſight of ſo great a Monſter will not quaile and
kéepe his cham­ber eſpecially in the night, but when we had brought this
matter to ſo good a pointe, there chaunced a pitiful caſe: For as I looked for
my compaignions that ſhould come from the Sepulchre, beholde there was a boye
of the houſe, that fortuned to looke out at a windowe and eſpied the Beare
rūning about, and he went and tolde al the ſeruaūtes of the houſe, whereupon
incontinent­ly they came foorth with torches, lanthornes, and other lightes
that they might ſée all the yarde ouer, thei came with clubbes, ſpeares, naked
ſwoordes, greyhoundes & maſties to ſlea the poore beaſt: Then I (duringe this
broile) [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=48)
thought to runne away, but becauſe I would ſée Thraſileon fightinge with the
dogges, I lay behinde y• gate to beholde him. And although I might perceaue
that he was welnie dead, yet remembred he his owne faithfulnes and ours, and
valiātly reſiſted the gaping and rauenous mouthes of the helhoūdes, ſo toke
he in grée the pageant which willingly he toke in hande him ſelfe, and with
much a doo tumbled at length out of the houſe, but when he was at libertie
abroade, yet coulde he not ſaue him ſelfe, for all the dogges of the ſtreate
ioyned them ſelues to the greyhoūdes & maſties of the houſe, and came vpon
him: Alas what a pitifull ſight it was, when our poor Thraſileon was thus
enuironed & compassed with ſo many dogges, that tare & rente him miſerably,
then I (impatient of ſo great his miſerie) rāne in emongſt the preaſe of the
people, & (ayding him with my woordes as much as I might) exhorted them al in
this manner. O great & extreame miſchaunce, what a pretious and excellent
beaſt haue we loſte: but my woordes did nothinge preuaile. For there came out
a tale man with a ſpeare in his hande yt truſt him cleane thorough, and
afterwardes many that ſtoode by, drewe out their ſwoordes & so they killed
him. But verely our good Capitaine Thraſileon, the honour of our cōforte
receaued his death ſo patiently, that he would not be­wray the league betwene
vs, either by criynge, how­linge or any other meanes, but (being torne with
dogges, & wounded with weapons) did yelde foorth a dolefull crie, more like
vnto a beaſt then a mā. And ta­kinge his preſent fortune in good parte, with
courage & glory inough did finiſh his life, with ſuch a terrour vn­to the
aſſembly, that no perſon was ſo hardy (vntill it was day) as to touch him,
though he weare ſtarke dead [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=48) but at laſt
there came a Butcher more valiant then the reſt, who (openinge the panche of
the beaſt) ſlitte out a hardy and venturous théefe. In this manner we loſte
our Capitaine Thraſileon▪ but he loſt not his fame and honour: when this was
done we packed vp our trea­ſure, which we cōmitted to the Sepulchre to kéepe,
and gotte vs out of the boundes of Platea, thinkinge with our ſelues that
there was more fidelitie emongeſt the dead, then emōgſt the liuing, by reaſon
that our praies was ſo ſurely kept in the Sepulchre: So (being weried with the
weight of our burthens, & welnie tired with long trauel, hauing loſt thrée of
our ſouldiours) we are come home with theſe preſent cheates: Thus whē they
had ſpoken (in memory of their ſlaine cōpaignions) thei tooke cuppes of Golde
& ſonge Hympnes vnto the God Mars, & layde them downe to ſléepe. Then the old
wo­man gaue vs freſh barley without meaſure, in ſo much that my Horſe ſedde ſo
abundantly that he might well thinke he was at ſome bankette that day. But I
(that was accuſtomed to eate branne & flowre) thought that but a ſower kinde
of meate, wherfore eſpiyng a corner where lay loues of bread for all the
houſe, I gotte me thither, and filled my hungry guttes withall.

¶How the theeues ſtole away a Gentel woman, and brought her to their denne.

### 4.4. Cap. 21.

WHen night was come, the Théeues awaked & roſe vp: and when thei had buckled
on their weapōs, & diſguiſed their faces with viſardes, they departed, & yet
for al the great ſléepe y• came vpon me, I could in no wiſe leaue eatinge, and
wheras, when I was a man, I could be cōtented wt one or twoo loues at the
moſt, now [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=49) my
guttes weare ſo gréedy that thrée pann [...]ers full would ſcantly ſerue me,
and while I cōſidered all theſe thinges the morning came, and being ledde to
a riuer, (notwithſtanding mine Aſſy ſhamefaſtnes) I quēched my thirſt. And
ſodēly after the théeues returned home carefull and heauy, bringinge no
burthens with them, no not ſo muche as traffe or baggage, ſaue onely a maiden
that ſéemed by her habite to be ſome gētle wo­man borne, and the daughter of
ſome woorthy Matron of that countrey, who was ſo faire and beautifull, that
though I weare an Aſſe, yet had I a great affection to her: The virgin
lamented and tare her heare, & ſpoyled her garmentes for the great ſorrow ſhe
was in, but the théeues brought her within the caue, and aſſaied to cō ­ſorte
her in this ſorte: Wéepe not fayre Gentle woman we pray you, for be you
aſſured that we wil doo no out­rage nor violence to your perſon, but take
pacience a while for our profit: For neceſſitie & poore eſtate hath cōpelled
vs to doo this enterpriſe, we warrant you that your parentes (although they be
couetous) wil be con­tented to giue vs a great quātitie of money to redéeme
and ranſom you from our handes. With ſuch and like flattering woordes they
endeuored to appeaſe the gen­tle woman, how be it ſhe would in no caſe be
comforted but put her head betwene her knées & cried piteouſly. Then thei
called the old woman and commaunded her to sitte by the maiden, and pacifie
her dolor as much as ſhe might. And they departed away to robbe, as they
accuſtomed to doo, but the virgin would not aſſwage her griefes nor mitigate
her ſorrow by any entreatie of the olde woman, but houled and ſobbed in ſuch
ſorte that ſhe made me (poore Aſſe) likewiſe to wéepe, & thus ſhe ſaid: Alas
can I poore wretche liue any longer, that [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=49) am come of ſo
good a houſe, forſaken of al my parentes, fréendes, and familie, made a rapine
and pray, cloſed ſeruily in this ſtony priſon, depriued of all pleaſure
wherein I haue bene brought vp, throwen in daūger, ready to be rente in
péeces emongeſt ſo many ſturdy théeues, and dreadfull robbers, can I (I ſay)
ceaſe from wepinge or liue any lenger? Thus ſhe cried and lamē ­ted, and
after ſhe had weried her ſelfe with ſorrow, & bloubered her face with teares,
ſhe cloſed y• windowes of her hollow eies and laide her downe to ſléepe: And
after taht ſhe had ſlept, ſhe roſe againe, like a furious & madde woman, and
beate her breaſt and comely face more than ſhe did before: Then the old woman
enqui­red the cauſes of her newe and ſodaine lamentation, to whom (ſighing in
pitifull ſorte) ſhe anſweared: Alas now I am vtterly vndone, now I am out of
all hope, O giue me a knife to kill me, or a halter to hange me, whereat the
olde woman was more angry, & ſeuerely commaunded her to tel her the cauſe of
her ſorrow, and why after her ſléepe ſhe ſhould renew her dolor & miſe­rable
wepinge, what thinke you (ꝙ ſhe) to deceaue our yonge men of the price of your
ranſom? no, no, therfore ceaſe your criyng, for the théeues doo litle eſtéeme
your houlinge, and if you will not, I will ſurely burne you aliue: Hereat the
mayden was greatly a [...]card and kiſ­ſed her hande, and ſaide: O mother take
pitie vpon me and my wretched fortune, and giue me licence a while to ſpeake,
for I thinke I ſhall not longe liue, let there mercy be ripe and frāke in
your venerable hoare head, and here the ſome of my calamitie: There was a
come­ly yonge man, who for his bountie and grace was be­loued entierly of all
the towne, my cooſin Germaine, & but thrée yeres elder then I, we twoo were
nouriſhed [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=50)
and brought vp in one houſe, and lay vnder one roofe and in one chamber, and
at lengthe by promiſe of Ma­riage, and by conſent of our parentes we weare
con­tracted together: the Mariage day was come, the houſe was garniſhed with
Lawrell, and torches were ſet in euery place in the honour of Hymeneus, my
eſpouſe was accompaigned with his parentes, kinſefolke and fréendes, & made
Sacrafice in the Temples & publique places: And when my vnhappy mother pampred
me in her lappe, & decked me like a bryde kiſſing me ſwéetely, & making me a
parent for childrē, behold there came in a great multitude of théeues, armed
like men of warre, with naked ſwoordes in their handes, who wente not about to
doo any harme, neither to take any thinge a­way, but brake into the chāber
where I was, & violētly toke me out of my mothers armes, when none of the
familie would reſiſte for feare. In this ſorte was our Marriage diſtourbed,
like the Mariage of Hyppodame & Perithous: but behold good Mother nowe my
vnhap­py fortune is renewed & encreaſed: For I dreamed in my ſléepe that I was
pulled out of our houſe, out of our chambre, and out of my bedde, and that I
romed about in ſolitary and vnknowen places, callinge vpon the name of my
vnfortunate huſbande, and how that he (aſſone as he perceaued that I was taken
away, euen ſmelling with perfumes & crowned with garlādes) did trace me by my
ſteppes, deſiringe the aide of the people to aſſiſt him, in y• his wife was
violently ſtolen away: And as he wente criynge vp and downe, one of the
théeues moued by indignation by reaſon of his pur­ſuite, toke vp a ſtone that
lay at his feete and threwe it at my huſband and killed him. By the terrour of
which ſight, and the feare of so dreadfull a dreame I awaked. [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=50) Then the old
woman rendringe out like ſighes, began to ſpeake in this ſorte, my daughter
take a good harte vnto you, and be not afearde at feigned and ſtraunge viſions
or dreames, for as the viſions of the day are ac­compted falſe and vntrewe, ſo
the viſions of the night doo often chaunce contrary. And to dreame of wéeping,
beatinge and killing, is a token of good lucke and pro­ſperous chaunge,
whereas contrary, to dreame of laughinge, carnall dalliance and good chéere,
is ſigne of ſadnes, ſicknes, loſſe of ſubſtaunce and diſpleaſure. But I will
tell thée a pleaſaunt tale to put away all thy ſorowe and to reuiue thy
Spirites: And ſo ſhe be­ganne in this manner.

¶ The moſt pleaſaunt and delectable tale of the Marriage of Cupide and
Pſyches.

### 4.5. Cap. 22.

THere was ſometimes, a certaine Kinge, inhabi­tyng in the Weaſt partes, who
had to wife a no­ble Dame, by whome he had thrée daughters ex­céedinge fayre:
Of whome the twoo elder weare of ſuch comely ſhape & beautie, as they did
excell and paſſe all other womē liuing, wherby they weare thought,
woor­thely, ſo deſerue the praiſe and commendation of euery perſon, and
deſeruedly to be preferred aboue the reſi­dew of the common ſorte: Yet the
ſinguler paſſinge beautie and maidenly Maieſtie of the yongeſt daugh­ter, did
ſo farre ſurmounte and excell them twoo, as no earthly creature coulde by any
meanes ſufficiently ex­preſſe or ſet out the ſame, by reaſon whereof (after
the fame of this excellēt maiden was ſpred abrode in euery part of y• Citie,)
the Citizens & ſtraūgers there, beinge inwardly pricked by zelous affection
to beholde her fa­mous perſon, came daily by thouſandes, hundreds and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=51) ſcores to
her fathers Pallaice, who as aſtonied with admiration of her incomperable
beautie did no leſſe woorſhippe and reuerence her, with croſſes, ſignes and
tokens, and other diuine adorations, accordinge to the cuſtome of the olde
vſed rites and ceremonies, then if ſhe weare Ladie Venus in déede: And ſhortly
after the fame was ſpredde into the next Cities and borderinge Regions, that
the Goddeſſe whome the déepe ſeas had borne and brought foorth, & the frothe
of the ſpurginge waues had nouriſhed, to the intent to ſhowe her highe
magnificencie and diuine power in earth,This maide was thought to be Venus. to
ſuche as earſt did honour and woorſhippe her: was now conuer­ſant emongſt
mortall men, or els that the earth & not the ſeas, by a newe concurſe and
influence of the cele­ſtiall Planetes, had budded and yelded foorth a newe
Venus, endewed with y• flower of virginitie: So day­ly more and more encreaſed
this opinion, and now is her fliyng fame diſperſed into the next Yſlelonde,
and welnie into euery parte and prouince of the whole worlde. Whereupon
innumerable ſtraūgers, reſorted from farre countreis, aduenturinge them
ſelues by longe iourneis on lande, and by great perilles on wa­ter to beholde
this glorious Virgin. By occaſion wher­of ſuche a contempt grewe towardes the
Goddeſſe Ve­nus, that no perſon trauelled vnto the towne Paphos, nor to the
yſle Gindos, no nor to Cithera to woorſhippe her. Her ornamentes weare throwen
out, her Tēples defaced, her pillowes and quiſhions torne, her ceremo­nies
neglected, her Images and ſtatues vncrowned, & her bare aulters vnſwept, and
foule with the aſhes of old burned ſacrafice. For why euery perſon honored &
worſhipped this maiden in ſtéede of Venus. And in the morninge at her firſt
comminge abroade, offered vnto [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=51) her oblations,
prouided banquettes, called her by the name of Venus whiche was not Venus in
déede, and in her honour preſented flowers and garlādes in moſt reuerent
faſhion.

This ſodeine chaunge and alteration of celeſtiall honour did greatly inflame &
kindle the minde of very Venus, who (vnable to temper her ſelfe from
indigna­tion, ſhakinge her head in raginge ſorte) reaſoned with her ſelfe in
this manner: Beholde the originall parent of all theſe elementes, beholde the
lady Venus renou­med thoroughout all the worlde, with whome a mor­tall mayden
is ioyned now partaker of honour, my name regiſtred in the Citie of heauen, is
prophaned and made vile by terrene abſurdities, if I ſhal ſuffer a­ny mortall
creature to preſent my Maieſtie in earth, or that any ſhall beare about a
falſe ſurmiſed ſhape of my perſon: then in vaine did Paris that ſheaparde (in
whoſe iuſt iudgement and cōfidence the great Iupiter had affiance) preferre
me aboue the reſidew of the God­deſſes for the excellencie of my beautie: but
ſhe what ſo euer ſhe be that hath vſurped mine honour, ſhall ſhortly repent
her of her vnlawfull eſtate: And by and by ſhe called her winged ſonne Cupide,
raſhe inough, and hardie, who by his euil manners, contemninge all publique
iuſtice and lawe, armed with fire & arrowes, runninge vp and downe in the
nightes from houſe to houſe, and corruptinge the lawfull marriages of euery
perſon, doth nothinge but that whiche is euill, who al­though that he weare of
his owne proper nature ſuffi­cient prone to woorke miſchiefe, yet ſhe egged
him forwarde with woordes and brought him to the Citie, and ſhewed him Pſyches
(for ſo the mayden was cal­led) and hauyng tolde the cauſe of her anger, not
with­out [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=52)
great rage) I pray thée (ꝙ ſhe) my déere childe by motherly bonde of loue, by
the ſwéete woundes of thy percinge dartes, by the pleaſaunt heate of thy fire,
re­uenge the iniurie which is done to thy mother, by the falſe and diſobedient
beautie of a mortall mayden, and I pray thée without delay, y• ſhe may fall in
loue with the moſte miſerableſt creature liuinge, the moſt poore, the moſt
crooked, and the moſt vile, that there may be none founde in all the worlde of
like wretchednes. When ſhe had ſpoken theſe woordes, ſhe embraſed and kiſſed
her ſonne, & toke her voiage towardes the ſea.

When ſhe was come to the ſea, ſhe began to call the Goddes & Goddeſſes, who
were obedient at her voyce. For incontinent came y• daughters of Nereus
ſinging with tunes melodiouſly: Portunus with his briſtled & rough bearde:
Salatia, with her boſome ful of fiſh: Pa­lemon, the driuer of the Dolphin, the
trumpetters of Triton leapinge hither and thither, & blowinge with heauenly
noies: Such was the cōpany which followed Venus marchinge towardes the Occean
ſea.

In the meane ſeaſon Pſyches with al her beautie re­ceaued no fruicte of her
honour: She was wondred at of al▪ ſhe was praiſed of al, but ſhe perceaued y•
no King nor Prince, nor any of the inferiour ſorte did repayre to woo her.
Euery one merueled at her diuine beautie, as it were at ſome Image well
painted & ſette out. Her other twoo ſiſters, which were nothinge ſo greatly
ex­alted by the people, were royally married to twoo Kinges, but the virgin
Pſyches ſittinge at home alone lamented her ſolitary life, & beinge diſquieted
both in minde and bodie (although ſhe pleaſed al the world) yet hated ſhe in
her ſelfe her owne beautie.

Wherupon the miſerable father of this vnfortunate [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=52) daughter
ſuſpectyng that the Goddes & powers of hea­uen did enuie her eſtate, wente
vnto the towne called Milet to receaue the oracle of Apollo, where he made his
prayers and offered ſacrifice: and deſired a huſband for his daughter, but
Apollo though he were a Grecian and of the countrie of Ionia, becauſe of the
foundation of Milet yet he gaue anſweare in Latine verſe, the ſenſe whereof
was this.

Let Pſyches corps be cladd in mourninge weede

And ſette on rocke of yonder hill aloft

Her huſbande is no wight of humaine ſeede

But Serpent dyre and fierce as may be thought

Who flies with winges aboue in ſtarry ſkies

And doth ſubdew eche thinge with firy flight

The Goddes them ſelues and powers that ſeeme ſo wiſe

With mighty Ioue be ſubiect to his might

The riuers blacke and deadly floodes of paine

And darkenes eke as thrall to him remaine.

The Kyng ſomtimes happy, when he harde the Pro­phecie of Apollo returned home
ſadde & ſorowfull, and declared to his wife the miſerable and vnhappy fate of
his daughter, then they began to lament, and wéepe, and paſſed ouer many daies
in great ſorrow, but now the time approched of Pſyches marriage, preparation
was made, blacke torches were lighted, the pleaſaunt ſonges were turned into
pitifull cries, the melody of Hymeneus was ended with deadly howlinge,Hymeneu,
the God of Mar­riage. the mai­den that ſhould be married did wipe her eies
with her veile: all the family, and people of the Citie, wéeped likewiſe, and
with great lamentation was ordained a remiſſe time for that day, but
neceſſitie compelled that Pſyches ſhould be brought to her appointed place,
ac­cordinge to the diuine commaundement. And when
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=53) the
ſolemnitie was ended, they went to bringe this ſo­rowfull ſpouſe, not to her
marriage, but to her finall ende and buriall. And while the father and mother
of Pſyches did goe forwarde, wepinge and criynge to doo this enterpriſe,
Pſyches ſpake vnto them in this ſorte: why torment you your vnhappy age with
continuall dolor? why trouble you your ſpirites, which are more rather mine
then yours? why ſoyle ye your faces with teares, whiche I ought to adoure and
woorſhippe? why teare you my eies in yours? why pull you your hoare heares?
why knocke you your breaſtes for me? now you ſée the rewarde of my excellent
beautie: now, now, you perceaue (but too late) the plague of enuie. When the
people did honour me and call me new Venus, thē you ſhould haue wept, then
you ſhould haue ſorrowed, as though I had béene then dead: For nowe I ſée, and
perceaue that I am come to this miſery by the onely name of Venus, bring me,
and (as fortune hath apoin­ted) place me on the toppe of the rocke, I greatly
deſire to ende my marriage, I greatly couette to ſée my huſ­bande, why doo I
delay? why ſhoulde I refuſe him that is appointed to deſtroy all the worlde?
Thus ended ſhe her woordes, & thruſt her ſelfe emongſt the people that
followed: Then thei brought her to the apointed rocke of the highe hill, and
ſet her thereon and ſo departed. The torches and lightes were put out with the
teares of the people, and euery man gonne home: the miſera­ble parentes welny
conſumed with ſorrow, gaue them ſelues to euerlaſtinge darkenes.

Thus poore Pſyches being left alone wepyng and tremblinge on the toppe of the
rocke, was blowen by the gentle ayre and of ſhrillinge Zephyrus and carried
from the hill, with a meke winde, whiche retained her [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=53) garmentes vp,
and by little & litle brought her downe into a déepe valley, where ſhe was
laide in a bedde of moſt ſweete and fragrant flowres.

## 5\. The fifth Booke of Lucius Apuleius

### 5.1.

Thus fayre Pſyches beinge ſwéetely couched e­mongſt the ſofte and tender
hearbes, as in a bedde of ſoote and fragrant flowres, and hauinge quallified
the troubles and thoughtes of her reſtles minde, was now well repoſed: And
when ſhe had refreſhed her ſelfe ſuf­ficiently with ſléepe, ſhe roſe with a
more quiet and pa­cified minde, and fortuned to eſpie a pleaſaunt woodde
enuironned with great and mighty trées: ſhe eſpied likewiſe a runninge riuer
as cléere as Criſtall: In the middeſt of the woodde, welnie at the fall of the
riuer was a Princely edifice, wrought & builded, not by the arte or hande of
mā, but by the mighty power of God: and you would iudge at the firſt entrie
therein, that it weare ſome pleaſaunt and woorthy manſion for the powers of
heauen. For the embowinges aboue weare of Cytern, and Yuery, propped and
vndermined with pillors of Golde, the walles couered and ſéeled with Siluer,
diuers ſortes of beaſtes weare grauē and car­ued, that ſéemed to encounter
with ſuch as entred in: al thinges weare ſo curiouſly and finely wrought, that
it ſéemed either to be the worke of ſome demigod, or God him ſelfe, the
pauement was al of pretious ſtone, deuided and cut one from an other, whereon
was car­ued diuers kindes of pictures, in ſuch ſorte that bleſſed and thriſe
bleſſed weare they whiche might goe vpon ſuch a pauement: Euery parte and
angle of the houſe was ſo well adorned, that by reaſon of the pretious ſtones
and ineſtimable treaſure there, it glittered and ſhone in ſuch ſorte that the
chambers, porches, & dores gaue light as it had bene the Sunne. Neyther
other­wiſe [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=54)
did the other treaſure of y• houſe diſagrée vnto ſo great a maieſtie, that
verely it ſéemed in euery point a heauēly palaice fabricate & builded for
Iupiter him ſelf.

Then Pſyches moued with delectation, approched nighe, & takinge a bolde harte
entred into the houſe, & behelde euery thing there, with great affectiō, ſhe
ſawe ſtorehouſes wrought excéeding fine, & repleniſhed with abondance of
richeſſe. Finally there could nothinge be deuiſed which lacked there, but
emōgſt ſuch great ſtore of treaſure, this was more meruelous, y• there was no
cloſure, bolte, or locke to kéepe y• ſame. And when with great pleaſure ſhe
viewed al theſe thinges, ſhe harde a voice without any body, y• ſaide: Why doo
you maruell madame at ſo great richeſſe? behold al that you ſée is at your
cōmandement: wherfore, goe you into the chāber & repoſe your ſelfe vpon the
bedde, & deſire what bathe you will haue, and we whoſe voices you here be your
ſeruauntes, and ready to miniſter vnto you accordinge to your deſire: in the
meane ſeaſon, royall meates and deintie diſhes ſhalbe prepared for you.

Then Pſyches perceaued the felicitie of diuine pro­uidence, & according to the
aduertiſement of the incor­porall voices, ſhe firſt repoſed her ſelfe vpō the
bedde, & thē refreſhed her bodie in ye baines. This done ſhe ſaw y• table
garniſhed with meates, & a chaire to ſit downe.

When Pſyches was ſet downe, al ſortes of diuine meates and wines weare brought
in, not by any body but as it weare with a winde, for ſhe coulde ſée no
per­ſon before her, but onely here voices on euery ſide. Af­ter that al the
ſeruices weare brought to the table, one came in and ſange inuiſibly, an other
plaide on the harpe, but ſhe ſawe no man: The harmony of the in­ſtrumentes did
ſo greatly ſhrill in her eares, y• (though [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=54) there weare no
manner of perſon) yet ſéemed ſhe in the middeſt of a multitude of people.

All theſe pleaſures finiſhed: when night approched Pſyches went to bedde: &
when ſhe was laide, that the ſwéete ſléepe came vpon her, ſhe greatly feared
her vir­ginitie becauſe ſhe was alone: Thē came her vnknowē huſbande and lay
with her: and after y• he had made a perfect conſummation of the Mariage, he
roſe in the morninge before day & departed. Sone after came her inuiſible
ſeruantes, preſenting to her ſuch thinges as were neceſſary for her
defloration, and thus ſhe paſ­ſed foorth a great while: and (as it happeneth)
y• nouel­tie of the thinges by continuall cuſtome did encreaſe her pleaſure,
but ſpecially the ſounde of the inſtru­mentes was a comfort vnto her being
alone.

Duringe this time that Pſyches was in this place of pleaſures, her father &
mother did nothinge but wéepe and lament, and her twoo ſiſters hearinge of her
moſte miſerable fortune came with great dolor and ſorrowe to comforte and
ſpeake with their parentes.

The night followinge Pſyches huſbande ſpake vnto her (for ſhe might féele his
eies, his handes & his eares) and ſaide, O my ſwéete ſpouſe and dere wife,
fortune doth menace vnto thée imminent perill and daunger, whereof I wiſhe
thée greatly to beware: For knowe thou that thy ſiſters, thinkinge that thou
arte dead, be greatly troubled, and are come to the mountaine by thy ſteppes,
whoſe lamentations if thou fortune to heare, beware that thou doo in no wiſe
either make an­ſweare or looke vp towardes them. For if thou doo thou ſhalt
purchaſe to me great ſorrow, & to thy ſelfe vtter deſtruction. Pſyches
(hearinge her huſbande) was con­tented to doo all thinges as he commaunded.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=55) After that
he was departed, & the night paſſed away, Pſyches lamented & cried al ye day
folowyng, thinkyng that now ſhe was paſt all hope of comfort in that ſhe was
cloſed within the walles of a priſon, depriued of humaine conuerſation, and
commaunded not to ayde or aſſiſt her ſorowfull ſiſters, no nor once to ſée
them: Thus ſhe paſſed all the day in wepinge, and wente to bedde at night
without any refectiō of meate or baine.

Incontinently after, came her huſbande, who (when he had embraſed her
ſwéetely) gan ſay: Is it thus that you performe your promiſe my ſwéete wife?
what doo I finde here? paſſe you all the day and the night in we­pinge? & will
you not ceaſe in your huſbandes armes? Goe too, doo what you wil, purchaſe
your owne deſtru­ction, & when you finde it ſo, then remēber my woordes, and
repent, but too late: Then ſhe deſired her huſbande more and more, aſſuringe
him that ſhe ſhould die, vn­leſſe he woulde graunt that ſhe might ſée her
ſiſters, whereby ſhe might ſpeake with them & comfort them, whereat at length
he was contented, and moreouer he willed that ſhe ſhould giue them as much
Golde and Iuelles as ſhe would, but he gaue her a further charge, ſaying:
beware that ye couet not (beinge moued by the pernicious counſel of your
ſiſters) to ſée the ſhape of my perſon, leaſt by your curioſitie you be
depriued of ſo great and woorthy eſtate. Pſyches beinge gladde here­with
rendred vnto him moſt entier thankes, and ſaid: Swéete huſbande I had rather
die then to be ſeperate from you: for whoſoeuer you be, I loue and retaine you
within my harte, as if you weare mine owne ſpi­rite or Cupide him ſelfe: but I
pray you graunt this likewiſe, that you would commaunde your ſeruaunt Zephyrus
to bringe my ſiſters downe into the valley, [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=55) as he brought
me,W [...]men cā do [...] moſt when they be in bedde. wherwithal ſhe kiſſed
him ſwéetely, and deſired him gently to graunt her requeſt, callinge him her
ſpouſe, her ſwéete harte, her ioye, & her ſolace, whereby ſhe enforced him to
agrée to her minde, and when morninge came he departed away.

After longe ſearch made, the ſiſters of Pſyches came vnto the hill where ſhe
was ſet on the rocke, and cried with a lowde voice, in ſuche ſorte that the
ſtones an­ſweared againe: And when they called their ſiſter by her name, that
their lamentable cries came vnto her eares, ſhe came foorth, and ſaid:
beholde, here is ſhe for whome you wéepe, I pray you torment your ſelues no
more, ceaſe your wéeping: And by & by, ſhe cōmaunded Zephyrus by the
appointment of her huſband to bring them downe: Neither did he delay, for with
gentle blaſtes he retained them vp, and laide them ſoftely in the valey: I am
not able to expreſſe the often embra­ſinge, kiſſing, and gretyng, which was
betwéene them thrée, all ſorowes and teares were then laide aparte: Come in (ꝙ
Pſyches) into our houſe & refreſh your af­flicted mindes with your ſiſter.
After this, ſhe ſhowed them the ſtorehouſes of treaſure, ſhe cauſed them to
heare the voices whiche ſerued her, the bayne was rea­dy, the meates were
brought in, & when they had eaten and filled them ſelues with diuine
delicates, they con­ceaued great enuie within their hartes, and one of thē
beinge very curious, did demaunde what her huſbande was, of what ſtate, & who
was the Lorde of ſo pretious a houſe, but Pſyches, remembringe the promiſe
which ſhe made to her huſbande, feigned that he was a yonge man, of comely
ſtature, with a flexen bearde, and had great delight in huntinge in the hilles
and dales by: And leaſt by her longe talke ſhe ſhould be founde to
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=56) trippe or
faile in her woordes, ſhe filled their lappes with Golde, Siluer and Iewels,
and commaūded Z [...] ­phirus to carry them away.

When they were brought vp to the mountaine, they toke their waies:
[...]omewarde to their owne houſes, and murmured with enuy that they bare
againſt Pſyches, ſayinge: beholde cruell & contrary fortune, behold how we
(borne all of one parent) haue diuers deſtinies, but eſpecially we, y• are ye
elder twoo, be married to ſtraūge huſbandes, made as handemaidons, and as it
were ba­niſhed from our countrie & fréendes, wheras our yōger ſiſter hath ſo
great abondaunce of treaſure and gotten a God to her huſbande, who hath no
ſkill how to vſe ſo great plenty of richeſſe: ſawe you not ſiſter what was in
the houſe? what great ſtore of Iewelles, what glit­teringe robes, what gemmes,
what golde we trode on? That if ſhe haue a huſbande accordinge, as ſhe
af­firmeth, there is none that liueth this daye more hap­pie in all the worlde
then ſhe. And ſo it may come to paſſe that at length for the great affection
and loue whiche he may beare vnto her, he may make her a Goddeſſe, for (by
Hercules) ſuche was her counte­naunce, ſo ſhe behaued her ſelfe, that (as a
Goddeſſe) ſhe had voyces to ſerue her, and the windes did obay her.Such taſke
vſe goſſeps when they meete to­gether. But I poore wretche haue firſte married
a huſ­bande elder then my Father, more balde then a coote, more weake then a
childe, and that locketh me vp all day in the houſe. Then ſayde the other
ſiſter, and in faith I am married to a huſbande that hath the gowte, twyfolde,
crooked, not couragious in payinge my debt, I am ſayne to rubbe, and mollifie
his ſtonie fingers with diuers ſortes of oyles, & to wrappe them in play­ſters
and ſalues, ſo that I ſoyle my white and deintie [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=56) handes, with the
corruption of filthy cloutes, not vſing my ſelfe like a wife, but more like a
ſeruaunt: and you my ſiſter ſéeme likewiſe to be in bondage, and ſerui­tude,
wherefore I cannot abide to ſée our yonger ſiſter in ſuche great felicitie,
ſawe you not I pray, howe proudely and arrogantly ſhe handled vs euen now? and
how in vauntinge her ſelfe ſhe vttered her pre­ſumptuous minde, how ſhe caſte
a litle Golde into our lappes, and (beyng werie of our company) commaun­ded
that we ſhould be borne and blowen away? verely I liue not nor am a woman, but
I will depriue her of all her bliſſe: And if you my ſiſter be ſo farre bente
as I, lette vs conſulte together, and not vtter our minde to any perſon, no
nor yet to our parentes, nor tell that euer we ſawe her. For it ſuffiſeth that
we haue ſéene her, whome it repenteth to haue ſéene: neither lette vs declare
her good fortune to our Father, nor to any o­ther, ſince as they ſéeme not
happy whoſe richeſſe are vnknowen: So ſhall ſhe knowe, that ſhe hath ſiſters
(no abiectes) but more woorthier then ſhe. But now lette vs goe home to our
huſbandes and poore houſes, and when we are better inſtructed lette vs returne
to ſuppreſſe her pryde: ſo this euill counſell pleaſed theſe twoo euill women,
and they hidde the treaſure whiche Pſyches gaue them, and fare their heare,
renewynge their falſe and forged teares. When their father and mother behelde
them wéepe and lament ſtill, they doubled their ſorrowes, and griefes, but
full of yre and farced with enuie they toke their voyage home­warde, deuiſinge
the ſlaughter and deſtruction of their ſiſter.

In the meane ſeaſon y• huſband of Pſiches did warne her againe in the night
with theſe woordes: Séeſt thou
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=57) not (ꝙ he)
what perill and daunger euill fortune doth threaten vnto thée, whereof if thou
take not good héede, it will ſhortly come vpon thée: for the vnfaithfull
har­lottes doo greatly endeuour to ſet their ſnares to catch thée, and their
purpoſe is to make and perſwade thée to beholde my face, which if thou once
fortune to ſée (as I haue often tolde) thou ſhalt ſée no more: wherefore if
theſe naughty hegges, armed with wicked mindes, doo chaunce to come againe (as
I thinke no otherwiſe but that they will) take héede that thou talke not with
them, but ſimply ſuffer them to ſpeake what they will, howbeit if thou canſt
not reſtraine thy ſelfe, beware that thou haue no communication of thy
huſbande, nor anſweare a woorde if they fortune to queſtion of me, ſo will we
encreaſe our ſtocke, and this yonge and tender childe, couched in this yonge
and tender belly of thine, (if thou conceale my ſecreates) ſhal be made an
immor­tall God, otherwiſe a mortall creature. Then Pſyches was very gladde
that ſhe ſhould bringe foorth a diuine babe, and very ioyfull in that ſhe
ſhould be honored as a mother:So vſeth yonge wiues to doo. She reckened &
nombred carefully the daies and monethes that paſſed, and being neuer with
childe before, did maruell greatly that in ſo ſmall a time her belly ſhould
ſwell ſo bigge.

But thoſe peſtilent & wicked furies, breathinge out their ſerpentine poyſon,
toke ſhippinge to bringe their enterpriſe to paſſe. Then Pſyches was warned
againe by her huſbande in this ſorte: beholde the laſt day, the extreme caſe,
and the enemies of thy bloud, hath armed them ſelues againſt vs, pitched their
campes, ſet their hoſte in a ray, & are marchinge towardes vs, for now thy
twoo ſiſters haue drawen their ſwoordes, and are ready to flea thée: O with
what force are we aſſayled [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=57) this day, O
ſwéete Pſyches I pray thée to take pitie on thy ſelfe, of me, and deliuer thy
huſbande, and this in­ſant within thy belly from ſo great daunger: And ſée
not, neither heare theſe curſed women, whiche are not woorthy to be called thy
ſiſters, for their great hatred, and breache of ſiſterly amitie, for they will
come (like Sirens) to the mountaine, and yelde out their piteous and
lamentable cries: When Pſyches had harde theſe woordes, ſhe ſighed ſorowfully,
and ſaide: O déere huſ­bande, this longe time you haue had experience & triall
of my faith, and boubt you not but that I will perſeuer in the ſame, wherfore
commaunde your winde Zephi­rus that he may doo, as he hath donne before, to
the in­tent that where you haue charged me, not to beholde your venerable
face, yet that I may comfort my ſelfe with the ſight of my ſiſters. I pray you
by theſe beauti­full heares, by theſe rounde chéekes, delicate & tender, by
your pleaſaunt whote breſt,The childe ta­keth the ſhape of the Father. whoſe
ſhape and face I ſhall learne at length by the childe in my belly, graunt the
fruicte of my deſire, refreſhe your déere ſpouſe Pſy­ches with ioye, who is
bounde and linked vnto you for euer, I litle eſtéeme to ſée your viſage and
figure, litle doo I regarde the night & darknes thereof, for you are my onely
light. Her huſbande (beinge as it were en­chaunted with theſe woordes, and
compelled by violēce of her often embraſinge, wiping away her teares with his
heare) did yelde vnto his wife. And when morning came departed as he
accuſtomed to doo.

Now her ſiſters arriued on lande, and neuer reſted till they came to the
rocke, without viſitinge of their Father and mother, and leaped downe raſhly
from the hill them ſelues: Then Zephyrus accordinge to the di­uine
commaundement brought them downe (though it
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=58) were againſt
his will) & laide them in the valley with­out any harme. By and by they went
into the pallaice to their ſiſter without leaue, & when they had eftſones
embraſed their pray, and thanked her (with flatteringe woordes) for the
treaſure whiche ſhe gaue thē, thei ſaid: O déere ſiſter Pſyches, know you
that you are now no more a childe but a mother: O what great ioye beare you
vnto vs in your belly? what a cōfort wil it be vnto all the houſe? how happy
ſhall we be that ſhall ſée this infant nouriſhed emongſt ſo great plentie of
treaſure? that if he be like his parentes, as it is neceſſarie he ſhoulde,
there is no doubte but a newe Cupide ſhalbe borne: by this kinde of meanes
they wente aboute to winne Pſyches by litle and litle, but becauſe they were
weary with trauell, they ſatte them downe in chayres, and after that they had
waſhed their bodies in baynes, they wente into a parler, where all kinde of
meates were ready prepared, Pſyches commaunded one to play with his Harpe, it
was donne: Then, im­mediatly other ſange, other tuned their inſtrumentes, but
no perſon was ſéene, by whoſe ſwéete harmonie and modulation, the ſiſters of
Pſyches were greatly delighted.

Howbeit the wickednes of theſe curſed wemen was nothing ſuppreſſed by the
ſwéete noyes of theſe inſtru­mentes, but they ſetled thē ſelues to woorke
their trea­ſon againſt Pſyches demaūding who was her huſbād, and of what
parentage: Then ſhe (hauinge forgotten, by too much ſimplicitie, that, whiche
ſhe had ſpoken be­fore of her huſband) inuented a new anſweare, & ſaide that
her huſband was of a great prouince, a marchant, and a man of a midle age,
hauing his bearde enterſpar­ſed with gray heares, which when ſhe had ſaid
(becauſe [[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=58)
ſhe would haue no further talke) ſhe filled their lappes full of Golde and
Siluer, and bid Zephyrus to beare them away.

In their retorne homeward thei murmured with thē ſelues ſayinge, how ſay you
ſiſter to ſo apparaunt a lie of Pſyches? For firſt ſhe ſaid that her huſbande
was a yonge man of floriſhinge yeares & had a flexen beard, and now ſhe ſaith
that it is halfe graye with age, what is he that in ſo ſhorte ſpace can become
ſo olde? you ſhall finde it no otherwiſe my ſiſter, but that eyther this
curſed queane hath inuented a great lie▪ or els that ſhe neuer ſawe the ſhape
of her huſbande: And if it be ſo that ſhe neuer ſawe him, then verely ſhe is
married to ſome God,The enuious perſon pine [...]h as others felicitie. and
hath a yonge god in her belly, but if it be a deuine babe and fortune to come
to the eares of my mother (as God forbidde it ſhould) then may I goe & hange
my ſelfe, wherefore let vs goe to our parents, and with forged lies let vs
colour the matter.

After they were thus inflamed and had viſited their parentes, they returned
againe to the mountayne, and by the ayde of the winde Zephirus were carried
downe into the valey, and after thei had ſtrained their eye liddes to enforce
them ſelues to wéepe, they called vnto Pſyches in this ſorte: Thou (ignorant
of ſo great euill) thinkeſt thy ſelfe ſure and happy, and ſitteſt at home
nothinge regardinge thy perill, where as we goe aboute thy affayres, and are
carefull leaſt any harme ſhould happen vnto thée, for we are credibly
informed, neither can we but vtter it vnto thée, that there is a great Serpent
full of deadly poyſon, with a rauenous and gapinge threate, that lieth with
thée euery night, remember the oracle of Apollo, who pro­nounced that thou
ſhouldeſt be married to a dyre and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=59) [...]erte
Serpent, and many of the inhabitantes here by, and ſuch as hunte about in the
countrey, affirme that they ſawe him yeſternight returnynge from paſture and
ſwimminge ouer the riuer, whereby they doo vn­doubtedly ſay that he will not
pamper thée longe with delicate meates, but when the time of deliuerie ſhall
approche, he will deuoure both thée & thy childe, wher­fore aduiſe thy ſelfe,
whether thou wilt agrée vnto vs that are carefull for thy ſafetie, and ſo
auoide the perill of death, and be contented to liue with thy ſiſters, or
whether thou wilt remaine with the ſerpent, & in the ende to be ſwallowed into
the gowlfe of his bodie. And if it be ſo, that thy ſolitary life, thy
conuerſation with voyces, this ſeruile and daungerous pleaſure, and the loue
of the Serpent doo more delight thée: ſay not but that we haue playde the
partes of naturall ſiſters in warninge thée. Then the poore & ſimple miſer
Pſyches was moued with the feare of ſo dreadfull woordes, and (being amaſed in
her minde) did cleane forgette the ad­monitions of her huſbande, & her owne
promiſes made vnto him. And (throwyng her ſelfe headlonge into ex­treame
miſery) with a wane and ſallow countenance, ſcantly vtteringe a thirde woorde,
at length gan ſay in this ſorte: O my moſt déere ſiſters I hartely thāke you
for your great kindenes towardes me, and I am now verely perſwaded that they
whiche haue enformed you hereof, haue enformed you of nothinge but truth, for
I neuer ſawe the ſhape of my huſbande, neither know I frō whence he came,
onely I here his voyce in ye night, in ſo much that I haue an vncertaine
huſbande, & one that loueth not the light of the day, whiche cauſeth me to
ſuſpect that he is a beaſt as you affirme, moreouer I doo greatly feare to ſée
him, for he doth menace and [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=59) threaten great
euill vnto me, if I ſhould goe about to ſpie, and beholde his ſhape, wherfore
my louing ſiſters if you haue any holeſome remedy for your ſiſter in daunger,
giue it now preſently: Then they openinge the gates of their ſubtill mindes,
did put away all pri­uie gile, & egged her forward in her feareful thoughts,
perſwadinge her to doo as they would haue her, wher­upon one of them began and
ſaid, becauſe that we litle eſtéeme any perill or daunger to ſaue your life,
we en­tende to ſhow you the beſt way and meane as we may poſſibly doo: Take a
ſharpe raſer and put it vnder the pillow of your bedde, and ſée that you haue
ready a pri­uie burninge lampe with oyle, hidde vnder ſome parte of the
hanginge of the chamber, and (finely diſſimuling the matter) when (accordinge
to his cuſtome) he cometh to bedde and ſléepeth ſoundly, ariſe you ſecreatly,
and with your bare féete goe and take your lampe, with the raſer in your right
hande, and with valiant force cutte of the head of the poyſonous Serpent,
wherin we will ayde and aſſiſt you: and when by the death of him, you ſhalbe
made ſalue, we will marry you to ſome comely man. After they had thus inflamed
the harte of their ſiſter, (fearing leaſt ſome daunger might happen vnto them
by reaſon of their euill counſell,) they were car­ried by the winde Zephyrus
to the toppe of the moun­taine, and ſo they ranne away, and toke ſhippinge.

When Pſyches was lefte alone (ſauing that ſhe ſée­med not to be alone, beinge
ſtirred by ſo many furies) ſhe was in a toſſinge minde, like the waues of the
ſea, and although her wil was obſtinate and reſiſted to put in execution the
counſell of her ſiſters, yet ſhe was in doubtfull and diuers opinions touching
her calamitie, Sometime ſhe would, ſometime ſhe would not, ſome­time
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=60) ſhe is
bolde, ſometime ſhe feareth, ſometime ſhe miſtruſteth, ſometime ſhe is moued,
ſometime ſhe ha­teth the beaſt, ſometime ſhe loueth her huſbande, but at
length the night came, when as ſhe made preparatiō for her wicked intent.

Sone after, her huſbande came, & when he had kiſſed and embraſed her, he fell
a ſléepe: Then Pſyches (ſome­what féeble in body and minde, yet moued by
crueltie of fate) receaued boldenes & brought forth the lampe, and toke the
raſer, ſo by her audacitie ſhe chaunged her kinde, but when ſhe toke the lampe
and came to the bedde ſide, ſhe ſawe the moſt méeke, and ſwéeteſt beaſt of all
beaſtes, euen fayre Cupide couched fayrely, at whoſe ſighte the very lampe
encreaſed his lighte for ioye, and the raſer turned his edge. But when
Pſy­ches ſawe ſo glorious a bodie, ſhe greatly feared, and (amaſed in minde,
with a pale countenaunce, all trem­blinge) fell on her knées, and thought to
hide the raſer, yea verely in her owne harte, whiche ſhe had vndoub­tedly
donne, had it not (through feare of ſo great an enterpriſe) fallen out of her
hande. And when ſhe ſawe and behelde the beautie of his deuine visage, ſhe was
well recreated in her minde, ſhe ſawe his heares of Golde, that yéelded out a
ſwéete ſauour: his necke more white then milke, his purple chéekes, his heare
hangynge comely behinde and before, the brightnes whereof did darken the light
of the lampe, his tender plume feathers diſperſed vpon his ſhoulders like
ſhi­ninge flowers, and tremblinge hither and thither, and his other partes of
his bodie ſo ſmothe and ſofte that it did not repent Venus to beare ſuche a
childe: at the beddes féete lay his bowe, quiuer, and arrowes, that  [...]e
the weapōs of ſo great a God, which, when Pſyches [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=60) did curiouſly
behold, and merueling at the weapons of her huſband toke one of the arrowes
out of the quiuer, and pricked her ſelfe withall, wherewith ſhe was ſo
grieuouſly wounded that the bloudde followed, and thereby of her owne accorde
ſhe added loue vpon loue, then more and more broylinge in the loue of Cupide,
ſhe embraſed him and kiſſed him a thouſand times fea­ringe the meaſure of his
ſléepe: but alas, while ſhe was in this great ioye, whether it were for enuie,
or for de­ſire to touche this amiable bodie likewiſe, there fell out a droppe
of burning oyle from the lampe vpō the right ſhoulder of the God. O raſhe &
bolde lampe the vile mi­niſtery of loue, how dareſt thou be ſo bolde as to
burne the God of al fire? when as he inuēted thée, to the intēt that al
louers might with more ioye paſſe the nightes in pleaſure. The God being
burned in this ſorte, & per­ceauinge that promiſe and faith was broken he
flied a­way without vtteraunce of any woorde from the eies & hādes of his
moſt vnhappy wife. But Pſiches fortuned to catch him (as he was riſing) by the
right thighe, and helde him faſt as he flewe aboue in the ayre, vntill ſuch
time, that (conſtrayned by werines) ſhe lette goe and fell downe vpon the
grounde: but Cupide followed her downe, and lighted vpon the toppe of a
Cypreſſe trée, and angerly ſpake vnto her in this manner: O ſimple Pſiches
conſider with thy ſelfe, how I (little regarding the cōmaundement of my
mother, who willed me that thou ſhouldeſt be married to a man of baſe &
miſerable condition) did come my ſelfe from heauen to loue thée, & wounded
mine owne bodie with my proper weapōs to haue thée to my ſpouſe, and did I
ſéeme a beaſt vnto thée, y• thou ſhouldeſt goe about to cutte of my head wt a
raſer, who loued thée ſo wel? did not I alwaies giue thée
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=61) in charge?
did not I gentely will thée to beware? but thoſe curſed ayders and counſelours
of thine, ſhalbe woorthely rewarded for their paines.The abſent of louers is
grea­teſt puniſhmet. As for thée, thou ſhalt be ſufficiently puniſhed by my
abſence: When he had ſpoken theſe woordes, he toke his dight into y• ayre.

Then Pſyches fell  [...]atte on the grounde, & as longe as ſhe might ſee her
huſband, ſhe caſt her eies after him into the ayre wepinge and lamentinge
piteouſly, but when he was gonne out of her ſight, ſhe threw her ſelf into the
nerte running riuer, for the great anguiſh and dolor that ſhe was in, for the
lacke of her huſband, how be it the water would not ſuffer her to be drowned,
but toke pitie vpon her, in the honour of Cupide which ac­cuſtomed to broyle
and burne the riuer, and ſo threwe her vpon the banke emongſt the hearbes.

Then Pan the ruſtical God ſitting on the riuer ſide, embraſinge and teachyng
the Goddeſſe Canna to tune her ſonges and pipes, by whome were féedinge the
yonge and tender goates, after that he perceaued Pſy­ches in ſo ſorowfull
caſe, not ignorant (I know not by what meanes) of her miſerable eſtate,
endeuored to pa­cifie her in this ſorte: Oh fayre mayde, I am a ruſtike & rude
herdeſman, howbeit (by reaſon of my olde age) ex­perte in many thinges, for as
farre as I can learne by coniecture, whiche (according as wiſe men doo terme)
is called diuination, I perceaue by your vncertaine gate, your pale hewe, your
ſobbinge ſighes, and your watrie eies, that you are greatly in loue. Wherfore
harken to me, and goe not about to ſlea your ſelfe, nor wéepe not at all, but
rather addore and woorſhippe the great God Cupide, and winne him vnto you by
your gentle pro­miſe of ſeruice. When the God of ſhepeherdes had ſpo­ken theſe
woordes, ſhe gaue no anſweare but made re­uerence [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=61) vnto him as to a
God, and ſo departed.

After that Pſyches had gonne a litle way, ſhe fortu­ned (vnwares) to come to a
Citie where the huſbande of one of her ſiſters did dwel, which when Pſyches
did vnderſtande, ſhe cauſed that her ſiſter had knowledge of her comming. And
ſo they mette together, and after great embraſinge and ſalutation, the ſiſter
of Pſyches demaunded the cauſe of her trauell thither: Marry (ꝙ ſhe) doo not
you remember the counſell that you gaue me, whereby you would, that I ſhould
kill the beaſt, who vnder colour of my huſbande did lie with me eue­ry night?
you ſhall vnderſtande, y• aſſone as I brought foorth the lampe to ſée &
beholde his ſhape, I perceaued that he was the ſonne of Venus, euen Cupide him
ſelfe that lay with me. Then I (beynge ſtrōken with great pleaſure, and
deſirous to embraſe him) coulde not tho­roughly aſſwage my delight, but alas
(by euil channce) the boylinge oyle of the lampe fortuned to fall on his
ſhoulder, whiche cauſed him to awake, who (ſeinge me armed with fire and
weapon) gan ſay. How dareſt thou be ſo bolde to doo ſo great a miſchiefe?
departe frō me, and take ſuch thinges as thou diddeſt bringe: for I will haue
thy ſiſter (and named you) to my wife, & ſhe ſhalbe placed in thy felicitie,
and by and by he cōmaunded Ze­phyrus to carry me away frō the boundes of his
houſe.

Pſyches had ſcantly finiſhed her tale, but her ſiſter (perced with y• pricke
of carnall deſire & wicked enuie) ranne home, & (feigninge to her huſbande
that ſhe had harde woorde of the death of her parētes) toke ſhipping and came
to the mountaine. And although there blewe a contrary winde, yet beinge
brought in a vaine hope ſhe cried, O Cupide take me a more woorthy wife, and
thou Zephyrus beare downe thy miſtris, & ſo ſhe caſte
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=62) her ſelfe
downe hedlonge from the mountaine, but ſhe fell not into the valley neither
aliue nor dead, for al the members & partes of her bodie were torne emongſt
the rockes, whereby ſhe was made a pray vnto the birdes and wilde beaſtes, as
ſhe woorthely deſerued.

Neither was the vengeaunce of the other delaide, for Pſiches traueling in that
coūtrey fortuned to come to an other Citie, where her other ſiſter did dwell,
to whome when ſhe had declared all ſuch thinges as ſhe tolde to her firſte
ſiſter,As euery vertue is rewarded, ſo euery vice is pu­niſſhed. ſhe ranne
likewiſe vnto the rocke and was ſlaine in like ſorte. Then Pſiches traue­led
about in the countrey to ſéeke her huſband Cupide, but he was gotten into his
mothers chāber, and there bewayled the ſorowfull wounde, whiche he caught by
the oyle of the burninge lampe.

Then the white birde the Gull whiche ſwimmeth on the waues of the water, flewe
towardes the Oc­cean ſea, where ſhe founde Venus waſhinge and ba­thinge her
ſelfe: to whome ſhe declared that her ſonne was burned and in daunger of
death, and moreouer that it was a cōmon bruite in y• mouth of euery perſon
(who ſpake euill of all the family of Venus) that her ſonne doth nothing but
haunt harlots in y• mountaine, and ſhe her ſelfe, laſciuiouſly, vſe to riotte
on the ſea, whereby they ſay yt they are now become no more gra­tious, no more
pleaſaunt, no more gentle, but inciuill, mōſtruous & horrible: moreouer the
marriages are not for any amitie, or for loue of procreatiō, but ful of enuy,
diſcorde, & debate. This the curious Gull did clatter in the eares of Venus
reprehēding her ſonne. But Venus began to crie, and ſaid: what hath my ſonne
gotten any loue? I pray thée (gentle birde y• doeſt ſerue me ſo faith­fully)
tel me what ſhe is, & what is her name, that hath [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=62) troubled my
ſonne in ſuch ſorte, whether ſhe be any of the Nymphes, of the nomber of the
Goddeſſes, of the cōpany of the Muſes, or of the miſtery of my Graces? To
whome the birde anſweared. Madame I know not what ſhe is, but this I know,
that ſhe is called Pſiches. Then Venus with indignatiō cried out: what is it
ſhe? the vſurper of my beautie, the viccar of my name? what did he thinke that
I was a baude, by whoſe ſhowe he fell acquainted with the mayde? And
immediatly ſhe departed, and went to her chamber, where ſhe founde her ſonne
wounded as it was tolde vnto her, whome when ſhe behelde ſhe cried out in this
ſorte.

Is this an honeſt thinge? is this honorable to thy parentes? is this reaſon
that thou haſt violate and bro­ken the cōmaundement of thy mother and
ſoueraigne miſtris? And whereas thou ſhouldeſt haue vexed my enemie with
lothſome loue, thou haſte done contrary: For (beinge but of tender and vnripe
yéeres) thou haſt with too licentious appetite embraſed my moſte mor­tall foe,
to whome I ſhalbe made a mother, and ſhe a daughter: Thou preſumeſt and
thinkeſt (thou triflinge boye, thou verlette, and without all reuerence) that
thou arte moſte woorthy and excellent, and that I am not able by reaſon of
mine age to haue an other ſonne, which if I might haue, thou ſhouldeſt well
vnderſtand that I would beare a more woorthier then thou, but to woorke thée a
greater deſpite, I doo determine to ad­opte one of my ſeruantes, & to giue him
theſe winges, this fire, this bowe, and theſe arrowes, and all other furniture
whiche I gaue to thée, not for this purpoſe, neyther is any thinge giuen thée
of thy father for this intent: but firſte thou haſt béene euill brought vp,
and inſtructed in thy youth: thou haſte thy handes ready
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=63) and ſharpe:
Thou haſt often offended thy auncientes and eſpecially me that am thy mother,
thou haſt perced me with thy dartes, thou contemneſt me as a widow, neither
doeſt thou regarde thy valiant and inuincible Father, and to anger me more
thou arte amorous of wenches and harlottes, but I wil cauſe that thou ſhalt
ſhortly repent thée, & that this marriage ſhalbe déerely bought. To what a
pointe am I now driuē? what ſhall I doo? whither ſhall I goe? howe ſhall I
repreſſe this  [...]eaſre? Shall I aſke ayde of mine enemie Sobrietie, whome I
haue often offended to engender thée? or ſhall I ſéeke for counſell of euery
poore and ruſticall womā? No, no, yet had I rather die, howbeit I will not
ceaſe my vengeance, to her muſt I haue recourſe for helpe, & to none other, (I
meane to Sobrietie) who may correct thée ſharpely, take away thy quiuer,
depriue thée of thy arrowes, vnbende thy bowe, quenche thy fire, & (which is
more) ſubdew thy body with puniſhment, and when that I haue raſed & cut of
this thy heare, whiche I haue dreſſed with mine owne handes, and made to
glitter like golde, and when I haue clipped thy winges which I my ſelfe haue
cauſed to burgen, then ſhal I thinke to haue ſufficiently reuenged my ſelfe
vpon thée, for the iniurie which thou haſt done: when ſhe had ſpokē theſe
woordes ſhe departed in a great rage out of her chāber.

Iuno was daughter of Sa­turne and Opis ſiſter and wife of Iupiter. Ceres other
wife called  [...]ſis wife of Oſ [...]ris  [...] of Egipte▪ ſhe  [...]
ſuppoſed to be the Goddeſſe of Harueſt. Immediatly, as ſhe was goinge away,
came Iuno & Ceres demaūdinge the cauſe of her anger: then Venus made
anſweare, verely you are come to comfort my ſo­row, but I pray you with all
diligence to ſéeke out one whoſe name is Pſyches, who is a vagabonde, and
run­neth aboute the countries, and as I thinke you are not ignoraunt of the
bruite of my ſonne Cupide, and of his demeanure, which I am aſhamed to
declare: Then thei [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=63) ſtanding and
knowing the whole matter, endeuoured to mitigate the ire of Venus in this
ſorte.

What is the cauſe madame, or how hath your ſonne ſo offended that you ſhould
ſo greatly accuſe his loue, & blame him by reaſon that he is amorous? And why
ſhould you ſéeke the death of hir, whom he doth fancy? We moſt humbly entreate
you to pardon his faulte, if he haue accorded to the mynde of any maiden, what
doo not you knowe that he is a yonge man? or haue you forgotten of what yéeres
he is? doth he ſéeme alwayes vnto you to be a childe? you are his mother, and
a kynd woman, will you continually ſearche out his daliance? will you blame
his luxurie? will you bridle his loue? And will you reprehende your own arte
and delightes in him? what God or man is he, that can endure that you ſhould
ſowe or diſperſe your ſéede of loue in euery place, and to make a reſtraint
therof within your own doores, certes you wil be the cauſe of the ſuppreſſion
of the publique places of yonge dames. In this ſorte theſe Goddeſſes
endeuoured to pacifie hir minde, and tercuſe Cupide with all their power
(although he weare ab­ſent) for feare of his dartes and ſhaftes of loue. But
Venus would in no wyſe aſſwage hir heate, but (thin­king that they did rather
trifle and taunte at her iniu­ries) ſhe departed from them, and tooke her
viage to­wardes the ſea in all haſt.

## 6\. The ſixth Booke of Lucius Apuleius

### 6.1.

In the meane ſeaſon Pſyches hurled hir ſelf hither and thither, to ſéeke for
her huſband, the rather becauſe ſhe thought, that if he would not be appeaſed
with the ſwéete flatterie of his wyfe, yet he would take mercy vpon her at her
ſeruile and continuall praiers. And (eſpiyng a Churche on the toppe of a high
hill) ſhe ſayd, what can I tell whether my huſbande and maiſter bée
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=64) there or no?
wherefore ſhe went thither warde, & with great paine & trauell, moued by hope,
after y• ſhe climed to the toppe of the mountaine, ſhe came to the Tēple &
went in, whereas, behold ſhe eſpied ſhéefes of corne li­yng on a heape, blades
writhed like garlādes, & réedes of barley, moreouer ſhe ſawe hookes, ſithes,
ſickels and other inſtruments to reape, but euery thing lay out of order, & as
it were caſte in by the handes of labourers, which when Pſiches ſawe, ſhe
gathered vp & put euery thing dewly in order, thinking that ſhe would not
de­ſpiſe or contemne the Temples of any of the Gods, but rather get the fauour
& beneuolence of them all, by & by Ceres came in, & beholding her buſie and
curious in her chappel, cried out a farre of, and ſaid: O Pſiches néede­ful of
mercy, Venus ſearcheth for thée in euery place to reuenge her ſelfe & to
puniſh thée greuouſly, but y• haſte more minde to be here, and careſt for
nothyng leſſe, thē for thy ſafetie. Then Pſiches fell on her knées before
her, wateringe her féete with her teares, wipinge the ground with her heare, &
with great wéeping & lamen­tation deſired pardon, ſaiyng: O great & holy
Goddeſſe I pray thée by thy plentuous & liberal right hād, by thy ioyfull
ceremonies of harueſt, by the ſecretes of thy ſa­crafice, by the fliyng
chariottes of thy Dragons, by the tillage of the groūd of Sicile, which thou
haſt inuēted, by the marriage of Proſerpina, by y• diligent inquiſitiō of
thy daughter, & by the other ſecretes which are with­in the tēple of Eleuſis
in the lande of Athēs, take pitie on me thy ſeruaunt Pſiches, and let me hide
my ſelfe a few dales emōgſt theſe ſhéefes of corne vntill the yre of ſo great
a Goddeſſe be paſt, or vntill that I be refreſhed of my great labour &
trauell. Then anſweared Ceres: Verely, Pſiches I am greatly moued by thy
prayers & [[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=64)
teares, & deſire with all my harte to ayde thée, but if I ſhould ſuffer thée
to be hidden here, I ſhould incurre the diſpleaſure of my Coſin, with whome I
haue made a treaty of peace, and an auncient promeſſe of amitie: wherefore I
aduiſe thée to departe henſe, and take it not in euell parte in that I will
not ſuffer thée to abide and remaine within my Temple.

Then Pſiches driuen away cōtrary to her hope, was double afflicted with
ſorrow, and ſo ſhe returned backe againe: and behold, ſhe perceaued a farre of
in a valley a Temple ſtanding within a foreſt, fayre and curiouſly wrought,
and mindinge to ouerpaſſe no place, whither better hope did direct her, and to
the intent ſhe would deſire the pardon of euery God, ſhe approched nighe to
the ſacred doores, whereas ſhe ſawe pretious richeſſe & veſtmentes igrauen
with letters of gold, hanging vpō braunches of trées, and the poſtes of the
Temple, teſti­fiynge the name of the Goddeſſe Iuno, to whome they were
dedicate, then ſhe knéeled downe vpon her knées, and embraſinge the Aulter
with her handes, and wi­pinge her teares gan pray in this ſorte. O déere
ſpouſe and ſiſter of the great God Iupiter, which arte adored among the great
tēples of Samos, called vpō by wemē with childe, worſhipped at high
Carthage, becauſe thou wereſt brought from heauen by the Lion, the riuers of
the floud Inachus doo celebrate thée, & know yt thou arte the wife of the
great God & the Goddeſſe of Goddeſſes: All the Eaſt part of the world hath
thée in veneration, all the world calleth thée Lucina, I pray thée to be mine
aduocate in my tribulatiōs, deliuer me from the great daunger which purſueth
me, and ſaue me that am we [...] ried with ſo longe labours and ſorrowe, for I
knowe that it is thou that ſuccoureſt and helpeſt ſuche w [...]men
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=65) as are with
childe and in daūger. Then Iuno hearinge the praiers of Pſiches, appeared
vnto her in al her roy­altie: ſaying: Certes Pſiches I would gladly help thée,
but I am aſhamed to doo any thing contrary to the wil of my daughter in lawe
Venus, whom alwaies I haue loued as mine owne childe, moreouer I ſhall incurre
the daunger of the lawe intituled, De ſeruo corrupto, Whereby I am forbidden
to retaine any ſeruaunt fu­gitiue againſt the will of his maiſter.

Then Pſiches caſt of likewiſe by Iuno, as without all hope of the recouery of
her huſbande, reaſoned with her ſelfe in this ſorte, now what comfort or
remedie is lefte to my afflictions, when as my prayers will no­thinge auayle
with the Goddeſſes? what ſhall I doo? whither ſhall I goe? In what caue or
darkenes ſhall I hide my ſelfe to auoide the furor of Venus? why doo I not
take a good harte, and offer my ſelfe with humilitie vnto her whoſe anger I
haue wrought, what doo I know whether he (whome I ſéeke for) be in the houſe
of his mother or no? Thus beyng in doubte, poore Pſiches prepared her ſelfe to
her owne daunger, & deuiſed how ſhe might make her Orayſon and prayer vnto
Venus.

After that Venus was wery with ſearchinge by ſea and lande for Pſiches, ſhe
returned towarde heauen, & cōmaunded that one ſhould prepare her chariot,
which her huſbād Vulcanus gaue vnto her by reaſon of mar­riage, ſo finely
wrought that neither Golde nor filuer coulde be cōpared to the brightnes
therof, fowre white pidgeons guided the chariot with great dilig [...]nce, and
when Vlenus was entred in, a nomber of ſparrowes flewe chirpinge about,
makinge ſigne of ioye, and all other kinde of birdes ſange ſwéetely
foreſhowynge the cōminge of the great Goddeſſe: the cloudes gaue place,
[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=65) the
heauens opened, & receaued her ioyfully, the birdes that followed nothinge
feared the Egles, Haukes, and other rauenous fowle in the ayre. Incontinently
ſhe went vnto the ryall Pallaice of the God Iupiter, and with a proude & bolde
petition demaūded the ſeruice of Mercury in certaine of her affaires,
wherunto Iupiter conſented, then with much ioy ſhe deſcended frō heauē with
Mercurie, & gaue him an earneſt charge to put in execution hir woordes,
ſaying: O my brother, borne in Arcadia, thou knoweſt well that I (who am thy
ſiſter) did neuer enterpriſe to doo any thinge without thy pre­ſence, thou
knoweſt alſo how longe I haue ſought for a girle and cannot finde her,
wherefore there reſteth no­thinge els ſaue that thou with thy trumpette doo
pro­noūce the rewarde to ſuche as take hir, ſée thou put in execution my
commanndement, and declare that what ſo euer he be that retaineth her,
wittingly, againſt my will ſhall not defend him ſelfe by any meane or
excuſa­tion: whiche when ſhe had ſpoken, ſhe deliuered vnto him a libell
wherin was cōteined the name of Pſiches and the reſide we of his publication,
which done ſhe de­parted away to hir lodginge. By and by, Mercurius (not
delaying y• matter) proclaimed through out all the worlde, that what ſo euer
he were that coulde tell any tidinges of a Kinges fugitiue daughter, the
ſeruaunt of Venus, named Pſiches, ſhould bring woorde to Mer­curie, and for
rewarde of his paynes he ſhould receaue ſeuen ſwéete coſſes of Venus. After
that Mercury had pronounced theſe thinges, euery man was inflamed with deſire
to ſearche out Pſiches.

This proclamation was the cauſe that put away all doubte from Pſiches, who was
ſcantly come in ſight of the houſe of Venus, but one of her ſeruauntes called
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=66) Cuſtome came
out, who eſpiyng Pſiches, cried with a loude voice, ſayinge: O wicked harlotte
as thou arte, now at length thou ſhalt know that thou haſte a mi­ſtris aboue
thée, what doeſt thou make thy ſelfe igno­rant as though thou diddeſt not
vnderſtand what tra­uell we haue taken in ſearchinge for thée, I am gladde
that thou arte come into my handes, thou arte now in the goulfe of Hell, &
ſhalt abide the paine and puniſh­ment of thy great contumacie, and there
withall ſhe toke her by the heare, & brought her in before the pre­ſence of
Venus.

When Venus eſpied her, ſhe began to laugh, & as an­gry perſons accuſtome to
doo, ſhe ſhaked her head and ſcratched her right eare, ſaiyng: O goddeſſe,
Goddeſſe, you are now come at lēgth to viſit your mother, or els to ſée your
huſband, that is in daunger of death by your meanes, be you aſſured I will
handle you like a daugh­ter, where be my maydens Sorrow, and Sadnes? To whome
(when they came) ſhe deliuered Pſiches to be cruelly tormented, then they
fulfilled the cōmandemēt of their Miſteris, and after they had piteoufly
ſcourged her with whippes & roddes, they preſented her againe before Venus.
Thē ſhe began to laugh againe, ſaiyng: Behold ſhe thinketh (that by reaſon of
her great belly which ſhe hath gotten by playing the hoore) to moue me to
pitie, and to make me a grandmother to her childe: Am not I happy, that in the
flouriſhinge time of all mine age ſhalbe called a grādmother, and the ſonne
of a vile harlotte ſhalbe accōpted the Nephew of Venus? How be it I am a
foole to terme him by the name of a ſonne, ſince as the marriage was made
betwéene vn­equall perſons, in the fieldes, without witneſſes, & not by the
cōſent of their parentes, wherfore the marriage [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=66) is illegitimate,
and the childe (that ſhalbe borne) a ba­ſtarde, if we fortune to ſuffer thée
to liue ſo longe till thou be deliuered.

When Venus had ſpoken theſe woordes ſhe leaped vpō the face of poore Pſiches,
and (tearing her apparell) toke her violently by the heare, & daſhed her head
vpon the ground. Then ſhe tooke a great quātitie of wheate, barley, will,
popy ſéede, peaſon, lintels, and beanes, and mingled them al together on a
heape, ſaying: thou euill fauored girle, thou ſéemeſt vnable to gette the
grace of thy louer, by no other meanes, but only by di­ligent & painefull
ſeruice, wherfore I will proue what thou cauſt doo, ſée that thou ſeperate all
theſe graynes one from an other, diſpoſinge thē orderly in their qua­litie,
and lette it be done before night. When ſhe had appointed this taſke vnto
Pſiches, ſhe departed to a great banquette that was prepared that day.

But Pſiches went not about to diſſeuer the graine (as beinge a thinge
impoſſible to be brought to paſſe by reaſon it lay ſo confuſely ſcattered) but
beinge aſtonied at the cruel cōmaundement of Venus, ſatte ſtill & ſaide
nothing: Then the litle Piſmere the Emote, takings pitie of her great
difficultie & labour, curſing the cruel­nes of the wyfe of Iupiter and of ſo
euill a mother, ranne aboute hither and thither, and called to her all the
Antes of the countrie, ſayinge: I pray you my fréendes, ye quicke ſonnes of
the grounde the mother of al thinges, take mercie on this poore mayde eſpouſed
to Cupide, who is in great daunger of her perſon, I pray you helpe her withall
diligence. Incōtinently one came after an other diſſeueryng & deuiding the
graine, & after that they had put eche kinde of corne in order, they ranne
away againe in all haſte.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=67) When night
came, Venus retourned home from the banquet well tipled wt wyne, ſmelling of
balme, & crowned with garlādes of Roſes, who when ſhe eſpied what Pſyches had
done, gan ſay, this is not the labour of thy hādes, but rather of his that is
amorous of thée, then ſhe gaue her a morſell of browne bread, and went to
ſleape.

In the meane ſeaſon Cupide was cloſed faſt in the moſte ſureſt chamber of the
houſe, partly becauſe he ſhould not hurte him ſelfe with wanton dalliance, and
partly becauſe he ſhould not ſpeake with his loue, ſo theſe twoo louers weare
deuided one from an other.

When night was paſſed, Venus called Pſyches & ſayde: ſéeſt thou yonder foreſt
that extendeth out in lengthe with the ryuer, there be great ſhéepe ſhininge
like golde, and kepte by no maner of perſone, I com­maunde thée that thou go
thither and bringe me home ſome of the wool of their fléeces. Pſyches aroſe
willing­ly, not to doo her commaundement, but to throwe her ſelfe hedlong into
the water to ende her ſorowe. Then a gréene réede inſpired by deuine
inſpiration with a gracious tune and melodie gan ſay. O Pſyches, I pray thée
not to trouble or pollute my water by the death of thée, and yet beware that
thou goe not towardes the terrible ſhéepe of this coaſt, vntill ſuche tyme as
the heate of the Sunne be paſt, for when the Sunne is in his force, then ſéeme
they moſt dreadfull, and furious, with their ſharpe hornes, their ſtony
forheads, & their gaping throtes wherwith thei arme them ſelues to the
deſtruction of mankinde: but vntill the midday is paſt and the heate aſſwaged,
and vntill they haue refreſhed them ſelues in the ryuer, thou maiſt hyde thy
ſelfe here by me vnder this great plane trée: and as ſone as their [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=67) great fury is
paſt, thou maiſt go among the thickettes and buſhes vnder the wood ſyde and
gather the lockes of their golden fléeces, which thou ſhalt finde hāginge
vpon the briers. Thus ſpake the gentle and beninge Réede, ſhowinge a meane to
Pſyches to ſaue her life, whiche ſhe bare well in memory, and with all
diligēce went and gathered vp ſuche lockes as ſhe founde & put them in her
apron, and carried them home to Venus: how be it the daunger of this ſeconde
labour did not pleaſe her, nor giue her ſufficient witneſſe of the good
ſeruice of Pſyches, but with a ſower reſemblaunce of laughter, ſhe ſaid: Of
certaintie I knowe y• this is not thy facte, but I will proue if thou be of ſo
ſtoute a cou­rage, and ſinguler prudencie as thou ſéemeſt.

Then Venus ſpake vnto Pſyches againe: ſaying, Séeſt thou the toppe of yonder
great hill, from whenſe there ronneth downe water of blacke & deadly colour,
whiche nouriſheth the floodes of Stix and Cocitus, I charge thée to goe
thither and bring me a veſſell of that water: wherewithall ſhe gaue her a
bottell of Criſtall, menacinge and threatening her rigorouſly.

Then poore Pſyches went in all haſt to the toppe of the mountaine, rather to
ende hir life then to fetche a­ny water, and whē ſhe was come vp to the ridge
of the hill, ſhe perceaued that it was impoſſible to bringe it to paſſe: For
ſhe ſawe a great rocke guſſhinge out moſte horrible fountaines of waters,
whiche ranne downe & fell by many ſtoppes and paſſages into the valley
be­neath, on eche ſide ſhe ſawe great Dragons, ſtretching out their longe and
blouddy neckes, that neuer ſlept, but apointed to kéepe the riuer there: the
waters ſée­med to thē ſelues likewiſe: ſaying, Away, away, what wilt thou
doo? Fly, fly, or els thou wilt be ſlaine: then
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=68) Pſiches
(ſéeing y• impoſſibilitie of this affaire) ſtoode ſtill as though ſhe were
trāſformed into a ſtone, & although ſhe was preſent in body, yet was ſhe
abſent in ſpirite and ſenſe, by reaſon of the great perill which ſhe ſawe, in
ſo much that ſhe could not cōfort her ſelfe with we­ping, ſuch was the
preſent daunger that ſhe was in.

But the royall bird of great Iupiter, the Egle, remē ­bring his old ſeruice,
which he had done, whē as by the pricke of Cupide he brought vp the boy
Ganimides to ye heauens, to be made the buttler of Iupiter, & mindinge to ſhow
the like ſeruice in the perſon of the wife of Cu­pide, came from the high
houſe of the ſkies, & ſaid vnto Pſiches: O ſimple woman, without all
experiēce, doeſt thou thinke to get or dippe vp any droppe of this dred­ful
water? No, no, aſſure thy ſelfe thou arte neuer able to come nigh it, for the
Goddes them ſelues doo greatly feare at the ſight therof: what haue you not
harde that it is a cuſtome emonge men to ſweare by the puiſſance of the
Goddes: And the Goddes doo ſweare by the Ma­ieſtie of the riuer Stix? but giue
me thy bottle, and ſo­denly he toke it, and filled it with the water of the
ri­uer, and takinge his flight thorough thoſe cruell and horrible Dragons
brought it vnto Pſyches: who being very ioyfull thereof preſented it to Venus,
who would not yet be appeaſed, but menacinge more & more, ſaid: what thou
ſéemeſt vnto me a very Witche & Enchaun­tereſſe, that bringeſt theſe thinges
to paſſe, how be it thou ſhalt doo one thinge more.

Take this bore & goe to hell to Proſerpina, and deſire her to ſende me a litle
of her beautie, as muche as will ſerue me the ſpace of one day, and ſay that
ſuche as I had is conſumed away ſince my ſonne fell ſicke, but re­turne againe
quickely, for I muſt dreſſe my ſelf there­withal, [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=68) withal, & goe to
the threatre of the Gods, thē poore Pſi­ches perceaued the ende of al her
fortune, thinking ve­rely y• ſhe ſhoulde neuer returne, & not without cauſe,
when as ſhe was cōpelled to goe to the goulfe & furies of Hell. Wherfore
without any further delay, ſhe wēt vp to a high tower to throwe her ſelfe
downe headlong (thinkinge that it was the nexte and redieſt waye to Hell) but
the towre (as inſpired) ſpake vnto her, ſai­ynge: O poore miſer why goeſt thou
about to ſlea thy ſelfe? why doeſt thou raſhly yéelde vnto thy laſte pe­rill
and daunger? know thou that if thy ſpirite be once ſeperate from thy bodie,
thou ſhalt ſurely goe to Hell, but neuer to returne againe, wherefore herken
to me: Lacedemon a Citie of Grece is not farre henſe: Goe thou thither and
enquire for the hill Tenarus, where­as thou ſhalte finde a hole leadinge to
Hell, euen to the pallaice of Pluto, but take héede that thou goe not with
emptie handes to that place of darkeneſſe: but carry twoo ſoppes ſodden in the
flower of barley and hony in thy handes, & twoo halfpens in thy mouth, and
when thou haſte paſſed a good parte of that way, thou ſhalt ſée a lame Aſſe
carriyng of woodde, & a lame fellowe driuinge him, who will deſire thée to
giue him vp the ſtickes that fall downe, but paſſe thou on and doo nothinge,
by and by thou ſhalt come vnto the riuer of Hell, whereas Charon is Ferriman,
who will firſt haue his fare paide him, before he will carry the ſoules ouer
the riuer in his boate, whereby you may ſée that auarice raigneth emongſt the
dead, neyther Charon nor Pluto will doo any thinge for nought: For if it be a
poore man that woulde paſſe ouer, and lacketh money he ſhalbe compelled to die
in his iourney before they will ſhowe him any reliefe, wherefore deliuer
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=69) to carraine
Charon one of the halfepens (whiche thou beareſt) for thy paſſage, & lette him
receaue it out of thy mouth. And it ſhall come to paſſe as thou ſitteſt in the
boate, thou ſhalte ſée an olde man ſwimminge on the toppe of the riuer
holdinge vp his deadly handes, and deſiringe thée to receaue him into the
barke, but haue no regarde to his piteous crie: when thou arte paſſed ouer the
floudde thou ſhalt eſpie old women ſpinninge who will deſire thée to helpe
them, but beware thou doo not conſent vnto them in any caſe, for theſe and
like baites and trappes wil Venus ſette, to make thée lette fall one of thy
ſoppes: and thinke not that the kéepinge of thy ſoppes is a light matter, for
if thou leſe one of them thou ſhalt be aſſured neuer to retorne againe to this
world. Then thou ſhalt ſée a great and meruelous dogge with thrée heades
barkinge continually at the ſoules of ſuch as enter in, by reaſon he can doo
them no other harme, he lieth day and night before the gate of Proſerpina, and
kéepeth the houſe of Pluto with great diligence, to whome if thou caſt one of
thy ſoppes, thou maiſt haue acceſſe to Proſerpina without all daunger: ſhe
will make thée good chéere, and entertaine thée with delicate meate & drinke,
but ſitte thou vpon the ground and deſire browne bread, and then declare thy
meſſage vnto her, and when thou haſt receaued ſuch beautie as ſhe giueth, in
thy retorne appeaſe the rage of the dogge with thy other ſoppe, & giue thy
other halfepeny to co­uetous Charon, and come the ſame way againe into the
world as thou wenteſt: but aboue all thinges haue a regarde that thou looke
not in the boxe, neither be not to curious about the treaſure of the diuine
beautie.

In this manner the towre ſpake vnto Pſyches, and aduertiſed her what ſhe
ſhould doo: and immediatly ſhe [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=69) tooke twoo
halfpence, twoo ſoppes, and all thinges ne­ceſſary and went to the moūtaine
Tenarus to goe to­wardes Hell.

After that Pſiches had paſſed by the lam [...] Aſſe, paide her halfpenny for
paſſage, neglected the old man in the riuer, denied to helpe the wemen
ſpinninge, and filled the rauenous mouth of y• dogge with a ſoppe, ſhe came to
the chamber of Proſerpina. There Pſyches would not ſitte in any royall ſeate,
nor eate any delicate meates, but kneelinge at the féete of Proſerpina, onely
contented with courſe bread, declared her meſſage, and after ſhe had receaued
a miſticall ſecrete in the boxe ſhe departed, and ſtopped the mouth of the
dogge with the other ſoppe, and paied the boteman the other halfpēny.

When Pſyches was returned from hell, to the light of y• worlde ſhe was
rauiſhed with great deſire, ſaying: Am not I a foole that knowinge that I
carry here the diuine beautie, will not take a little thereof to garniſh my
face, to pleaſe my louer withall? and by and by ſhe opened the boxe, where ſhe
coulde perceaue no beautie nor any thinge els, ſaue onely an infernall and
deadly ſléepe, whiche immediatly inuaded all her members aſ­ſone as the boxe
was vncouered, in ſuch ſort that ſhe fel downe on the gronnde, & lay there as
a ſléepinge corps.

But Cupide beinge now healed of his wounde and maladie, not able to endure the
abſence of Pſyches, gotte him ſecretely out at a windowe of the chamber where
he was encloſed, and (receauinge his winges) toke his flight towardes his
louinge wife, whome whē he had founde he wiped away the ſléepe from her face,
and put it againe into the boxe, and awaked her with the tippe of one of his
arrowes, ſayinge: O wretched  [...]aytife, beholde thou weareſt welny periſhed
againe, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=70) with
thy ouermuch curioſitie, well, goe thou, & doo thy meſſage to my mother, and
in the meane ſeaſon I will prouide for all thinges accordingly: wherewithall
he toke his flight into the ayre, and Pſiches brought her preſent to Venus.

Cupide being more and more in loue with Pſiches, & fearing the diſpleaſure of
his mother, did perce into the heauens, & arriued before Iupiter to declare
his cauſe: then Iupiter after that he had eftſones embraſed him, gan ſay in
this manner: O my welbeloued ſonne, al­though thou haſt not giuen due
reuerēce & honour vn­to me as thou oughteſt to doo, but haſt rather ſoyled, &
wounded this my breſt (wherby the lawes and order of the elementes & planetes
be diſpoſed) with continuall aſſaultes of terren luxury & againſt al lawes, &
the diſ­cipline Iulia, & the vtilitie of y• publique weale in trāſ­forming my
diuine beautie into ſerpentes, fire, ſauage beaſtes, birdes▪ & into bulles.
Howbeit remēbringe my modeſtie, & that I haue nouriſhed thee with mine owne
proper handes. I wil doo & accōpliſh al thy deſire, ſo that thou canſt beware
of ſpiteful & enuious perſons. And if there be any excellent mayden of comely
beautie in the world, remēber yet y• benefite which I ſhall ſhow vnto thée,
by recompence of her loue towardes me againe. When he had ſpokē theſe
woordes, he cōmaunded Mer­curie to call al the Goddes to counſell, and if any
of the celeſtiall powers did fayle of appearance, he ſhould be condemned in
ten thouſande poundes: which ſentence was ſuch a terrour vnto all the Goddes,
that the high Theatre was repleniſhed, & Iupiter began to ſpeake in this
ſorte. O ye Goddes, regiſtred in the bookes of the Muſes, you all know this
yonge man Cupide, whome I haue nouriſhed with mine owne handes, whoſe ra­ginge
[[Page 63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=70) flames of
his firſt youth I thought beſt to bridle and reſtraine. It ſuffiſeth in that
he is diffamed in eue­ry place for his adulterous liuinge, wherefore all
occa­ſion ought to be taken away by meane of marriage: he hath choſen a mayden
that fancieth him well, and hath beriued her of her virginitie, lette him haue
her ſtill and poſſeſſe her according to his owne pleaſure: then he returned to
Venus, and ſaid: And you my daughter, take you no care, neither feare the
diſhonour of your progenie and eſtate, neither haue regarde in that it is a
mortall marriage, for it ſéemeth vnto me, iuſte, law­full and legitimate by
the lawe Ciuill.

Incontinently after, Iupiter commaūded Mercurie to bring up Pſiches the
ſpouſe of Cupide, into the pal­layce of heauen. And then he toke a potte of
immorta­litie, and ſaid: Holde Pſyches and drinke to the ende thou maiſt be
immortall, and that Cupide may be thine euerlaſtinge huſbande.

By and by the great bankette and marriage feaſt was ſumptuouſly prepared,
Cupide ſatte downe with his déere ſpouſe betwéene his armes: Iuno likewiſe wt
Iupiter, and all the other Goddes in order, Ganimides filled the potte of
Iupiter, and Bacchus ſerued the reſt. Their drinke was Nectar the wine of the
goddes, Vul­canus prepared ſupper, the howers decked vp the houſe with Roſes &
other ſwéete ſmelles, the Graces threwe about baulme, the Muſes ſange with
ſwéete harmony, Apollo tuned pleaſauntly to the Harpe, Venus daun­ſed finely:
Satirus and Paniſcus plaide on their pipes: and thus Pſiches was married to
Cupide, and after ſhe was deliuered of a childe, whom we call Pleaſure.

This the trifling old woman declared vnto y• captiue mayden, but I poore Aſſe,
not ſtāding farre of was not
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=71) a litle ſory
in that I lacked penne and Inke to write ſo woorthy a tale.

¶How Apuleius carried away the Gentlewoman, and how they were taken againe by
the theeues, and what a kinde of death was inuented for them.

### 6.2. Cap. 23.

BY & by the Théeues came home laden with trea­ſure, and many of them whiche
were of ſtrongeſt courage (leauinge behinde ſuch as were lame and wounded, to
heale & ayre them ſelues) ſaide they would returne backe againe to fetche the
reſt of their pillage, whiche they had hidden in a certaine caue, and ſo they
ſnatched vp their dinner gréedely, & brought vs foorth into the way and beate
vs before them with ſtaues, about night (after that we had paſſed ouer many
hilles and dales) we came to a great caue, where they laded vs with mighty
burthens, and would not ſuffer vs to refreſhe our ſelues any ſeaſon, but
brought vs againe in our way, and hied ſo faſt homeward, that what with their
haſte and their cruel ſtripes, I fell downe vpon a ſtone by the high way ſide,
then they beate me pitifully in lifting me vp, and hurt my right thighe and my
left hoofe, and one of them ſaid, what ſhall we doo with this lame euill
fauoured Aſſe that is not woorth the meate y• he eates? An other ſaid: ſince
the time that we had him firſt, he neuer did any good, & I thinke he came vnto
our houſe with euill lucke, for we haue had great woundes ſince, & loſſe of
our valiaunt Capitaines, an other ſaide aſſone as he hath brought home his
burthē, I will ſure­ly throwe him out vpon the mountaine to be a pray for
wilde beaſtes: While theſe gentlemen reaſoned toge­ther of my death, we
fortuned to come home, for y• feare [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=71) that I was in,
cauſed my féete to turne into winges: after that we weare diſcharged of our
burthens, they went to their fellowes that lay wounded, & tolde them our great
tarditie & ſlownes by the way, neither was I brought into ſmall anguiſhe when
as I perceaued my death prepared before my face, ſayinge: Why ſtandeſt thou
ſtill Lucius? why doeſt thou looke for thy death? knowſt thou not that the
théeues haue ordeined to ſlea thée? Séeſt thou not theſe ſharpe and pointed
flintes which ſhal bruiſe and teare thée in péeces if by aduēture thou happen
vpon them, thy gentle Magicien hath not onely giuen thée the ſhape and trauell
of an Aſſe, but alſo a ſkinne ſo ſofte and tender as it were a ſwallow, why
doeſt thou not take courage & runne away to ſaue thy life? Arte thou affeard
of the old woman, whiche is more then halfe dead, whome with a ſtripe of thy
héele thou mayſt eaſely diſpatche? but whither ſhall I flie? what lodging ſhal
I ſéeke? beholde my aſſy cogitation? who is he that paſſeth by the way and
will not take me vp: while I deuiſed theſe thinges I brake the halter
wherewith I was tied, and ranne away with all my force, he  [...]beit I could
not eſcape the kitiſhe eyes of the old woman, for ſhe ranne after me, and with
more au­dacitie then becometh her kinde and age, caught me by the halter and
thought to pull me home: but I not for­gettinge the cruell purpoſe of the
théeues, was moued with ſmal pitie, for I kicked her with my hinder héeles to
the groūde and had welnie ſlaine her, who (although ſhe was throwen & hurled
downe) yet ſhe helde ſtill the halter and would not lette me goe, then ſhe
cried with a loude voice & called for ſuccour, but ſhe litle preuailed becauſe
there was no perſon that harde her, ſaue onely the captiue gentlewoman, who
hearinge the voice of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=72) the old
woman, came out to ſée what the matter was, & (perceiuing hir hanging at the
halter) tooke a good cou­rage and wreſted it out of hir handes, and
(entreatinge me with gentle woordes) gotte vpon my backe. Then I began to
ronne, and ſhe gently kicked me forwarde, whereof I was nothinge diſpleaſed,
for I had as great a deſier to eſcape as ſhée: In ſo muche that I ſéemed to
ſcowre away like a horſe. And when the gentlewoman did ſpeake, I would anſwere
hir with my neyinge, and oftentimes (vnder colour to rubbe my backe) I woulde
ſwéetely kiſſe her tender féete. Then ſhe, f [...]tchinge a ſighe from the
bottom of hir harte, lifted vp hir eies in­to the heauens, ſaiyng: O
ſoueraigne Goddes deliuer me if it be your pleaſure, from theſe preſent
daungers: And thou cruell fortune ceaſe thy wrath, let the ſorow ſuffiſe thée
whiche I haue already ſuſteined. And thou litle Aſſe that art the occaſion of
my ſauetie and liber­tée, if thou canſt once rendre me ſalue and ſounde to my
parentes, and to him that ſo greatly deſireth to haue me to his wyfe, thou
ſhalt ſée what thankes I wil geue thée, with what honour I will rewarde thée,
and how I wil vſe thée. Firſt, I will brauely dreſſe the heares of thy
ſorehead, and then I wil finely kembe thy mane, I wyll tie vp thy rugged tayle
trymly, I will decke thée rounde about with golden trappes, in ſuche ſorte,
that thou ſhalt glitter like the Starres of the ſkie, I will bringe thée dayly
in my apron the kyrnelles of nuttes, and will pamper the vp with deintie
delicates, I will ſette ſtoore by thée, as by one that is the preſer­uer of my
lyfe: Finaly, thou ſhalt lacke no maner of thinge. Moreouer, amongeſt thy
glorious fare, thy great eaſe, and the bliſſe of thy life thou ſhalt not bée
deſtitute of dignitée, for thou ſhalt be Chronicled per­petually [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=72) in memorie of my
preſent fortune, and the prouidence diuine. All the whole hiſtorie ſhall be
pain­ted vpon the wall of our houſe: Thou ſhalt be renow­  [...]ed throughout
all the worlde: And it ſhalbe regi­ſtred in the bookes of Doctours, that an
Aſſe ſaued the life of a yonge mayden that was captiue amongeſt Théeues: Thou
ſhalt be nōbred amongeſt the auncient myracles: we beleue that by like
example of truthe, Phryxus ſaued him ſelfe from drowning vpon a Ram, Arion
eſcaped vpon a Dolphin: And that Europa was deliuered by a Bull. If Iupiter
tranſformed him ſelfe into a Bull, why may it not be that vnder ſhape of this
Aſſe, is hiddē y• figure of a mā, or ſome power Deuine? Whyle that the
Virgin did thus ſorowfully vnfold hir deſires, we fortuned to come to a place
wheare thrée wayes did méete, and ſhe tooke me by the halter and would haue me
turne on the right hand to her fathers houſe, but I (knowing that the theues
weare gone that waye to fetche the reſidue of their pillage) reſiſted with my
head as much as I might, ſaiynge within my ſelfe, what wilt thou doo vnhappy
maidē? why woldeſt thou go ſo willingly to hel? why wilt yu rūne into
deſtructiō by meane of my féete? why doeſt thou ſéeke thine owne harme & mind
likewiſe? And whyle we twoo ſtriued to­gether whether way we might take, y•
theues returned loden with their praie, & perceiued vs a farre of by the light
of y• Moone: And after they had knowē vs, one of them gan ſay, whither go you
ſo haſtely? be you not a­ferde of ſpirites? And you (you harlot) doo you goe
to ſée your parentes? Come on, we will beare you company? And therwithall they
tooke me by the halter and draue me back againe, beating me cruelly with a
great ſtaffe (that they had) full of knobbes: thē I (returning againe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=73) [...] [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=73) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=74) to my ready
deſtruction, and remembring the griefe of my h [...]fe) be ganne to ſhake my
head and to waxe lame, but he that ledde me by the halter ſaid: what doeſt
thou ſtomble? canſt thou not goe? theſe rotten féete of thine can runne well
mough, but they cannot walke, thou couldeſt minſe it finely euen now with the
gentlewo­man, that thou diddeſt ſéeme to paſſe the horſe Pega­ſus in ſwiftnes.
In ſayinge theſe woordes, they beate me againe that they brake a great ſtaffe
vpon me, and when we were come almoſt home, we ſaw the old wo­man hanginge
vpon a bow of a Cypreſſe trée: then one of them cutte downe the bowe whereon
ſhe hanged, & caſt her into the bottome of a great ditche: after this they
boūd the maiden & fell greedely to their victuales, which the miſerable old
womā had prouided for them. At whiche time thei began to deuiſe with thē
ſelues of our death, & how they might be reuenged, diuers was the opinions of
this diuers nomber: the firſt ſaide that he thought beſt the mayde ſhould be
burned aliue: the ſecōde ſaide ſhe ſhould be throwen out to wilde beaſts: the
thirde ſaid ſhe ſhould be hanged vpon a gibbot: the fourth ſaide ſhe ſhould be
flead aliue: thus was y• death of the poore mayden ſcāned betwéene them
fower. But one of the Théeues after euery man had declared his iudgement did
ſpeake in this manner. It is not conue­niēt vnto the othe of our cōpany, to
ſuffer you to waxe more cruell, thē the qualitie of the offence doth merite,
for I would that ſhe ſhould not be hanged, nor burned, nor throwen to beaſtes,
nor die any ſodaine death, but by my counſell I would haue her puniſhed
accordinge to her deſerte. You know wel what you haue determi­ned already of
this dull Aſſe, that eateth more then he is woorth, that feigneth lameneſſe, &
that was the cauſe [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=74) of the fliynge
away of the mayde, my minde is that he ſhalbe ſlaine to morrow, and when all
the guttes and entrailes of his body is takē out, let the maide be ſowē into
his belly, then let vs lay them vpon a great ſtone againſte the broylinge
heate of the ſonne, ſo they ſhall both ſuſtaine all the puniſhmentes which you
haue or­deined: for firſt the Aſſe ſhalbe ſlaine as you haue deter­mined, and
ſhe, ſhall haue her membres torne & gnawē with wilde beaſtes, when as ſhe is
bitten & rente with wormes, ſhe ſhal endure the paine of the fire, when as the
broilyng heate of the ſonne ſhall ſkorche and parche the belly of the Aſſe,
ſhe ſhall abide the gallowes when the Dogges and vultures ſhall haue the
guttes of her body hanginge in their rauenous mouthes. I pray you nomber all
the tormentes whiche ſhe ſhall ſuffer: Firſt ſhe ſhall dwell within the paunch
of the Aſſe: ſecondly her noſethrilles ſhall receaue the carraine ſtinke of
the beaſte: thirdly ſhe ſhall die for hunger, laſte of all ſhe ſhall  [...]nde
no meane to ridde her ſelfe from her paines for her handes ſhalbe ſowed vp
within the ſkinne of the Aſſe: This beyng ſaide all the Théeues conſented to
the ſentence, and when I (poore Aſſe) harde, & vnder­ſtoode all their deuiſe,
I did nothinge els ſaue bewayle and lament my dead carkas, whiche ſhould be
handled in ſuch ſorte on the nexte morrow.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=75)

## 7\. The ſeuenth Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.

¶How he that was left behinde at Hippata to bring newes concerninge the
robbery of Milos houſe, came home and de­clared to his compaignions that all
the faulte was layde to one Apuleius charge.

### 7.1. Cap. 24.

ASſone as night was paſte, and the cléere charriot of the ſunne had ſpred his
bright beames on euery coaſte, came one of the companie of the Théeues (for ſo
his & their greatinge together did declare) who at his firſt entrie into the
caue (after he had breathed him ſelfe, & was able to ſpeake) tolde theſe
ti­dinges vnto his compaignions in this ſorte. Sirs, as touching the houſe of
Milo of Hippata, which we forci­bly entred & ranſakt the laſt day, we may put
away all feare, & doubte nothinge at all, for after y• ye by force & armes had
ſpoiled & taken away al things in the houſe, and ſo returned hither vnto our
caue,The vſe of cutte purſes now a daies. I (thruſtinge in emongſt the preaſe
of the people & ſhowing my ſelfe as though I were ſadde & forowful for the
miſchaunce) cō ­ſulted with them for the boultinge out of the matter, &
deuiſed what meanes might be wrought for the appre­henſiō of the théeues, to
the intent I might learne & ſée all that was done to make relation therof vnto
you as you willed me, in ſo much that the whole fact at length by manifeſt &
euident proofes as alſo by the cōmon opi­nion & iudgemēt of al the people,
was layde to one Lu­cius Apuleius charge,vvho was now  [...] Aſſe. as manifeſt
author of this cōmit­ted robbery, who a few daies before by falſe and forged
[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=75) letters &
coloured honeſtie,Surmiſes of the common people. fell ſo farre in fauour with
this Milo that he entertained him into his houſe, & re­ceyued him as chiefe of
his familiar friēdes, which Lu­cius, after that he had ſoiourned there a good
ſpace, and wonne the hart of Miloes maide by feigned loue, did thoroughly
learne y• waies and doores of all the houſe, & curiouſly viewed the cofers &
cheſtes▪ wherin was laide the whole ſubſtance of Milo, neither was there ſmall
cauſe giuē to iudge him culpable, ſince as the very ſame night that this
robbery was done he fledde away, and could be found in no place, & to thintēt
he might cleane eſcape, and better preuent ſuch as made hewe and crie after
him,His white horſe was likewiſe taken away by the Theeues. he toke his white
horſe & gallopped away, & after this his ſeruaūt was found in the houſe, who
(ac­cuſed as acceſſary to the felony & eſcape of his maiſter) was cōmitted to
the cōmon gaole, & the next day folow­yng was cruelly ſcourged & tormented
til he was wel­nie dead to the intent he ſhould cōfeſſe the matter, but when
they could wreſt or learne no ſuch thinge of him, yet ſente they many perſons
after towardes Lucius countrey to enquire him out, & ſo to take him priſoner.

As he declared theſe thinges,The Aſſe ſpea­keth. I did greatly lament with my
ſelfe to thinke of mine old and priſtine eſtate, and what felicitie I was
ſometimes in, in cōpariſon to the miſery that I preſently ſuſtained, beyng
chaunged into a miſerable Aſſe, then had I no ſmall occaſiō to re­member, how
the olde & auncient writers did ſeigne & affirme, that fortune was ſtarke
blinde & without eies, becauſe ſhe alwaies beſtoweth her richeſſe vpon ruſ
[...] perſons and fooles,God ſēdes fooles fortune. and chooſeth or fauoreth
no mortall perſon by iudgement but is alwaies conuerſant eſpe­cially with
ſuche as if ſhe coulde ſée, ſhe ſhoulde moſte ſhunne & forſake, yea and that
which is more worſe ſhe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=76) ſoweth ſuche
euill or rather contrary opinions in men, that the wicked doo glory with the
name of good, and contrary the good and innocent be detracted and ſclaū
­dered as euill. Furthermore I, who by hir great cru­eltie was turned into a
fower footed Aſſe, is moſt vile and abiect manner, yea and whoſe eſtate ſéemed
woor­thely to be lamented and pitied of the moſt harde & ſto­nie hartes, was
accuſed of theft & robbinge of my déere Oſte Milo, which villanie might rather
be called pari­cide then thefte, yet might not I defende mine owne cauſe, or
denie the facte any waie, by reaſon I coulde not ſpeake howbeit leaſt my
conſcience ſhould ſéeme to accuſe me by reaſon of ſilence, and againe being
enfor­ced by impacience I endeuered to ſpeake, & faine would haue ſaid: Neuer
did I that facte. And verely the firſte woorde, Neuer▪ I cried out once or
twiſe ſomwhat hād­ſomely, but the reſidew I could in no wiſe pronounce, but
ſtill remayning in one voice cried Neuer, Neuer, Neuer: Howbeit I ſetled my
hangyng lippes as roūde as I could to ſpeake the reſidew: but why ſhould I
fur­ther complaine of the crueltie of my fortune, ſince as I was not muche
aſhamed, by reaſon that my ſeruaunt & my horſe was likewiſe accuſed with me of
the robbery. While I pondred with my ſelfe all theſe thinges, a greater care
came to my remembraunce, touchinge the death which the Théeues deuiſed for me
& the mayden, and ſtil as I looked downe to my belly, I thought of the poore
Gentlewoman that ſhoulde be cloſed within me: and the théefe which a litle
before had brought the falſe newes againſt me, drewe out of the ſkirte of his
coate a thouſande crownes, whiche he had rifled away from ſuch as he mette,
and caſt it into the common treaſory. Then he carefully enquired how the
reſidew of his cō ­paignions [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=76) did.As Traſileon
Lamathus &c. To whom it was declared that the moſt valiant was murdred and
ſlaine in diuers manners, whereupon he perſwaded them to remitte all their
af­fayres a certaine ſeaſon, and to ſeke for other fellowes to bée in their
places, that by the exerciſe of newe laddes the terror of their martiall bande
might be re­duced to the olde number, aſſuringe them that ſuche as were
vnwillinge might be compelled by menaces and threatninges, and ſuch as weare
willing might be en­couraged forward with rewarde, further he ſaide, that
there were ſome, whiche (ſeinge the profite which they had) would forſake
their baſe and ſeruill eſtate, and ra­ther be contented to liue like tirantes
emongſt them: moreouer he declared, that for his parte he had ſpoken with a
certaine tale man, a valiant cōpaignion, but of yōge age, ſtoute in bodie, &
couragious in fight, whom he had fully perſwaded to exerciſe his idle handes,
dull with ſlouthfulnes, to his greater profite, and (while he might) to
receaue the bliſſe of better fortune, and not to holde out his ſturdy arme to
begge for a penny, but ra­ther to take as muche golde & ſiluer as he would.
Then euery one conſented, that he that ſéemed ſo woorthy to be their
compaigniō, ſhould be one of their cōpany and that they would ſearch for
others to make vp the reſi­dew of the nomber, wherupon he went out, and by and
by (returninge againe) brought in a tale yonge man (asThis yonge man was
[...]ep [...]lemus the yonge may­dens ſpouſe. he promiſed) to whom none of the
reſidew might be cō ­pared, for he was higher then they by the head, and of
more bignes in bodie, his bearde began to burgen, but he was poorely
appareled, in ſo much that you might ſée all his belly naked: As ſone as he
was entred in, he ſayd, God ſpéede ye ſouldiars of Mars, and my faith­full
compaignions, I pray you make me one of your
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=77) bande,A pre
[...]y deceiple of Lepolemus. and I will enſure you that you ſhall haue a man
of ſingular courage and liuely audacitie, for I had ra­ther receaue ſtrypes
vppon my backe, then money or golde in my handes: and as for death (whiche
euery man doo feare) I paſſe nothyng at all, yet thinke you not that I am an
abiect or a begger, neyther iudge you my vertue and proweſſe by my ragged
clothes, for I haue béene a Capitaine of a great company, and ſub­dued all the
countrey of Macedonie: I am the renou­med théefe Hemus the Thracien, whoſe
name all coun­tries and nations doo ſo greatly feare: I am the ſoone of Theron
the notable théefe, nouriſhed with humaine bloudde, entertained emongſt the
ſtouteſt: finally I am inheritour and follower of my Fathers, vertues, yet I
loſt in a ſhorte time all my company, and all my richeſſe by one aſſault,
whiche I made vpon a factor of the Prince, whiche ſometime had bene Capitayne
of twoo hundred men, for fortune was cleane againſt me: herken and I will tell
you the whole matter.A forged lie. There was a certayne manne in the courte of
the Emperour whiche had many offices, and in great fauour, who at laſt by the
enuie of diuers perſons was baniſhed away and compelled to forſake the courte:
his wife Platina, a woman of rare faithe and ſinguler ſhamefaſtnes, ha­uinge
borne tenne children to her huſbande, deſpiſed al worldly pompe and delicacie,
& determined to follow her huſbande, and to be a partaker of all his perils
and daunger, wherefore the cut of her heare, diſguiſed her ſelfe like a man, &
toke with her al her treaſure, paſſing thorough the handes of the ſouldiours
and the naked ſwordes without any feare, wherby ſhe endured many miſeries, and
was partaker of muche affliction to ſaue the life of her huſbande, ſuch was
her loue whiche ſhe [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=77) bare vnto him.
And when they had eſcaped many peri­lous daungers aſwell by lande as by ſea
they went to wardes Zacynthe to continue there accordinge as for­tune had
appointed: But when they arriued on the ſea coſte of Actiū (where we in our
returne frō Macedonie were rouinge about) when night came they turned in­to a
houſe, not farre diſtant from their ſhippe where they lay all night. Then we
entred in & toke away all their ſubſtance, but verely we were in great
daunger, for the good Matron perceyuinge vs incontinently by the notes of the
gate, went into the chamber, and cal­led vp euery man by his name, and
likewiſe the neigh­bours that dwelled rounde about, in ſo much y• by rea­ſon
of the feare thar euery one was in, we hardly eſca­ped away, but this moſt
holy womā, faithfull and true to her huſband (as the truth muſt be declared)
returned to Caeſar deſiringe his ayde and puiſance, and demaun­dinge
vengeaunce of the iniurie done to her huſbande, who graunted all her deſire:
then wente my company to wracke in ſo muche that euery man was ſlayne, ſo
great was the authoritie and woorde of the Prince. How be it when all my bande
was loſte and taken by ſearche of the Emperours armie, I onely ſtole away and
deliuered my ſelfe from the violence of the ſoul­diars, for I clothed my ſelfe
in a womans attyre, and mounted vpon an Aſſe that carried barley ſhéefes, and
(paſſinge thorough the middle of them all) I eſcaped away, becauſe euery one
déemed that I was a woman, by reaſon I lacked a bearde. How be it I lefte not
of for all this, nor did degenerate from the glory of my father, or mine owne
vertue, but freſhly cōming from the blouddy ſkirmiſh, and diſguiſed like a
woman I in­uaded Townes and Caſtels alone to gette ſome pray.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=78) And
therwithall he pulled out twoo thouſand crownes whiche he had vnder his coate,
ſayinge: Holde here the dowrie whiche I preſent vnto you, holde eke my per­ſon
whiche you ſhall alwaies finde truſty and faithfull if you will willingly
receaue me: And I will enſure you that in ſo doinge, within ſhorte ſpace I
will make and turne this ſtony houſe of yours into Golde: then by and by euery
one conſented to make him their Ca­pitaine, and ſo they gaue him better
garmentes and threwe away his olde. When he had chaunged his at­tyre he
embraced them one after an other, then placed they him in the higheſt rome of
the table, and dranke vnto him in token of good lucke.

¶How the death of the Aſſe, and the Gentel woman was ſtaide,

### 7.2. Cap. 25.

AFter ſupper they beganne to talke,Apuleius ſpea­keth. and declared vnto him
the goinge away of the gentlewoman, and how I bare her vpō my backe, & what
death was ordeyned for vs twoo. Then he deſired to ſée her▪ whereupon the
Gentlewoman was brought foorth faſt bounde, whom aſſone as he beheld, he
turned him ſelfe wringinge his noſe & blamed them, ſaying: I am not ſo much a
beaſt or ſo raſhe a fellow,A prety wyle to ſaue his wife. y• I would driue you
quight from your purpoſe, but my conſcience will not ſuffer me to conceale any
thinge that toucheth your profite, ſince as I am carefull for you, how be it
if my counſell doo diſpleaſe you, you may at your owne li­bertie procéede in
your enterpriſe. I doubte not but all Théeues, and ſuche as haue a good
iudgement, will preferre their owne lucre & gaine aboue all thinges in the
worlde, & aboue their vengeance, which purchaſeth [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=78) damage to diuers
perſons. Therefore if you put this Virgin in the Aſſes belly, you ſhal but
execute your in­dignation againſt hir without all maner of profite: but I
woulde aduiſe you to carie the Virgin to ſome towne & to ſel her. And ſuch a
braue girle as ſhe is, may be ſolde for a great quantitie of money: And I my
ſelfe know certaine bawde Marchaūtes, amongeſt whome, peraduenture ſome one
will giue-vs great ſummes of golde for her. This is my opinion touchinge this
af­faire: But aduiſe you what you intende to doo, for you may rule me in this
caſe. In this maner the good thefe pleaded and defended our cauſe, being a
good patron to the ſéely Virgin, and to me poore Aſſe. But they ſtaide
hereupon a good ſpace with longe deliberation, whiche made my harte (God wote)
and ſpirit greatly to quale. Howebeit, in the ende they conſented to his
opinion, and by and by, the mayden was vnloſed of hir bondes, who ſeinge the
yonge man, and hearinge the name of brothels and bawde Marchauntes, began to
waxe ioy­full, and ſmiled with her ſelfe. Then began I to déeme euill of the
generation of women, when as I ſawe the maiden (who was appointed to be maried
to a yonge gentleman, and who ſo greatly deſired the ſame) was nowe delighted
with the talke of a wicked and filthy brothel houſe, and other thinges
diſhoneſt. In this ſort the conſent and maners of wemen depēded in the
iud­gement of an Aſſe.

¶Howe all the Theues weare brought in a ſleape by their newe companion.

### 7.3. Cap. 26.

THen the yonge man ſpake againe, ſaiynge: Mai­ſters, why go we not about to
make our praiers
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=79) to Mars
touching this ſellinge of the maiden, [...]ere Lepolem [...] draweth to his
purpoſe. and to ſake for other compaigniōs. But as farre as I ſée here is no
maner of beaſte to make ſacrifice withall, nor wyne ſufficient for vs to
drinke. Let me haue (ꝙ he) tenne more with me, and we wil goe to the next
caſtel, to prouide for meate and other thinges neceſſarie. So he and tenne
more with him, went their waie: In the meane ſeaſon the reſidue made a great
fire, and an al­tar with grene tirfes, in the honour of Mars. By and by after
they came againe, bringing with them bottels of wyne, and a great nomber of
beaſtes, amongeſt whiche there was a bigge Ram goate, fatte, olde, and hearie,
whiche they killed and offered vnto Mars. Thē ſupper was prepared
ſumptuouſlie: And the new com­paignion ſaide vnto the other. You ought to
accompte me not onelie your Captaine in robberie and fight, but alſo in your
pleaſures and iolitie, wherupon by and by with pleaſaūt there he prepared
meate, & trimming vp the houſe, he ſet all thinges in order, & brought the
po­tage & dentie diſhes to the table: But aboue all he plied them well with
great pottes, & iugges of wine. Some­times (ſéeming to fetche ſomwhat) he
would goe to the maiden and giue her pieces of meate, whiche he priuely tooke
awaie, and would drinke vnto hir, whiche ſhe wil­lingly tooke in good parte.
Moreouer he kiſſed her twiſe or thriſe, wherof ſhe was well pleaſed, but I
(not well contented thereat) thought in my ſelfe: O wretched maide,Apuleius
ſpea­keth. thou haſt forgotten thy mariage, & doeſt eſteme this ſtraunger and
bloudy théefe aboue thy huſbande, which thy parentes ordeined for thée, nowe
perceiue I wel thou haſt no remorſe of cōſcience, but more delight to tarie &
plaie the harlot here amongſt ſo manie wea­pons and ſwoordes, what knoweſt
thou not howe the [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=79) other Theeues if
they knew thy demeanure would put thée to death as they had once apointed, &
ſo worke my deſtruction likewiſe? well now I perceaue thou haſte a pleaſure in
the damage and hurt of other. While I did angerly deuiſe with my ſelfe all
theſe thinges, I per­ceaued by certaine ſignes and tokens (not ignorant to ſo
wiſe an Aſſe) that he was not the notable théefe He­mus, but rather Lepolemus
her huſbād,The iudgement of an Aſſe. for after much communication he began to
ſpeake more frankely, not fearinge at all my preſence, and ſaide: be of good
chéere my ſwéete fréende Charites, for thou ſhalt haue by and by all theſe thy
enemies captiue vnto thée. Then he fil­led wine to the théeues more, and more,
and neuer cea­ſed till as they weare all ouercome with aboundance of meate and
drinke, when as he him ſelfe abſteyned and bridled his owne appetite: and
truely, I did great­ly ſuſpect, leaſt he had mingled in their cuppes ſome
deadly poyſon, for incontinently they all fell downe a ſléepe on the grounde
one after an other, and laye as though they had bene dead.

¶How the Gentlewoman was carried home by her huſband while the Theeues were
aſleepe, and howe muche Apu­leius was made of.

### 7.4. Cap. 27.

WHen the Théeues were all a ſléepe by their great and immoderate drinkynge,
the yonge man Lepolemus toke the maiden & ſet hir vpō my backe and wente
homeward, when we were come home, all the people of the Citie (eſpecially her
parētes, fréendes & familie) came rūning foorth ioyfully, & al the children
& maidens of y• towne, gathered together to ſée this virgin in great triūph
ſittyng vpō an Aſſe. Thē I
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=80) (willinge to
ſhow as much ioye as I might as preſentA prety ieſt of an Aſſe. occaſion
ſerued) I ſet and pricked vp my longe eares, I ratled my noſethrilles, and
cried ſtoutly, nay rather I made the towne to ringe againe wt my ſhrilling
sound▪ when we were come to her fathers houſe, ſhe was re­ceaued into a
chamber honorably: as for me, Lepole­mus (accompaigned with a great nomber of
Citizins) did driue me backe againe with other horſes to y• caue of the
Théeues, where we found them all a ſléepe liyng on the ground as we left them,
then they firſt brought out al the golde, ſiluer, and other treaſure of the
houſe, and laded vs withall, whiche when they had done, they threwe many of
the théeues downe into the bottome of déepe ditches, and the reſidew they
ſlewe with their ſwoordes: after this we returned home gladde & merry of ſo
great vengeance vpō them, and the richeſſe which we carried was committed to
the publique Treaſory: This done, the maide was married to Lepolemus,
ac­cordyng to the lawe, whome by ſo much trauell he had valiātly recouered:
Then my good miſtris looked about for me, & aſkinge for me cōmaunded the very
ſame day of her marriage, that my maūger ſhould be filled with barley, and
that I ſhould haue hay & Otes abundantly, & ſhe would call me her litle
Camell. But how greatly did I curſe Fotis in that ſhe tranſformed me into an
Aſſe, and not into a Dogge, becauſe I ſawe the dogges had filled their
paunches with the relickes and bones of ſo woorthy a ſupper, the nexte day
this newe wedded woman (my miſtris) did greatly commende me before her
parentes and huſbande, for the kindenes whiche I had ſhowed vnto her, and
neuer leued of vntill ſuche time as they promiſed to rewarde me with great
ho­nors, then they called together al their fréendes, & thus [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=80) it was ſo
concluded, one ſaid that I ſhould be cloſed in a ſtable and neuer woorke but
continually to be fedde and fatted with fine and choſen barley and beanes, &
good littor, how be it an other preuayled, who wiſhing my libertie perſwaded
them that it was better for me to runne in the fieldes emongſt the laſciuious
horſes and mares, whereby I might engender ſome mules for my miſtris,This
pleaſed the Aſſe. then he that kept the horſe was called for, and I was
deliuered vnto him with great care, in ſo muche that I was right pleaſaunt and
ioyous, becauſe I hoped that I ſhoulde carry no more fardels or bur­thens,
moreouer I thought that when I ſhould thus be at libertie, in the ſpringe time
of the yeare when the medowes and fieldes were gréene, I ſhould finde ſome
Roſes in ſome place, whereby I was fully perſwaded that if my maiſter and
miſtris did render to me ſo ma­ny thankes and honours beynge an Aſſe, they
would much more rewarde me beynge turned into a man: but when he (to whome the
charge of me was ſo ſtraightly cōmitted) had brought me a good way diſtant
from the Citie, I perceaued no delicate meates nor no libertie which I ſhould
haue,Vnhappy is he that hath an ill miſtris. but by and by his couetous wife
and moſt curſed queane made me a mill Aſſe, and (bea­tinge me with a kidgell
full of knottes) would wringe bredde for her ſelf and her houſehold out of my
ſkinne, yet was ſhe not contented to wery me and make me a drudge with
carriage and grinding of her owne corne, but I was hired of her neyghbours to
beare their ſackes likewiſe, how be if ſhe would not giue me ſuche meate as I
ſhoulde haue, nor ſufficient to ſuſtaine my life withall, for the barley
whiche I grounde for mine owne dinner ſhe would fell to the inhabitātes by.
And after that I had laboured all day, ſhe would ſet before
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=81) me at night
a litle filthy branne,Such scrapinge dames be many now a daies. nothinge
cleane but full of ſtones. Beynge in this calamitie yet fortune worked me
other tormentes, for on a day I was lette looſe into the f [...]ldes to
paſture by the commaūdement of my maiſter, O how I leaped for ioye, how I
neyed to ſee my ſelfe in ſuch libertie, b [...]t eſpecially ſince I be­helde
ſo many mares, whiche I thought ſhould be my wiues and concubines, and I
eſpied out and chooſe the fayreſt before I came nighe them, but this my
ioyfull hope turned into vtter deſtruction,Pleaſure often­times turneth to
paine. for incontinently all the ſtone Horſes whiche were well fedde and made
ſtronge by eaſe of paſture, and thereby muche more puiſſant then a poore Aſſe,
were Ielous ouer me, and (hauinge no regarde to the lawe and order of the God
Iupiter) ranne fierſely and terribly againſte me, one lifted vp his fore féete
and kicked me ſpitefully, an o­ther turned him ſelfe and with his hinder
héeles ſpur­ned me cruelly, the thirde threatninge with a maliti­ous neyinge
dreſſed his eares and ſhewyng his ſharpe and white téeth bitte me on euery
ſide. In like ſorte haue I redde in Hiſtories howe the Kinge of Thrace,The
Aſſe hath redde Hiſtories. would throwe his miſerable geſte to be torne in
péeces and deuoured of his wilde horſes, ſo niggiſhe was that Tyraūt of his
prouender that he nouriſhed them with the bodies of men.

¶How Apuleius was made a common Aſſe to fetche home woodde, and how he was
handled by a boye.

### 7.5. Cap. 28.

AFter that I was thus handled by the Horſes, I was brought home againe to the
mille, but be­holde, fortune (inſatiable of my tormentes) had deuiſed a new
paine for me, I was appointed to bringe [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=81) home woodde
euery day frō a high hill, and who ſhould driue me thither and home againe,
but a boy that was the verieſt hangeman in all the worlde, who was not
contēted with the great trauell that I toke in climinge vp the hill, neither
pleaſed when he ſawe my hoofes torne and worne away by ſharpe flintes, but he
beate me cruelly with a great ſtaffe,One ſorrowe that the b [...]ye wrought to
A­puleius. in ſo much that the mary of my boanes did ake for woo, for he
woulde ſtrike me continually on my right hippe and ſtill in one place, whereby
he tare my ſkinne and made of my wide ſore a great hole or trench, or rather a
windowe to looke out at, and although it ranne downe of bloud, yet would he
not ceaſe beatinge me in that place, moreouer he la­ded me with ſuch great
truſſes and burthens of woodde that you would thinke they had bene rather
prepared for Olyphantes then for me, and when he perceaued that my woodde
hanged more of one ſide then an other (when he ſhoulde rather take away the
heauy ſhides, and ſo eaſe me or els lifte them vp to make them equall with the
other) he layde great ſtones vpon the weaker ſide to remedie the matter, yet
coulde he not be con­tented with this my greate miſerie and immoderate
burthens of woodde, but when we came to any riuer (as their weare many by the
way) he to ſaue his féete from water woulde leape vpon my loynes likewiſe,
whiche was no ſmall lode vpon lode. And if by ad­uenture I had fell downe in
any dirtie or myry place, when he ſhould haue pulled me out, either with
ropes, or lifted me vp by the tayle, he woulde neuer healpe me, but layde me
on from toppe to toe with a mighty ſtaffe, till he had lefte no heare on all
my bodie, no not ſo muche as on mine eares, whereby I was com­pelled by force
of the blowes to ſtande vp.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=82) The ſame
hangeman boye did inuent an other tor­ment for me, he gathered a great many
ſharpe thornes as ſharpe as néedels, and bounde them together like a faggot
and tied them at my taile to pricke me, then was I afflicted on euery ſide,
for if I had endeuored to runne away the thornes would haue pricked me, if I
had ſtoode ſtill the boye would haue beaten me, and yet the boye beate me to
make me runne, whereby I per­ceaued that the hangeman did deuiſe nothinge els
ſaue to kill me by ſome manner of meanes, and he woulde ſweare and threaten to
doo me worſe harme, and be­cauſe he might haue ſome occaſion to execute his
ma­licious minde, vpon a day (after that I had endeuored to much by my
pacience) I lifte vp my héeles and ſpur­ned him welfauoredly. Then he inuented
this ven­geance againſt me, after that he had well laded me with ſhrubbes and
rubbell and truſſed it rounde vpon my backe, he brought me out into the way:
then he ſtale a burninge coale out of a mans houſe of the nexte village and
put it into the middle of the rubbell, the rubbell and ſhrubbes beinge very
drie, did fall on a light fire and burned me on euery ſide. I coulde ſée no
remedie how I might ſaue my ſelfe, and in ſuche a caſe it was not beſte for me
to ſtande ſtill: but fortune was fauorable towardes me, perhaps to reſerue me
for more daungers, for I eſpied a great hole full of rayne water that fell the
day before, thither I ranne haſte­ly and plunged my ſelfe therein, in ſuche
ſorte that I quenched the fire and was deliuered from that preſent perill, but
the vile boye to excuſe him ſelfe declared to all the neyghbours and
ſheapeherdes aboute that I willingly tombled in the flere as I paſſed through
the villages. Then he laughed vpon me ſaiynge: Howe [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=82) longe ſhall we
nouriſhe and keepe this fyry Aſſe in vaine.

¶Howe Apuleius was accuſed of lecherie by the Boie.

### 7.6. Cap. 29.

A Fewe daies after, this Boie inuented an other miſchiefe: For whē he had
ſolde al y• wood, which I bare, to certain men dwelling in a village by, he
led me homeward vnladen: And then he cried that he was not able to rule me, &
that he woulde not driue me any lenger to the hill for woodde, ſaiyng: doo you
ſée this ſlowe and dull Aſſe, who beſides all the miſchiefes that he hath
wrought alreadie, inuenteth dailie more & more. For when he eſpieth any woman
paſſing by the waie, whether ſhe be olde or maried, or if it be a yonge
childe, he will throwe his burthen from his backe and ronneth fierſly vpon
thē. And after yt he hath throwen them downe, he will ſtride ouer them to
committe his buggery and beaſtlie pleaſure, moreouer he will faine as though
he would kiſſe them, but he will byte their faces cruellie, whiche thinge may
woorke vs great diſ­pleaſure, or rather be imputed vnto vs as a crime: and
euen now when he eſpied an honeſt maiden paſſing by the highe waie, he by and
by threwe downe his woodde & ranne after her: And when he had throwen her vpon
the ground, he would haue rauiſhed her before the face of all the worlde, had
it not bene that by reaſon of her criyng out, ſhe was ſuccoured and pulled
frō his héeles and ſo deliuered. And if it had ſo come to paſſe that this
fearfull maiden had bene ſlaine by him, what daun­ger had we bene in? By theſe
and like lies, he prouoked the ſhéepeherdes earneſtlie againſt me, whiche
greued [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=83) me
(God wote) full ſore that ſaide nothing. Then one of the ſhepeherdes ſaid: Why
doo we not make ſacrifice of this common adulterouſe Aſſe. My ſonne (ꝙ he) let
vs kill him and throwe his guttes to the dogges,Here they deuiſe to kill the
Aſſe. & reſerue his fleſhe for the labourers ſupper. Then let vs caſt duſt
vpō his ſkinne, & carie it home to our maiſter, and ſay that the Wolues hath
deuoured him. The boie that was my euill accuſer, made no delaie but prepared
him ſelfe to execute the ſentence of the ſhepeherde, re­ioyſing at my preſent
daūger, but O how greatly did I then repent that the ſtripe which I gaue him
with my héele had not killed him. Then he drewe out his ſwoord and made it
ſharpe vpon a whetſtone to ſlea me, but an other of the ſhepeherdes gan ſaie,
verely it is a great offence to kill ſo faire an Aſſe.A friendly ene­mie to
the Aſſe. And ſo (by accuſation of luxurie and laſciuious wantonnes) to lacke
ſo neceſſary his labour and ſeruice, where otherwyſe if you would cut of his
ſtones, he might not onely be depriued of his courage, but alſo become gentle,
that we ſhould be de­liuered from all feare of daunger. Moreouer, he would be
thereby more fat and better in fleſhe. For I knowe my ſelfe as well many
Aſſes, as alſo moſte fierce hor­ſes, that by reaſon of their wantonnes, haue
bene moſt madde and terrible, but (when they weare gelded and cut) they haue
become very gentle and tame, and trac­table to all vſe. Wherfore I would
counſell you to geld him. And if you conſent therto, I will by and by, when I
goe to the next market fetche mine yrons and tooles for the purpoſe: And I
enſure you after y• I haue gel­ded and cut of his ſtones, I will deliuer him
vnto you as tame as a lambe. When I did perceiue that I was deliuered from
death,Apuleius ſpea­keth. and reſerued to be gelded, I was greatly ſorie, in
ſo muche that I thought all the hinder [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=83) part of my bodie
and my ſtones did ake for woo, but I ſought about to kil my ſelfe by ſome
maner of meanes, to thende if I ſhould die, I would die with vnperiſhed
members.

¶Howe the boye that ledde Apuleius to the fieldes, was ſlaine in the woodde.

### 7.7. Cap. 30.

WHile I deuiſed with my ſelfe in what maner I might ende my life, the roperipe
boie on the next morrow led me to the hill againe, & tied me to a boowe of a
great Oke, and in the meane ſeaſon he tooke his hatchet and cut woodde to lode
me withall, but beholde there crept out of a caue by, a meruailous great
Beare, holdinge out his mighty head, whome when I ſawe, I was ſodēly ſtrokē
in feare & (throwing all the ſtrēgth of my bodie into my hinder héeles)
lifted vp my ſtreined head and brake the halter, wherwith I was tied. Then
there was no néede to bidde me runne awaie, for I ſcoured not onely on foote,
but tumbled o­uer the ſtones and rockes with my bodie, til I came in­to the
open fieldes, to the intent I would eſcape away from the terrible Beare, but
eſpecially from the boie y• was worſe then the Beare. Then a certaine
ſtraunger that paſſed by y• waie (eſpiyng me alone as a ſtraie Aſſe) tooke me
vp & rode vpon my back, beating me wt a ſtaffe (which he bare in h [...] hād)
through a blind & an vnknowē lane, wherat I was nothing diſpleaſed, but
willingly wēt forward to auoide y• cruel paine of gelding, which y• ſhepardes
had ordeined for me, but as for y• ſtripes I was nothing moued, ſince I was
acuſtomed to be beatē ſo euery day: But euell fortune would not ſuffer me to
continue in ſuche eſtate longe: For the Shepeherdes
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=84) (looking
about for a cowe that they had loſt,He falleth into Scilla that will auoide
Charib­dis. after they had ſought in diuers places) fortuned to come vpon vs
vnwares, who when they eſpied and knewe me, they woulde haue taken me by the
halter, but he that rode vpon my backe reſiſted thē ſaiyng. Good lord
maiſters, what intende you to doo? will you robbe me? Then ſaid the
ſhéepeherdes, what thinkeſt thou that we handle thée otherwiſe then thou
deſerueſt, which haſt ſtolen a­waie our Aſſe, why doeſt thou not rather tel vs
where thou haſt hidden the boie whom thou haſt ſlaine? And therewithall they
pulled him downe to the grounde, beatinge him with their fiſtes, and ſpurning
him with their féere. Then he ſware vnto thē ſaiyng: that he ſaw no maner of
boie, but onely founde the Aſſe looſe and ſtraiynge abroade, whiche he tooke
vp to thintent he might haue ſome rewarde for the finding of him, and to
reſtore him againe to his maiſter. And I would to god (ꝙ he) y• this Aſſe
(which verely was neuer ſéene) could ſpeake as a man, to geue witneſſe of mine
innocencie: Then would you be aſhamed of the iniurie whiche you haue done to
me. Thus (reaſoning for him ſelfe) he no­thing preuailed, for thei tied the
halter about my neck, and (maugre his face) pulled me quite awaie, & led me
backe againe through the wooddes of the hill to y• place where the boie
accuſtomed to reſorte. And after that they could finde him in no place, at
length they founde his bodie rent and torne in pieces, and his members
diſperſed in ſondrie places, which I well knewe was done by the cruel Beare,
and verely I would haue told it if I might haue ſpoken, but (whiche I could
onely do) I greatly reioyſed at his death, although it came to late. Then they
gathered together the pieces of his bo­die and buried them. By and by they
laide all the fault [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=84) to him that was
my newe maiſter, that tooke me vp by the way, and (bringing him home faſte
bounde to their houſes) purpoſed on the nexte morrow to accuſe him of murder,
and to lead him before the Iuſtices to haue iudgement of death.

¶How Apuleius was cruelly beaten by the mother of the boye that was ſlaine.

### 7.8. Cap 31.

IN the meane ſeaſon while the parentes of the boye did lament and wéepe, for
the death of their ſonne. The ſhéepeherd (according to his promiſe) came with
his inſtrumentes and tooles to gelde me, then one of them ſaid: Tuſhe we litle
eſtéeme the miſchief which he did yeſterday, but now we are contēted that to
morow his ſtones ſhal not onely be cut of,Apuleius gel­dinge was de­laide. but
alſo his head. So was it brought to paſſe that my death was delaide till the
next morowe: but what thankes did I giue to that good boie, who (being ſo
ſlaine) was the cauſe of my par­don for one ſhorte day: Howbeit I had no time
then to reſt my ſelf, for the mother of the boye wéeping and la­menting for
his death, attyred in mourninge veſture, tare her heare, and beate her breſt,
and came preſently into the ſtable, ſayinge: Is it reaſon that this careleſſe
beaſt ſhould doo nothinge all day but holde his head in the manger, filling
and bolling his guttes with meate without cōpaſſion of my great miſerie, or
remēbraunce of the pitifull death of his ſlayne maiſter: and contem­ninge my
age and infirmitie, thinketh that I am vna­ble to reuenge his miſchiefes:
moreouer he would per­ſwade me that he were not culpable, in déede it is a cō
­uenient thinge to looke and pleade for ſafetie, when as the conſcience doth
confeſſe the offence, as théeues and malefactors accuſtome to doo: but O good
Lord y• curſed
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=85) beaſt if
thou couldeſt vtter the cōtentes of thine owne minde whomeA fooliſh wo­man to
laye the fault to a bruite beaſt. (though he were the verieſt foole in all the
worlde) mighteſt thou perſwade that this murder was voide or without thy
faulte, when as it lay in thy power either to kéepe of the théeues with thy
héeles or elſe to bite and teare them with thy téeth. Couldeſt not thou (that
ſo oftē in his life time diddeſt ſpurne & kicke him) defende him nowe at the
pointe of death by like meane? yet at leaſt thou ſhouldeſt haue taken him vpō
thy backe, and ſo brought him from the cruel handes of théeues, where contrary
thou ranneſt away alone for­ſakinge thy good maiſter, thy paſtor, and
conductor. Knoweſt y• not that ſuch as denie their holeſome helpe and ayde to
them which lie in daunger of death, ought to be puniſhed becauſe they haue
offended againſt good manners and the law naturall, but I promiſe thée thou
ſhalt not longe reioyſe at my harmes: thou ſhalt féele y• ſmart of thy
homicide and offence, I wil ſée what I can doo, and there withall ſhe vnloſed
her apron, and boūde all my féete together, to the ende I might not helpe my
ſelfe, then ſhe toke a great barre whiche accuſtomed to barre the ſtable
doore, and neuer ceaſed beatinge of me till ſhe was ſo weary y• the barre fell
out of her hādes, whereupon ſhe (complayninge of the ſoone faintnes of her
armes) ranne to her fire and brought a fier brande and thruſt it vnder my
taile, burninge me continually till ſuch time as (hauing but one remedie) I
all arrayed her face and eies with my dirtie donge, whereby (what with the
ſtinke therof, and what with the filthines that fell in her eyes) ſhe was
welnie blinde, ſo I enforced the queane to leaue of, otherwiſe I had died as
Melea­ger did by the ſticke, whiche his madde mother Althea caſt into the
fire.

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=85)

## 8\. The eight Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.

¶Howe a yonge man came and declared the mi­ſerable death of Lepolemus, and his
wife Cha­rites.

### 8.1. Cap. 32.

ABoute midnight came a yonge man whiche ſéemed to be one of the fami­lyThe
Aſſe ſpea­keth. of the good woman Charites, who ſometimes endured ſo muche
miſery and calamitie with me emongſt the théeues, who after that he had taken
a ſtoole and ſatte downe by the fire ſide in the company of the ſeruauntes,
beganne to de­clare many terrible thinges that had happened vnto the houſe of
Charites, ſaying: O ye horſekepers, ſhepe­herdes, and cowheardes, you ſhall
vnderſtand that we haue loſte our good miſtris Charites, miſerably and by
euill aduenture, and to the ende you may learne and know all the whole matter,
I purpoſe to tell you the circumſtance of euery pointe, wherby ſuch as are
more learned then I (to whome fortune hath miniſtred more copious ſtile) may
painte it out in paper in forme of an Hiſtorie: there was a yonge gentleman
dwellinge in the nexte Citie, borne of good parentage, valiant in proweſſe,
and riche in ſubſtance, but very much geuen and addict to whore huntyng and
continuall reueling. Whereby he fell in company with théeues,Theſe vices are
lightly linked together. and had his hande ready to the effuſion of humaine
bloudde, his name was Thraſillus.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=86) The matter
was this according to the report of eue­ry man: He demaunded Charites in
marriage, who although he were a man more comely then the reſidue that wooed
her,Good fame is better then riches. and alſo had richeſſe abundantly, yet
becauſe he was of euill fame, and a man of wicked ma­ners and conuerſation, he
had the repulſe and was put of by Charites, and ſo ſhe married with Lepolemus:
howbeit this yonge man ſecretly loued her, yet moued ſomwhat at her refuſal,
he buſily ſerched ſome meanes to woorke his damnable intent: And (hauinge
found oc­caſion and opportunitie to accōpliſh his purpoſe, which he had longe
time concealed) brought to paſſe, that the ſame daye that Charites was
deliuered by the ſubtile meane and valiant audacitie of her huſbande, from the
puiſſance of the Théeues, he mingled him ſelf emongſt the aſſembly, feigninge
that he was gladde of the new marriage and comminge home againe of the mayden,
whereby (by reaſon that he came of ſo noble parentes) he was receaued &
entertained into the houſe, as one of their chiefe and principall
fréendes:Here the Lābes made muche of the Wolfe. Howbeit vnder cloke of a
faithful welwiller, he diſſimuled his miſchie­uous minde and intent, in
continuāce of time, by much familiaritie, and often conuerſation and
banketinge together, he fell more and more in fauour, like as we ſée it
fortuneth to louers, who firſt doo litle delight thē ſelues in loue, till as
by continuall acquaintaunce they kiſſe and embraſe eche other. Thraſillus
perceauinge that it was a harde matter to breake his minde ſecret­ly to
Charites, whereby he was wholy barred from the accompliſhmēt of his luxurious
appetite, & on the other ſide perceauinge that the loue of her and her
huſbande was ſo ſtrongly linked together, ye the bonde betwéene them might in
no wiſe be diſſeuered, moreouer it was [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=86) a thinge
impoſſible to rauiſhe her, although he had con­ſented therto, yet was he ſtill
prouoked forward by ve­hement luſt when as he ſawe him ſelfe vnable to bring
his purpoſe to paſſe. Howbeit at lēgth the thinge which ſéemed ſo hard and
difficil, through hope of his fortified loue, did now appeare eaſie & facill:
but marke I pray you diligently to what ende the furious force of his
in­ordinate deſire came. On a day Lepolemus went to the chaſe with Thraſillus
to hunte for Goates, for his wife Charites deſired him earneſtly to medle with
no other beaſtes, which were of more fierce and wilde na­ture, when they were
come within the chaſe to a great thicket fortreſſed about with bryers and
thornes, they compaſſed rounde with their dogges, and beſette euery place with
nettes, by and by warninge was giuen to lette looſe: The dogges ruſhed in with
ſuche a crie that all the foreſt range againe with the noyes, but be­holde
there leaped out no Goate, nor déere, nor gentle Hinde, but an horrible and
daungerous wilde Boare, harde & thicke ſkinned, briſteled terribly like
thornes, fominge at the mouth, grindinge his téeth and lokinge dyrefully with
fitie eyes. The dogges that firſt ſet vpō him he tare and rent with his
tuſkes, and thē he ranne quight thorough the nettes and eſcaped away: when we
ſawe the furie of this beaſt, we were greatly ſtrikē with feare, and becauſe
we neuer accuſtomed to chaſe ſuche dreadfull Boares, and further becauſe we
were vnarmed and without weapons, we gotte and hidde our ſelues vnder buſhes
and trées: then Thraſillus ha­uinge founde oportunitie to woorke his treaſon,
ſaide to Lepolemus, what ſtande we here amaſed? why ſhow we our ſelues like
daſtardes? why léeſe we ſo woorthy a pray with our feminiue hartes? let vs
mounte vpon [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=87)
our horſes and purſue him incontinentlie: Take you a hunting ſtaffe, & I will
take a chaſing ſpeare, by and by they leaped vpon their horſes and folowed the
beaſte. But he returning againſt thē with furious force, pried with his eies,
on whome he might firſt aſſaile with his tuſkes: Lepolemus ſtroke the beaſt
firſt on the back wt his hunting ſtaffe.O wicked deede. Thraſillus faininge to
aide and aſ­ſiſte him, came behind, and cut of the hinder legges of Lepulemus
horſe, in ſuch ſorte that he fel downe to the ground with his maiſter: And
ſodenly the Boare came vpon Lepolemus, and furiouſly tare and rēt him with
his téeth. Howbeit, Thraſillus was not ſuffiſed to ſée him thus wounded,O more
miſche­uous facte. but when he deſired his friendlie helpe, he thruſt
Lepolemus through the right thighe with his ſpeare, the more becauſe he
thought the woūd of the ſpeare would be takē for a wound of the Boares
téeth: Then he killed the beaſt likewiſe. And when he was thus miſerably
ſlaine, euery one of vs came out of our holes, and went towardes our ſlaine
maſter. But although that Thraſillus was ioyfull of the death of
Lepolemus,Worſe then Iudas. whome he did greatly hate, yet he cloked the
matter with a ſorowfull countenaunce, he feigned a dolorous face, he often
embraſed the body whiche he him ſelfe ſlewe, he plaied all the partes of a
mourninge perſon, ſauing there fell no teares from his eies. Thus he reſembled
vs in eche point, who verely, and not without occaſion, had cauſe to lament
for our maiſter, laiyng all the blame of this homicide vnto the Boare.
Incontinently after, the ſoroweful newes of the death of Lepolemus, came to
the eares of all the family, but eſpecially to Charites, who after ſhe had
hard ſuche pi­tifull tidinges, as a madde and raginge woman, ranne vp and
downe the ſtreates, criyng and howling lamē ­tably. [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=87) All the citezins
gathered together, and ſuche as they met, bare them companie runninge towardes
the chaſe. When they came to the ſlaine bodie of Lepole­mus, Charites threwe
her ſelfe vpon him, weping and lamenting greuouſlie for his death, in ſuche
ſorte, that ſhe would haue preſentlie ended her life, vpon y• corpſe of her
ſlaine huſbande, whome ſhe ſo entierly loued, had it not bene that her
parentes and friendes did com­fort her, and pulled her away. The body was
takē vp, and in funerall pompe brought to the citie, and buried. In the meane
ſeaſon, Thraſillus feigned much ſorowe for the death of Lepolemus, but in his
hart he was well pleaſed & ioyful. And to coūterfect the matter, he would
come to Charites & ſaie: O what a loſſe haue I had by y• death of my friende,
my fellowe, my compaignion Le­polemus: O Charites, cōfort your ſelfe, pacifie
your do­lor, refraine your wéeping, beat not your breſtes: And with ſuch other
& like woordes, & diuers exāples he en­deuored to ſuppreſſe her great ſorowe,
but he ſpake not this for any other intēt but to win the hart of y• womā,
and to noriſh his odious loue with filthy delight.The parte of a good woman.
Howbeit, Charites after the buriall of her huſbāde, ſought y• meanes to
folowe him, and (not ſuſteining the ſorowes wherin ſhe was wrapped) gotte her
ſecretly into a chā ­ber & purpoſed to finiſh her life there with dolour &
tri­bulation: But Thraſillus was very importunate, & at lēgth brought to
paſſe that at the interceſſiō of the pa­rentes & friendes of Charites, ſhe
ſomewhat refreſhed her fallen membres with refectiō of meate and bayne.
Howbeit, ſhe did it more at y• cōmaundement of her pa­rents, then for any
thing els: For ſhe could in no wiſe be mery, nor receiue any comforte, but
tormented her ſelfe daye and night before the image of her huſbande,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=88) which ſhe
had made like vnto Bacchus, & rendred vnto him diuine honours and ſeruices. In
the meane ſeaſon Thraſillus not able to refraine any lēger, before Cha­rites
had aſſwaged her dolours, before her troubled minde had pacified her fury,
euē in the middle of all her griefes, while ſhe wéeped for her huſbande,
while ſhe tare her garments and rent her heare, demaunded her in marriage, and
ſo without ſhame he detected the ſe­cretes & vnſpeakeable deceites of his
harte. But Cha­rites deteſted and abhorred his demaunde & as ſhe had bene
ſtroken with ſome clappe of thunder, with ſome ſtorme, or with the lightning
of Iupiter, ſhe preſently fell downe to the grounde all amaſed. Howbeit in the
ende when her ſpirites were reuiued & that ſhe retur­ned to her ſelfe,
perceauing that Thraſillus was ſo im­portunate, ſhe demaunded reſpite to
deliberate and to take aduiſe on the matter, in the meane ſeaſon y• ſhape of
Lepolemus that was ſlaine ſo miſerably appeared to Charites with a pale and
blouddy face, ſayinge: O my ſwéete wife (which no other perſon cā ſay but I)
I pray thée for the loue which is betwéene vs twoo,Murder is al­waies reueled.
if there be any memory of me in thy hart, or remembraunce of my pitifull
death, marry with any other perſon, ſo that y• marry not with the traytour
Thraſillus, haue no con­ference with him, eate not with him, lie not with him,
auoide the blouddy hande of mine enemie, couple not thy ſelfe with a
parricide, for thoſe woundes (the bloud wherof thy teares did waſh away) were
not y• woūdes of the téeth of the Boare, but the ſpeare of Thraſillus
depriued me from thée. Thus ſpake Lepolemus vnto his louinge wife, and
declared the reſidew of the dam­nable fact: then Charites awaking from ſléepe
beganne to renew her dolor, to teare her garments, and to beate [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=88) her armes with
her comely hādes, howbeit ſhe reueled the viſion whiche ſhe ſawe to no manner
of perſon, but diſſimulinge that ſhe knew no parte of the miſchiefe, deuiſed
with her ſelfe howe ſhe might be reuenged on the traytor, and finiſh her owne
life to ende and knitte vp all ſorrow: Incontinently came Thraſillus the
de­teſtable demaunder of ſodein pleaſure, and weried the cloſed eares of
Charites with talke of mariage, but ſhe gentely refuſinge his cōmunication,
and colouring the matter, with a paſſing crafte in the middeſt of his ear­neſt
deſiers, gan ſay: Thraſillus, you ſhall vnderſtand that yet the face of your
brother and my huſband, is al­waies before mine eies, I ſmel yet the Cinamome
ſent of his pretious body, I yet feele Lepolemus aliue in my hart, wherfore
you ſhall doo wel if you graūt to me, mi­ſerable woman, neceſſarie time to
bewayle his death, that after the reſidue of a few moneths, the whole yere may
be expired, which thing toucheth aſwell my ſhame as your holſome profite,
leaſt peraduēture by our ſpée­die and quicke marriage we ſhould iuſtely raiſe
& pro­uoke the ſpirit of my huſband to woorke our deſtructiō. Howbeit
Thraſillus was not contented with this pro­miſe,The whote fu­ries of deueliſ
[...]. appetites. but more and more was earneſt vpon her: In ſo much y• ſhe
was enforced to ſpeake to him in this man­ner: My fréende Thraſillus, if thou
be ſo contented vn­till the whole yéere be complete and finiſhed, beholde here
is my body, take thy pleaſure, but in ſuch ſort and ſo ſecrete, that no
ſeruaūt of the houſe may perceaue it. Then Thraſillus truſtinge the falſe
promiſſes of the woman, & preferring his inordinate pleaſure aboue all thinges
in the worlde, was ioyfull in his harte & looked for night, when as he might
haue his purpoſe. But come y• about midnight (ꝙ Charites) deſguiſed without
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=89) company. And
doo but hiſſe at my chamber doore, & my noucce ſhall attende and let thée in:
this counſell plea­ſed Thraſillus meruelouſly, who (ſuſpecting no harme) did
alwaies looke for night, and the houre aſſigned by Charites: the time was
ſkarſe come, whē as (according to her commaundement) he deſguiſed him ſelfe,
& went ſtreight to the chamber, where he foūde the nource at­tendinge for
him, who (by the apointment of her mi­ſtris) fedde him with ſlatteringe talke,
and gaue him mingled & doled drinke in a cuppe, excuſing the abſence of her
miſtris Charites by reaſon that ſhe attended on her father being ſicke, vntil
ſuch time, that with ſwéete talke and operation of the wine, he fell in a
ſounde ſléepe: now when he lay proſtrate on the grounde rea­die to all
aduenture, Charites (beinge called for) came in, and with manly courage and
bolde force, ſtoode ouer this ſleepinge murderer, ſaying: Beholde the
faithfull compaignion of my huſbande, beholde this valiaunt hunter:The Goddes
ſuf­fereth no vice vnpuniſhed. behold my déere ſpouſe, this is the hande which
ſhedde my bloudde, this is the harte whiche hath de­uiſed ſo many ſubtill
meanes to worke my deſtruction, theſe be the eyes whome I haue ill pleaſed,
behold now they forſhowe their owne deſtinie, ſléepe careleſſe, dreame that
thou arte in the handes of the mercifull, for I will not hurte thée with thy
ſwoorde or with any other weapon, God forbidde that I ſhoulde ſlea thée as
thou ſleweſt my huſband, but thy eies ſhall fayle thée, and thou ſhalte ſée no
more, then that whereof thou dreameſt: thou ſhalte thinke the death of thine
enemie more ſwéete then thy life: thou ſhalte ſée no light, thou ſhalte lacke
the ayde of a leader, thou ſhalte not haue me as thou hopeſt, thou ſhalte haue
no delight of my marriage, thou ſhalte not die, and yet liuinge thou [[Page
81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=89) ſhalte haue no
ioye, but wander betwéene light and darkeneſſe as an vnſure image: thou ſhalte
ſéeke for the hande that pricked out thy eies, yet ſhalte thou not knowe of
whome thou ſhouldeſt complaine: I will make ſacrafice with the bloudde of
thine eyes vpon the graue of my huſband, but what gaineſt thou thorough my
delay? Perhaps thou dreameſt that thou embra­ceſt me in thine armes, leaue of
the darkenes of ſléepe, and awake thou to receaue a penall depriuation of thy
ſight, lifte vp thy face, regarde thy vengeance and e­uill fortune, recken thy
miſerie ſo pleaſeth thine eies to a chaſte woman, that thou ſhalte haue
blindneſſe to thy compaignion, and an euerlaſtinge remorſe of thy miſerable
conſcience. When ſhe had ſpoken theſe woordes, ſhe toke a great nedle from her
head and pric­ked out both his eies: which done, ſhe by and by caught the
naked ſwoorde whiche her huſbande Lepolemus accuſtomed to were, and ranne
thorough out all the Citie like a madde woman, towarde the Sepulchre of her
huſbande: Then all we of the houſe withall the Ci­tizins, rāne incontinently
after her, to take the ſwoord out of her handes, but ſhe claſpinge aboute the
tombe of Lepolemus, kept vs of with her naked weapon, and when ſhe perceaued
that euery one of vs wepte and la­mented, ſhe ſpake in this ſorte: I pray you
my fréendes wéepe not, nor lament for me, for I haue reuenged the death of my
huſbande, I haue puniſhed deſeruedly the wicked breaker of our marriage, nowe
is it time to ſéeke out my ſwéete Lepolemus, and preſently with this ſwoorde
to finiſhe my lyfe. And therewithall after ſhe had made relation of the whole
matter, declared the viſion which ſhe ſawe, and tolde by what meane ſhe
deceaued Thraſillus, thruſtinge the ſwoorde vnder her
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=90) right breſt
& wallowinge in her owne bloudde, at lēgth with manly courage yéelded vp the
ghoſt.O deede woor­thy of remem­braunce. Then imme­diatly the fréendes of
miſerable Charites, did burie her body within the ſame ſepulchre. Thraſillus
hearyng al the matter, & knowinge not by what meanes he might ende his life,
for he thought his ſwoorde was not ſuffi­cient to reuēge ſo great a crime, at
length went to the ſame ſepulchre and cried with a loude voice, ſayinge: O ye
dead ſpirites whom I haue ſo highly offended re­ceaue me, beholde I make
ſacrifice vnto you with my bodie: whiche ſaide, he cloſed y• ſepulchre,
purpoſing to famiſh him ſelfe, and to finiſhe his life there in ſorrow. Theſe
thinges the yonge man with pitifull ſighes and teares declared vnto the
cowheardes & ſhéepeherdes, whiche cauſed them all to wéepe: but they fearinge
to become ſubiect vnto new maiſters, prepared thē ſelues to departe away.

¶How Apuleius was ledde away by the horſekeper, and what daungers he was in.

### 8.2. Cap. 33.

BY and by the Horſekeper,The Aſſe ſpea­keth. to whome the charge of me was
cōmitted, brought foorth all his ſubſtance and laded me and other horſes
withal, & ſo depar­ted thenſe: we bare wemen, children, pullettes, ſpar­rowes,
kiddes, whelpes, & other thinges whiche were not able to kéepe pace with vs,
and that whiche I bare vpon my backe, although it was a mighty burthen, yet
ſéemed it very light, becauſe I was driuen away from him that moſt terribly
had appointed to kill me, when we hed paſſed ouer a great mountayne full of
trées, and were come againe into the open fieldes, beholde we approched nighe
to a fayre and riche Caſtell, where [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=90) it was tolde
vnto vs that we weare not able to paſſe in our iourney that night, by reaſon
of the great number of terrible Woolues, whiche weare in the countrey a­bout,
ſo fierce and cruell, that they put euerie man in feare, in ſuch ſort that
they would inuade and ſet vpon ſuch which paſſed by like theues, and deuoure
bothe thē and their beaſtes.

Moreouer, we weare aduertiſed that there laie in the waie wheare we ſhould
paſſe, manie dead bodies, eaten and torne with Wolues. Wherefore we weare
willed to ſtate theare all night, & on the next morning, to goe cloſe and
rounde together, whereby we might paſſe and eſcape all perilles and daungers.
But (not­withſtandinge this good counſell) our cait [...]e driuers weare ſo
couetous to goe forwarde, and ſo fearfull of purſuit, that they neuer ſtaied
till the morninge: But being well nie midnight, they made vs trudge in our
waie a pace: Then I fearing the great daunger whiche might happen, ranne
amongeſt the middle of the other horſes, to thend I might defend and ſaue my
poore but­tockes from the Wolues, whereat euery man muche meruailed to ſée,
that I ſcoured away ſwifter then the other horſes: But ſuche was my agilitée
not to get me any praiſe, but rather for feare. At that time I remem­bred with
my ſelfe, that the valiant horſe Pegaſus, did  [...]ie in the aire more to
auoide the daunder of dreadfull Chimera, then for any thing els. The ſhepardes
which draue vs before thē, weare well armed like warriours: One had a ſpeare,
an other had a ſhepehooke, ſome had dartes, ſome clubbes, ſome gathered vp
great ſtones, ſome helde vp their ſharpe iauelins, and ſome feared awaie the
Wolues with light firebrandes. Finally we lacked nothing to make vp an armie,
but onely drums
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=91) and
trumpettes, but when we had paſſed theſe dau [...] ­gers not without ſmall
feare, we fortuned to fall into worſe, for the Wolues came not vpon vs, eyther
be­cauſe of the greate multitude of our company, or els becauſe of our
firebrandes, or peraduenture they were gone to ſome other place, for we could
ſée none, but the inhabitantes of the nexte villages (ſuppoſinge that we were
Théeues by reaſon of our great multitude,) for the defence of their owne
ſubſtance, and for the feare they were in, ſette great and mighty maſties vpon
vs, which they had kept & nouriſhed for the ſafetie of their houſes, who
compaſſing vs rounde about, leaped on e­uery ſide, tearing vs with their
téeth, in ſuch ſorte that they pulled many of vs to the grounde, verely it was
a pitifull ſight to ſée ſo many dogges, ſome followinge ſuche as flied, ſome
inuadinge ſuch as ſtoode ſtill, ſome tearinge thoſe which lay proſtrate, but
generally there were none which eſcaped cléere: Behol [...]e vpon this an
other daunger enſewed, the inhabitantes of the towne ſtoode in their garrettes
& windowes, throwinge great ſtones vpon our heades, that we coulde not tell
whe­ther it were beſt for vs to auoide the gapinge mouthes of the dogges at
hād, or the perill of the ſtones a farre, emongſt whome there was one that
hurled a greate  [...]inte vpon a woman, which ſatte vpon my backe, who cried
out piteouſly, deſiringe her huſband to helpe her. Then he (cominge to ſuccour
and ayde his wife) began to ſpeake in this ſorte: Alas maiſters what meane you
to trouble vs poore laboring mē ſo cruelly? what meane you to reuenge your
ſelues vppon vs, that doo you no harme? what thinke you to gaine by vs? you
dwell not in caues or dennes: you are no people barborous that you ſhould
delight in effuſion of humaine bloudde. [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=91) At theſe woordes
the tempeſt of ſtones did ceaſe, & the ſtorme of the dogges vaniſhed away.
Then one (ſtan­dinge on the toppe of a great Cipreſſe trée) ſpake vnto vs,
ſaying: Thinke you not maiſters that we doo this, to the intent to rifle or
take away any of your goodes, but for the ſaluegarde of our ſelues and family,
now a Goddes name you may departe away. So we wēt for­warde ſome wounded with
ſtones, ſome bitten with dogges, but generally there was none whiche eſcaped
frée.

¶How the Shepeherdes determined to abide in a certaine woodde to cure their
woundes.

### 8.3. Cap. 34.

WHen we had gonne a good part of our way we came to a certayne woodde
enuironed with great trées, & compaſſed about with pleaſaunt medowes, wheras
the ſhéepeherdes apointed to conti­new a certaine ſpace to cure their woundes,
and ſores, then they ſatte downe on the grounde to refreſh their werie mindes,
and afterwardes they ſought for medi­cines to heale their bodies, ſome waſhed
away their bloud with the water of the runninge riuer: ſome ſtop­ped their
woundes with ſponges and cloutes, in this māner euery one prouided for his
owne ſafety. In the meane ſeaſon we perceaued an old man, who ſéemed to be a
ſhéepeherde by reaſon of the goates and ſhéepe that fedde roūd about him:A
dreadfull place of daūger Then one of our cōpany demaū ­ded whether he had
any milke, butter, or chéeſe to ſell. To whom he made anſweare ſhaking his
head, ſaying: Doo you looke for any meat or drinke, or any other refe­ction
here? know you not in what place you be? & ther­withal he toke his ſhéepe &
draue thē away as faſt as he might poſſible. This anſwere made our
ſhéepeherdes [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=92)
greatly to feare that they thought of nothinge els butto enquire what countrey
they weare in: Howbeit, they ſawe no maner of perſone of whome they might
de­maunde. At length as they weare thus in doubte, they  [...]erceiued an
other olde man with a ſtaffe in his hand, very werie with trauell, who
approching nighe to our companie, began to wéepe and complaine, ſaiyng: Alas
maiſters, I praie you ſuccour me miſerable caitife, and reſtore my neiphewe to
me againe, that by following a ſparrowe that flewe before him, is fallen into
a ditche hereby, and verely I thinke he is in daunger of death. As for me, I
am not able to helpe him out by reaſon of my olde age, but you that are ſo
valiāt and luſtie, may eaſelie helpe me herein, and deliuer me my boye, my
heire and guide of my life. Theſe woordes made vs all to pitie him: And then
the yongeſt and ſtouteſt of our companie, who alone eſcaped beſt the late
ſkyrmiſhe of dogges and ſtones, roſe vp, demaūding in what ditche the boie
was fallen: Mary (ꝙ he) yonder, and pointinge with his finger, brought him to
a great thicket of buſ­ſhes and thorne, where they both entred in. In the
meane ſeaſon, after y• we had well refreſhed our ſelues and cured our woundes,
we tooke vp our packes, pur­poſing to depart awaie. And becauſe we would not
goe awaie without the yonge man our felowe: The ſhe­pehardes whiſtled and
called for him, but whē he gaue no anſwere, they ſent one of their companie
to ſéeke him out, who after a while returned againe with a pale face and
ſorowfull newes, ſaiyng: that he ſawe a terri­ble Draggon eating and deuouring
their compaigniō: and as for the olde man, he coulde ſée him in no place.
When they hard this (remēbring likewiſe the woordes of the firſt olde man
that ſhaketh his head and draue [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=92) away his ſheepe)
they ranne away beatinge vs before them, to flie from this deſert and
peſtilent countrie.

¶How a woman killed her ſelfe, and her childe, becauſe her huſbande haunted
harlottes.

### 8.4. Cap. 35.

AFter that we had paſſed a great part of our iour­ney we came to a certaine
village, where we lay all night, but herken and I will tell you a great
miſchiefe that happened there. You ſhal vnderſtande y• there was a ſeruaunt to
whome his maiſter had com­mitted the whole gouermēt of his houſe, and was
mai­ſter of the lodginge where we lay: this ſeruaunt had married a mayden of
the ſame houſe, how be it he was greatly in loue with a harlotte of the towne,
and accu­ſtomed to reſorte vnto her, wherewith his wife was ſo highly
diſpleaſed and became ſo ielous, that ſhe gathe­red together all her huſbandes
ſubſtāce, with his tailes and bookes of accompte, & threwe them into a light
fire, ſhe was not contented with this, but ſhe toke a corde & bounde her
childe which ſhe had by her huſband about her middle, & caſte her ſelfe
hedlonge into a déepe pitte: The maiſter takinge in euill parte the death of
theſe twaine, toke his ſeruaunt whiche was the cauſe of this murder by his
luxury, and firſt after that he had put of all his apparell, he annointed his
body with hony, and then bounde him ſure to a figge trée, where, in a rotten
ſtocke a great number of Piſmares had builded their neſtes, the Piſmares after
they had felte the ſwéetnes of the hony came vpon his bodie, and by litle and
litle (in continuance of time) deuoured all his fleſhe, in ſuch ſorte that
there remained on the trée nothinge els ſaue his bace bones: this was declared
vnto vs by the inha­bitantes
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=93) of the
village there who greatly ſorrowed for the death of this ſeruant: then we
auoidinge likewiſe from this dreadfull lodginge, incontinently departed away.

¶Howe Apuleius was cheapened by diuers perſons, and how they loked in his
mouth to know his age.

### 8.5. Cap. 36.

AFter this we came to a fayre Citie very popu­lous, where our ſhéepeherdes
determined to cō ­tinew, by reaſon y• it ſéemed a place where they might liue
vnknowē, farre from ſuch as ſhould purſue them, and becauſe it was a countrie
very plentifull of corne and other victualles, where when we had remai­ned the
ſpace of thrée daies, & that I poore Aſſe, and the other horſes were fedde &
kept in the Stable to the in­tent we might ſéeme more ſaleable, we were
brought out at length to the market, and by & by a crier ſounded with his
horne to notifie y• we were to be ſolde, all my compaigniō horſes were bought
vp by gentlemen, but­as for me I ſtoode ſtill forſaken of all men. And when
many biers came by and looked in my mouth to knowe mine age, I was ſo werie
with opening my iawes that at length (vnable to endure any lenger) whē one
came with a ſtinking payre of handes, & grated my gommes with his filthy
fingers I bitte them cleane of, whiche thing cauſed the ſtanders by to forſake
me, as beinge a fierce and cruell beaſt: the crier when he had gotten a hoarſe
voice with crying, and ſawe that no man would bie me, began to mocke me,
ſaiyng: To what end ſtāde we here with this vile Aſſe, this feble beaſt, this
ſlowe iade with woorne hoofes, good for nothinge, but to make ſlues of his
ſkinne, why doo we not giue him to ſome [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=93) body, for he
earneth not his hey, in this manner he made all the ſtanders by to laugh
excéedingly, but my euill fortune whiche was euer ſo cruell againſte me, whome
I by trauell of ſo many countreis coulde in no wiſe eſcape, did more and more
enuie me, with inuen­tion of new meanes to afflict my poore bodie, in geuing
me an other maiſter as ſpitefull as the reſt. There was an olde man, ſomewhat
balde, with longe and grey heare, one of the nomber of thoſe which goe from
doore to doore through out al the villages, bearing the image of the Goddeſſe
Siria, and plaiyng with cymballes to gette the almes of good and charitable
folkes, this olde man came haſtely towardes the crier, and demaunded where I
was bredde, marry (ꝙ he) in Cappadocia: then he enquired what age I was of,
the crier aunſweared as a mathematricien, whiche deſpoſed to me my pla­netes,
that I was fiue yeeres olde, and willed the olde man to looke in my mouth, for
I would not willingly (ꝙ he) incurre the penaltie of the lawe Cornelia in
ſel­ling a frée Citizin for a ſeruill ſlaue, by a Goddes name this faire beaſt
to ride home on, and about in the coun­trie: but this curious bier did neuer
ſtinte to queſtion of my qualities, and at length he demaunded whether I were
gentle or no: gentle (ꝙ the crier) as gentle as a Lambe, tractable to al vſe,
he wil neuer bite, he wil ne­uer kicke, but you would rather thinke y• vnder
y• ſhape of the Aſſe, there were ſome well aduiſed man, whiche verely you may
eaſely coniect, for if you would thruſt your noſe in his tayle you ſhall
perceaue how pacient he is: Thus the crier mocked the olde man, but he
per­ceauing his tauntes and ieſtes, wared very angry, ſai­yng: Away dotinge
crier, I pray the omnipotent and omniparent goddeſſe Siria, ſainct Sabod,
Bellona [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=94) with
her mother Idea, & Venus with Adonis to ſtrike out both thine eies that with
tauntinge mockes haſte ſcoffed me in this ſorte, doeſt thou thinke that I will
put a Goddeſſe vppon the backe of any fierce beaſte, whereby her diuine image
ſhould be throwen downe on the grounde, and ſo I poore miſer ſhould be
compel­led (tearinge my heare) to looke for ſome Phiſicien to helpe her? when
I harde him ſpeake this, I thought wt my ſelfe ſodeinly to leape vpon him like
a madde Aſſe, to the intent he ſhoulde not bie me, but incontinently there
came an other Marchaunt that preuented my thought, and offered ſeuentene pence
for me: then my mayſter was gladde and receauing the money, deliue­red me to
my newe maiſter, who was called Philebus: and he carried his newe ſeruaunt
home, and before he came to his houſe, he called out his daughters, ſay­inge:
beholde my daughters what a gentle ſeruant I haue bought for you, then they
weare meruelous glad, and comminge out pratlinge and ſhoutinge for ioye,
thought verely that he had brought home a fitte & con­uenable ſeruant for
their purpoſe, but when they per­ceaued that it was an Aſſe, they began to
reproue him, ſayinge: that he had not bought a ſeruant for his may­dēs, but
rather an Aſſe for him ſelfe. Howbeit (ꝙ they) kéepe him not wholy for your
owne ridinge, but let vs likewiſe haue him at commaundement, therewithall they
ledde me into the ſtable, & tied me to the maūger, there was a certaine yonge
man with a mighty bodie well ſkilled in playing on inſtrumētes before the
God­deſſe to get money, who (aſſone as he eſpied me) enter­tained me very
well, for he filled my racke & maunger with meat, & ſpake merely, ſaying: O
maiſter Aſſe you are welcome, now you ſhall take my office in hande, [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=94) you are come to
ſupplie my rowme, and to eaſe me of my miſerable laboure: But I praie God thou
maiſt lōg liue and pleaſe my maiſter well, to thende thou maieſt continually
deliuer me from ſo great paine. When I harde his woordes, I did prognoſticate
my miſerie to come. The daie following, I ſawe there a great nom­ber of
perſons apparelled in diuers colours, hauinge painted faces, mytres on their
heades, veſtimentes co­loured like ſaffron, ſurpleſſes of ſilke, and on their
féete yellowe ſhoes, who attired the Goddeſſe in a roabe of purple, and put
her vpon my backe. Then they went foorth with their armes naked to their
ſhoulders, bea­ring with them great ſwoordes and mightie axes, and daunſing
like madde perſons. After that we had paſ­ſed many ſmall villages, we fortuned
to come to one Britunis houſe, where at our firſt entrie, they began to hurle
them ſelues hither and thither, as though they weare madde. They made a
thouſand ieſtes with their féete and their heades: They would bite them
ſelues: Finally, euery one tooke his weapon and wounded his armes in diuers
places. Emongeſt whome there was one more madde then the reſte, that fette
many déepe ſighes from the bottome of his harte, as though he had bene
rauiſhed in ſpirit, or repleniſhed with deuine po­wer. And after that, he
ſomwhat returning to him ſelf inuented and forged a great lie, ſaiyng: that he
had di­ſpleaſed the deuine maieſtie of the Goddeſſe, by doinge of ſomething
whiche was not conuenable to the order of their holie Religion, wherefore he
would doo venge­ance of him ſelfe: And therewithall he tooke a whippe and
ſcourged his owne body, that the bloud iſſued out abundantly, which thinge
cauſed me greatly to feare to ſée ſuch woūdes and effuſion of bloud, leaſt
the ſame [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=95)
Goddeſſe deſiring ſo much the bloud of mē ſhould like­wiſe delire y• bloud of
an Aſſe.So vſed they in olde time to of­fer to Images. After they were wery wt
hurling and beating them ſelues, they ſat downe. And beholde, the inhabitantes
came in & offred gold, ſiluer, veſſels of wyne, milke, chéeſe, flower, wheat,
and other thinges: Amongſt whome there was one that brought barley to the Aſſe
that caried the Goddeſſe, but the gre­dy horſons thruſt al into their ſacke
which thei brought for the purpoſe, and put it vpon my back, to thende I might
ſerue for twoo purpoſes, y• is to ſay: for the barne by reaſon of my corne,
and for the temple, by reaſon of the goddeſſe. In this ſorte they wet from
place to place robbing all the countrey ouer: At length they came to a
certaine caſtell, purpoſing to make good chere there, where vnder coloure of
diuinatiō, thei brought to paſſe that they obteined a fatte ſhéepe of a poore
huſbandman for the Goddeſſe ſupper, & to make ſacrifice withal. Af­ter that y•
banket was prepared, they waſhed their bo­dies & brought in a tale yong mā of
the village to ſuppe with them, who ſkaree taſted a fewe potage when they
began to diſcouer their beaſtly cuſtomes & inordi­nate deſier of vnnaturall
luxurie. For they compaſſed him round about ſitting at the table, & abuſed the
yong man contrarie to all nature & reaſon: When I behelde this horrible fact,
I could not but attempte to vtter my minde and ſaie, O maiſters, but I could
pronounce no more but the firſt letter O, which I roared out ſo vali­antly,
that the yong mē of the town, ſéeking for a ſtray Aſſe that they had loſt the
ſame night, and hearing my voice, wherby they iudged y• I had bene theirs,
entred into the houſe vnwares, and founde theſe perſons cō ­mitting their
vile abhomination, which whē they ſaw, they declared to all the inhabitātes
by their vnnatural [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=95) vilanie mocking
and laughing at this the pure & cleane chaſtitie of their Religion. In the
meane ſeaſon, Phe­bus & his companie, (by reaſon of the bruite which was
diſperſed throughout all ye Region there of their beaſt­ly wickednes) put all
their tromperie vpon my backe & departed away about midnight. When we had
paſſed a good part of our iourney before the riſing of the Sun, we came into a
wide deſert, where they cōſpired toge­ther to ſlea me. For after they had
taken the Goddeſſe from my back and ſet her gingerly vpon the grounde, they
likewiſe tooke of my harneſſe, and boūd me ſurely to an oke, beating me with
their whippe, in ſuche ſorte that all my bodie was mortified. Amōgſt whome
there was one that threatned to cut of my legges with his hatchet, becauſe by
my noyſe I diffamed his chaſtitée, but the other regarding more their own
profit then my vtilitie, thought beſt to ſpare my life, becauſe I might carie
home the Goddeſſe: So they laded me againe, dri­uing me before them with their
naked ſwoordes til thei came to a noble citie: where the principal patrō
bearing high reuerence vnto the Goddeſſe, came in great deuo­tion before vs wt
Tympanie, cimballes, & other inſtru­mentes, & receiued her & al our companie
with much ſa­crifice & veneration: But there I remember, I thought my ſelfe in
moſte daūger, for there was one yt brought to the maiſter of the houſe, a
fide of a fat buck for a pre­ſent, whiche being hanged behinde the kytchin
doore, not farre from the grounde, was cleane eaten vp by a greyhounde that
came in: The Cooke when he ſawe ye veniſon denoured, lamēted & wept
pitifully. And be­cauſe ſupper time approched nigh, whē as he ſhould be
reproued of to much negligēce, he tooke a halter to hāge him ſelf, but his
wife perceiuing wherabout he went,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=96) canne
incontinently to him, and taking the halter in both her handes ſtopped him of
his purpoſe, ſaiynge: O huſband, are you out of your wittes? what intende you
to doo? Sée you not a preſent remedy before your eyes miniſtred vnto you by
deuine prouidence? I pray you huſband follow my coūſell, carrie this ſtraūge
Aſſe out into ſome ſecret place and kill him, whiche done cut of one of his
ſides, and ſauce it well like the ſide of the buck, and ſette it before your
maiſter. Then the Cooke hearing the counſell of his wife, was well pleaſed to
ſlea me, to ſaue him ſelfe: And to bringe his purpoſe to paſſe, he went to the
whetſtone to ſharpe his tooles ac­cordingly.

## 9\. The ninth Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.

¶Howe Apuleius ſaued him ſelfe from the Cooke by breaking his halter and of
other thinges that happened.

### 9.1. Cap. 37.

IN this maner the traiterous Cooke, prepared him ſelfe to ſlea me: And when he
was ready with his kniues to doo his feate, I deuiſed with my ſelfe how I
might eſcape the preſent perill, and I did not long delaie: for incontinentlye
I brake the halter wherewith I was tied, and flinging my héeles hither &
thither to ſaue my ſelfe, at length I ran haſtely into a parlour wheare the
maiſter of the houſe was feaſtinge with the prieſtes of the Goddeſſe Siria,
and diſquieted all the companie, throwinge downe their meates and drinkes from
the table. The maiſter of the houſe diſ­maide [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=96) at my great
diſorder, cōmaunded one of his ſer­uauntes to take me vp, and locke me in
ſome ſtronge place to the ende I might diſturbe them no more. But I litle
regarded my impriſonment, conſideringe that I was happely deliuered frō the
handes of the traiterous Cooke: Howbeit fortune, or the fatall diſpoſition of
the diuine prouidence, whiche neither can be auoyded by wiſe counſell, neither
yet by any holeſome remedy in­uented a new torment, for by & by a yonge ladde
came running into the parlor, all trembling and declared to the maiſter of the
houſe, that there was a madde dogge running about in the ſtréetes, whiche had
done muche harme, for he had bitten many greyhoūdes and horſes in the Inne
by: and he ſpared neither man nor beaſt, for there was one Mytilius a
mulettour, Epheſtio a cooke, Hyppatauius a chamberlaine, and Appolonius a
Phiſicien, who (thinking to chaſe away yc madde dogge) were cruelly wounded by
him, in ſo muche that many horſes and other beaſtes infected with the venim of
his poiſonous téeth became madde likewiſe, whiche thinge cauſed them all at
the table greatly to feare, and thin­king that I had bene bitten in like
ſorte, came out with ſpeares, clubbes, and pitchforkes purpoſing to ſlea me,
and I had vndoubtedly bene ſlaine had I not by and by crepte into a chamber,
where my maiſter intended to lodge that night. Then they cloſed and locked
faſt the doores about me, and kept the chamber rounde, til ſuch time as they
thought that the peſtilent rage of madnes had killed me, when I was thus
ſhutte in the chamber alone, I laide me downe vpon the bedde to ſléepe,
con­ſidering it was long time paſt, ſince I lay and toke my reſte as a man
doth, when morninge was come, & that I was well repoſed, I roſe vp luſtely. In
y• meane ſea­ſon
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=97) they which
watched about the chāber all night rea­ſoned with them ſelues in this ſorte,
verely (ꝙ one) I thinke the Aſſe be dead, ſo thinke I (ꝙ an other) for the
outragious poiſō of madnes hath killed him, but being thus in diuers opinions
of a poore Aſſe, they looked tho­rough a creuis, & eſpied me ſtandinge ſtill,
ſober & quiet in the middle of the chāber, then thei opened the dores, and
came towardes me to proue whether I were gētle or no. Emongſt whome there was
one, which in my o­pinion was ſent from heauen to ſaue my life, that wil­led
the other to ſet a baſen of fayre water before me, & therby thei ſhould know
whether I were madde or no, for if I did drinke without feare as I accuſtomed
to doo it was a ſigne that I was whole & in mine Aſſy wittes, where contrary
if I did fly & abhorre the taſt of the wa­ter, it was an euident proufe of my
madnes, whiche thing he ſaid y• he had red in auncient & credible bookes,
wherupon they toke a baſin of cléere water & preſented it before me, but I, as
ſone as I perceaued the holſome water of my life, ranne incontinently &
thruſtinge my head into the baſin, drāke as though I had bene greatly a
thirſt, then they ſtroked me with their handes, and bowed mine eares, & toke
me by the halter to proue my paciēce, but I taking eche thing in good part,
diſproued their madde preſumption by my méekenes & gentle be­hauiour: when I
was thus deliuered from this double daūger, the next day I was laded againe
with the god­deſſe Siria, & other trumpery, and was brought out in­to the way
with trumpets & cymballes, to begge in the villages, which we paſſed by
according to our cuſtome. And after that we had gonne thorough a fewe townes
and caſtels, we fortuned to come to a certaine village, which was builded (as
the inhabitātes there affirmed) [[Page
89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=97) vpon the
foundation of a famous & auncient Citie. And after that we had turned into the
next Inne, we harde of a pretie ieſt committed in the towne there, whiche I
would that you ſhould know likewiſe.

¶Of the deceipte of a woman, which made her huſband Coocko [...]le.

### 9.2. Cap. 38.

THere was a man dwelling in y• towne very poore that had nought but that
whiche he gotte by the labor & trauell of his handes: his wife was a faire
yonge woman, but very laſciuious & giuen to the appe­tite & deſire of the
fleſh: it fortuned on a day that while this poore man was gonne betimes in the
morninge to the fielde about his buſines, according as he accuſtomed to doo,
his wiues louer ſecretely came into his houſe to haue his pleaſure with her.
And ſo it chaunced that du­ring the time that he & ſhe were buſking together,
her huſbande ſuſpectinge no ſuche matter, returned home praiſing the chaſt
continencie of his wife, in y• he found his doores faſte cloſed, wherfore as
his cuſtome was, he wiſtled to declare his cōming home: thē his crafty wife
reddy wt preſent ſhiftes caught her louer & couered him vnder a great tubbe
ſtāding in a corner: and therwith­al ſhe opened the doore, blaming her
huſbād in this ſort. Cōmeſt y• home ſo euery day with empty handes? and
bringeſt nothing to maintaine our houſe? thou haſt no regard for our profite,
neither prouideſt for any meate or drinke, where as I poore wretch doo nothing
day and night but occupie my ſelfe with ſpinning, & yet my tra­uell will
ſkarſe finde the candels whiche we ſpende. O how much more happy is my
neighbour Daphue, y• ea­teth and drinketh at her pleaſure, and paſſeth the
time with her amorous louers accordinge to her deſire.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=98) What is the
matter (ꝙ her huſbād) though our maiſter hath made holyday at the fieldes,
yet thinke not but y• I haue made prouiſion for our ſupper, doeſt thou not ſée
this tubbe that kéepeth a place here in our houſe in vaine, and doth vs no
ſeruice? beholde I haue ſolde it to a good fellow (that is here preſent) for
fiue pence, wher­fore I pray thée lende me thy hande that I may deliuer him y•
tubbe: His wife (hauing inuented a preſent ſhift) laughed on her huſband,
ſaying: what marchāt I pray you haue you brought home hither, to fetch away
my tubbe for fiue pence, for which I poore woman y• ſitte al day alone in my
houſe haue bene proffred ſo often ſeuē: Her huſband being well apaide at her
woordes, demaū ­ded what he was that had bought the tubbe: looke (ꝙ ſhe) he
is gone vnder to ſée where it be ſound or no, thē her louer which was vnder
the tubbe, began to ſtirre & ruſtle him ſelfe, and becauſe his woordes might
agrée to the woordes of the woman, he ſaide: Dame will you haue me tell the
truth: this tubbe is rottē and krakt as me ſéemeth on euery ſide. And then he
turned him ſelfe to her huſband, ſaying: I pray you honeſt man light a
candell, y• I may make the tubbe cleane within, to ſée if it be for my purpoſe
or no, for I doo not minde to caſte away my money wilfully: He, by & by (being
made a ve­ry Oxe) lighted a cādle, ſaying: I pray you good brother put not
your ſelfe to ſo much paine, lette me make the tubbe cleane and ready for you,
wherupon he put of his coate and crept vnder the tubbe to rubbe away the filth
from the ſides. In the meane ſeaſon this minion louer caſt his wife on the
bottome of the tubbe, and had his pleaſure with her ouer his head, and as he
was in the middeſt of his paſtime, he turned his head on this ſide, and that
ſide, finding fault with this and with that, til [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=98) as they had both
ended their buſines, when as he deli­uered ſeuen pence for the tubbe: and
cauſed the good mā him ſelfe to carry it on his backe to his Inne.

¶Howe the Preeſtes of the goddeſſe Syria, were taken and putte in pryſon, and
howe Apuleius was ſolde to a Baker.

### 9.3. Cap. 39.

AFter that we had tarried there a fewe daies at the coſte and charges of the
whole village, and had gotten muche money by our diuination, and
pronoſtication of thinges to come: The Préeſtes of the Goddeſſe Siria inuented
a newe meane to picke mens purſes, for they had certayne lottes, whereon
writen:So vſed feigned Egiptiās of lat [...] yeres in Englād▪ Coniuncti
terram proſcindunt boues vt in futu­rum laeta germinent ſara: that is to ſay:
The oxen tied and yoked together: doo plowe the grounde to the intent it may
bringe foorth his encreaſe: And by theſe kinde of lottes thei de­ceaued many
of the ſimple ſorte: for if one had demaū ­ded whether he ſhoulde haue a good
wife or no, they woulde ſay that his lotte did teſtifie the ſame, that he
ſhould be tied and yoked to a good womā, and haue in­creaſe of children: If
one demaūded whether he ſhould by landes and poſſeſſion, they ſaid that he
ſhoulde haue much ground that ſhould yéelde his increaſe: If one de­maunded
whether he ſhoulde haue a good & proſperous voyage, thei ſaid he ſhould haue
good ſucceſſe, & it ſhould be for the encreaſe of his profite: If one
demaūded whe­ther he ſhould vanquiſh his enemies, & preuaile in pur­ſuite of
théeues, they ſaide that his enemies ſhould be tied and yoked to him: and his
purſuite after théeues ſhould be proſperous. Thus by the tellinge of fortunes
they gathered a great quantitie of money, but when
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=99) thei were
weary with geuing of anſweares, thei draue me away before them the nexte
night, thorough a lane whiche was more daungerous and ſtony then the way which
we went the night before: for on ye one ſide were Quagmyres & foggy marſhes,
on the other ſide were falling trenches and ditches, wherby my legges failed
me, in ſuch ſorte that I coulde ſcarſe come to the plaine fielde pathes. And
behold by and by a great company of the inhabitantes of the towne, armed with
weapons, and on horſebacke ouertoke vs, and incontinently ar­reſtinge Philebus
and his Préeſtes, tied them by the neckes and beate them cruelly, callinge
them Théeues and robbers, and after that they had manakled their handes: Showe
vs (ꝙ they) the cuppe of Golde, which (vnder the colour of your ſolempne
Religion) ye haue taken away, and nowe ye thinke to eſcape in the night
without puniſhment for your fact, by and by one came towardes me, and
thruſting his hande into the boſome of the Goddeſſe Siria, brought out the
cuppe whiche they had ſtole: How be it for all their robbery whiche appeared
euident and plaine, they woulde not be con­founded nor abaſhed, but ieſtyng &
laughinge out the matter, gan ſay: Is it reaſon maiſters that you ſhould thus
rigorouſly intreate vs, and threaten for a ſmall trifling cuppe, which the
mother of the Goddeſſe deter­mined to giue to her ſiſter for a preſent,
howbeit for all their lies and cauillations, they were carried backe to the
towne and put in priſon by the inhabitantes, who takinge the cuppe of golde,
and the Goddeſſe whiche I bare, did put and conſecrate them emongſt the
treaſure of the Temple: the next day I was carried to the mar­kette to be
ſolde, and my price was ſet at ſeuen pence, more then Philebus gaue for me.
There fortuned to [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=99) paſſe by a Baker
of the next village, who after that he had bought a great deale of corne,
bought me likewiſe to carry it home, and when he had well laded me ther­with,
he draue me thorough a thorny and daungerous way to his bakehouſe, there I
ſawe a great companie of horſes that went in the mill day and night grinding
of corne, but leaſt I ſhoulde be diſcouraged at the firſt, my mayſter
entertayned me well, for the firſte day I did nothinge but fare deintely, how
be it ſuche mine eaſe and felicitie did not longe endure: for the next day
followynge I was tied to the mill betimes in the mor­ninge with my face
couered, to the ende in turninge and windinge ſo often one waie, I ſhoulde not
become giddy but kéepe a certayne courſe, but although when I was a man I had
ſéene many ſuche horſemilles, and knewe well inough how they ſhoulde be
turned, yet feigninge my ſelfe ignorant of ſuche kinde of toyle, I ſtoode
ſtill and would not goe, whereby I thought I ſhoulde be taken from the mill as
an Aſſe vnapt, and put to ſome other light labour, or elſe to be dryuen in­to
the fieldes to paſture: but my ſubtiltie did me ſmall good, for by and by when
the mill ſtoode ſtill, the ſer­uauntes came about me, cryinge and beatinge me
for­warde, in ſuch ſorte that I could not ſtaye to aduiſe my ſelfe, wherby all
the cōpany laughed to ſée ſo ſodaine a chaunge, when a good parte of the day
was paſt, that I was not able to endure any lenger, they tooke of my harneſſe,
and tied me to the maunger, but although my bones were wery, and that I néeded
to refreſh my ſelfe with reſte and prouender, yet I was ſo curious that I did
greatly delight to behold the bakers art, in ſo much that I coulde not eate
nor drinke while I looked on. O good Lorde what a ſorte of poore ſlaues were
there, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=100) ſome
had their ſkinne blacke and blew: ſome had their backes ſtriped with laſhes,
ſome were couered with rugged ſackes, ſome had their members onely hidden:
ſome ware ſuche ragged cloutes y• you might perceaue all their naked bodies,
ſome were marked and burned in the forehedes with hote yrons, ſome had their
heare halfe clipped, ſome had lockes on their legges, ſome were vgly and euill
fauored, that thei coulde ſkarſe ſée, their eies & faces were ſo blacke &
dimme with ſmoke, like thoſe which fight together in the ſandes, & knowe not
where they ſtrike by reaſon of duſte: And ſome had their faces all mealy, but
howe ſhoulde I ſpeake of the horſes my compaignions, how they being old &
weake, thruſt their heades into the maunger: they had their neckes all wounded
and worne away: thei ratled their noſethrilles with a continuall cough, their
ſides were bare with their harneſſe and great trauell, their ribbes were
broken with beatinge, their hoofes were battred broade with inceſſant labour,
and their ſkinne rugged by reaſon of their lanknes: When I ſaw this dreadfull
ſight, I greatly begāne to feare, leaſt I ſhould come to the like ſtate: And
conſideringe with my ſelfe the good fortune which I was ſometime in when I was
a man, I greatly lamēted holding downe my head, and would eate no meate, but
I ſawe no comfort or conſolation of my euill fortune, ſauinge that my minde
was ſome­what recreated to heare and vnderſtande what euery man ſaid, for they
neyther feared nor doubted my pre­ſence: At that time I remēbred how Homer
the diuine authour of auncient Poetry, deſcribed him to be a wiſe man, which
had traueled diuers countreis and na [...]iōs, wherfore I gaue great thakes
to my Aſſy fourme, in y• by y• meane I had ſéene the experiēce of many
thinges, [[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=100)
and was become more wiſe (not withſtāding the great miſery and labour which I
dayly ſuſteined) but I will tell you a pretie ieſt, which cometh now to my
remem­braunce, to the intent your eares may be delighted in bearinge the ſame.

¶How Apuleius was handled by the Bakers wife, which was a harlotte.

### 9.4. Cap. 40.

THe Baker whiche bought me was an honeſt and ſober man, but his wife was the
moſte peſtilent woman in all the worlde, in ſo much that he en­dured many
miſeries and afflictions with her, ſo that  [...] my ſelfe did ſecretely pitie
his eſtate, and bewaile his euill fortune: for ſhe had not one faulte alone,
but all the miſchiefes that could be deuiſed, ſhe was crabbed, cruell,
laſciuious, dronken, obſtinate, niggiſhe, coue­tous, riotous in filthy
expenſes, an ennemie to faithe and chaſtitie, a deſpiſer of all the Goddes
whome other did honour, one that affirmed that ſhe had a God by her ſelfe,
whereby ſhe deceaued all men, but eſpecially her poore huſbande, one that
abandoned her body with continuall whoredome: This miſcheuous queane ha­ted me
in ſuche ſorte,There is no mallice, aboue the mallice of a woman. that ſhe
commaunded euery day before ſhe was vp, that I ſhould be put in the mill to
grinde: and the firſte thinge whiche ſhe woulde doo in the morninge was to ſée
me cruelly beaten, and that I ſhoulde grinde when the other beaſtes did féede
and take reſte: when I ſawe that I was ſo cruelly handled, ſhe gaue me
occaſion to learne her conuerſation and life, for I ſawe oftentime a yonge
man, whiche would priuilyg [...]e into her chamber, whoſe face I did greatly
deſire to ſée, but I coulde not by reaſon mine eies were
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=101) couered
euery day. And verely if I had bene frée and at libertie I woulde haue
diſcouered all her abhomina­tion: ſhe had an olde woman, a bawde, a meſſenger
of miſchiefe that dayly haunted to her houſe, and made good chéere with her,
to the vtter vndoinge and impo­ueriſhment of her huſband, but I that was
greatly of­fended with the negligence of Fotis, who made me an Aſſe, in ſtéede
of a birde, did yet comfort my ſelf by this onely meane, in that to the
miſerable deformitie of my ſhape, I had longe eares, whereby I mighte here all
things that was done: On a day I harde the old baude ſay to the Bakers wife:
Dame you haue choſen (with­out my counſell) a yonge man to your louer, who as
me ſéemeth is dull, fearfull, without any grace, & daſterd­ly coucheth at the
frowning lookes of your odious huſ­bande, whereby you haue no delight nor
pleaſure with him:Thus old baudes ſeweth for yōg knaues. how farre better is
the yonge man Phileſiterus, who is comely, beautiful, in the flowre of his
youth, li­berall, courteous, valiant, and ſtoute againſt the dili­gent pries
and watches of your huſbande, woorthy to embraſe the woorthieſt dames of this
countrie, and woorthy to were a crowne of golde, for one parte that he plaide
to one that was ielous ouer his wife: Herken how it was, and then iudge the
diuerſitie of theſe twoo louers, knowe you one Barbarus a Senator of our
towne, whome the vulgar people call likewiſe Scor­pion for his ſeueritie of
manners. This Barbarus had a gentle woman to his wife, whome he cauſed dayly
to be encloſed within his houſe with diligent cuſtody, thē the Bakers wife
ſaid I know her very wel, for we two dwelled together in one houſe: Then you
know (ꝙ the old woman) the whole tale of Phileſiterus. No verely (ſaide ſhe)
but I greatly deſire to know it: therefore I [[Page
93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=101) pray you mother
tell me the whole ſtory. By and by the olde woman whiche knew well to babble,
beganne to tell as followeth.

¶How Barbarus beyng ielous ouer his wife, commaun­ded that ſhe ſhoulde be
kepte cloſe in his howſe, and what happened.

### 9.5. Cap. 41.

YOu ſhall vnderſtād that on a day this Barbarus preparing him ſelfe to ride
abroade, and willing to kéepe the chaſtitie of his wife (whom he ſo wel loued)
alone to him ſelfe called his man Myrmex (whoſe faith he had tried and proued
in many thinges) and ſe­cretely committed to him the cuſtody of his wife,
wil­linge him that he ſhould threaten, that if any man did but touch her with
his finger as he paſſed by, he would not onely put him in pryſon,What is more
worſe then a ielous perſon. and binde him hande and foote, but alſo cauſe him
to be put to death, or els to be famiſhed for lacke of ſuſtenaunce, whiche
woordes he confirmed by Othe of all the Goddes in heauen, and ſo he departed
away: When Barbarus was gone, Myr­mex beinge greatly aſtonied at his maiſters
threat­ninges, woulde not ſuffer his miſtris to goe abroade, but as ſhe ſatte
all day a ſpinninge, he was ſo carefull that he ſatte by her, when nighte came
he wente with her to the baynes, holdinge her by the garment, ſo faithfull he
was to fulfill the commaundement of his maiſter: How be it the beautie of this
noble Ma­tron coulde not be hidden from the burninge eyes of Phileſiterus, who
conſidering her great chaſtitie, and howe ſhe was diligently kepte by Myrmex,
thought it impoſſible to haue his purpoſe, yet (endeuoringe by all kinde of
meanes to enterpriſe the matter, and remem­bringe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=102) the
fragilitie of man,Golde cōquereth all thinges. that might be entiſed and
corrupted with money, ſince as by Golde the adamant gates may be opened) on a
day when he founde Myr­mex alone he diſcouered his loue, deſiring him to ſhow
his fauour (otherwiſe he ſhould certainly die) with aſ­ſurance that he néede
not to feare when as he might priuily be lette in and out in the night,
without know­ledge of any perſon. When he thought, with theſe, and other
gentle woordes, to allure and pricke forward the obſtinate minde of Myrmex, he
ſhowed him glittering golde in his hande, ſaying: that he would giue his
mi­ſtris twēty crounes, and him tenne, but Myrmex hea­ringe theſe woordes was
greatly troubled, abhorringe in his minde to cōmitte ſo wicked a miſchiefe:
wherfore he ſtopped his eares, & turning his head departed away: howbeit the
gliſtering h [...]w of theſe crownes could ne­uer out of his minde, but being
at home he ſéemed to ſée the money before his eies, which was ſo woorthy a
pray wherfore poore Myrmex being in diuers opinions could not tell what to
doo, for on the one ſide he cōſidered the promiſſe which he made to his
maiſter, and the puniſh­ment whiche ſhould enſue if he did contrary. On the
other ſide he thought of the gayne, & the paſſinge plea­ſure of the crownes of
Golde, in the ende the deſire of the money did more preuaile then the feare of
death, for the beautie of the ſlouriſhinge crownes did ſo ſticke in his minde,
that where the menaces of his maiſter compelled him to tarry at home, the
peſtilent auarice of the Golde egged him out a doores, wherfore putting all
ſhame aſide without further delay, he declared the whole matter to his
miſtris,Women eaſely allured by giftes. who according to the na­ture of women,
when ſhe harde him ſpeake of ſo great a ſumme, ſhe bounde Chaſtitie in a
ſtringe, and gauè [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=102) authorite to
Myrmex to rule her in that caſe. Myrmex ſeing the intent of his miſtreſſe, was
very glad, and for great deſier of the golde,Here gold brake faith and truſt.
he ran haſtely to Phileſiterus declaring that his miſtreſſe was cōſented to
his mind, wherefore he demaunded the gold which he promiſed: Then
incōtinentlie Phileſiterus deliuered him tenne crownes: and when night came,
Myrmex brought him diſguiſed into his miſtris chamber. About midnight when he
and ſhe weare naked together, making ſacri­fice vnto the Goddeſſe Venus,
beholde, her huſbande (contrary to their expectation) came and knocked at the
doore, callinge with a loude voice his ſeruaunt Myrmex: Whoſe longe tariyng,
encreaſed the ſuſpitiō of his maiſter, in ſuch ſorte, that he threatned to
beate Myrmex cruelly: but he being troubled with feare, and driuen to his
latter ſhiftes, excuſed the matter, ſaiynge that he could not finde y• kaie:
by reaſon it was ſo dark. In the meane ſeaſon Phileſiterus heatinge the noyſe
at the doore, ſlipt on his coate, and priuily ranne out of the chamber. When
Myrmex had opened the doore to his maiſter that threatned terribly, and had
let him in, he went into the chamber to his wife: In the meane while Myrmex
let out Phileſiterus, & barred the doores faſt, and went again to bedde. The
next morning,Haſte is no [...] good. whē Barbarus awaked, he perceiued twoo
vnknowen ſlip­pers liynge vnder his bedde, whiche Phileſiterus had forgotten
when he went away. Then he conceaued a great ſuſpition and ielouſie in his
minde, howbeit, he would not diſcouer it to his wife neither to any other
perſone, but putting ſecretly the ſlippers in his boſom, commaunded his other
ſeruauntes to binde Myrmex incontinently, and to bring him bounde to the
Iuſtice after him, thinking verely that by y• meane of the ſlip­pers
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=103) he might
boult out the matter. It fortuned that while Barbarus went toward the Iuſtice
in a furie & rage, and Myrmex faſt bounde, followed him wéeping, not becauſe
he was accuſed before his maiſter, but by reaſon he knewe his owne conſcience
gilty. Behold, by aduenture Phileſiterus (goinge about earneſt buſines)
fortuned to méete with them by the waie, who fearing the matter which he
cōmitted the night before, & doub­ting leaſt it ſhould be knowen, did ſodenly
inuente a meane texcuſe Myrmex, for he ran vpō him & beate him about the head
with his fiſtes cruelly, ſaiynge: Ah miſ­chieuous verlet that thou art, and
periured knaue. It were a good déede if the Goddeſſe and thy maiſter here,
would put the to death, for thou art woorthie to be im­priſoned, and to weare
out theſe irons, that ſtaleſt my ſlippers awaie when thou wareſt at the baynes
yeſter night. Barbarus hearing theſe woordes, returned incō ­tinently home, &
called his ſeruaunt Myrmex, cōmaū ­ding him to deliuer y• ſlippers againe to
y• right owner.

The old woman had ſcars finiſhed her tale, whē the Bakers wife gan ſaie:
Verely ſhe is bleſſed & moſt bleſ­ſed, that hath the fruition of ſo worthie a
louer, but as for me poore miſer, I am fallen into y• handes of a cow­ard, who
is not onlie aferde of my huſbande, but alſo of euery clap of the mill, and
dares doo nothing before the blinde face of yonder ſcabbed Aſſe. Then the old
womā anſwered, I promiſe you certeinly, if you will, you ſhal haue this yong
man at your pleaſure, and therewithall when night came,A harlot ſpen­deth the
ſub­ſtance of her huſbande. ſhe departed out of her chamber. In the meane
ſeaſon, the Bakers wife made ready a ſup­per with abundance of wyne, &
exquiſite fare: So that there lacked nothing but the cōming of the yong man:
For her huſbād ſupped at one of her neighbours houſe. [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=103) When time came
that my harneſſe ſhould be taken of & that I ſhould reſt my ſelf, I was not ſo
ioyful of my li­bertie, as whē y• vaile was takē frō mine eies, I ſhould
ſée all y• abhominatiō of this miſchieuous queane. Whē night was come & the
Sunne gone downe, behold y• old Baude & the yong mā, who ſéemed to me but a
child, by reaſon he had no bearde, came to y• doore: Thē y• Bakers wife
kiſſed him a thouſand times, & receiuing him cur­teouſly, placed him down at
the table: but he had ſcarce eaten the firſt morſell, when y• good man
(cōtrary to his wifes expectation) returned home, for ſhe thought he would
not haue come ſo ſone: But lorde how ſhe curſed him, praiyng God y• he might
breake his neck at y• firſt entry in. In the meane ſeaſon, ſhe caught her
louer and thruſt him into y• bynne where ſhe boulted her flowre, and
diſſimuling the matter, finely came to her huſbād, demaunding why he came
home ſo ſoone. I could not a­bide (ꝙ he) to ſée ſo great a miſchiefe & wicked
fact which my neighbours wife committed, but I muſt runne a­way: Oh harlot as
ſhe is, how ſhe hath diſhonoured her huſbande. I ſweare by this Goddeſſe
Ceres, that if I had not ſéene it with mine eies, I woulde neuer haue beleued
it. His wife deſirous to knowe the matter, de­ſired him to tell what ſhe had
doone: Then he accorded to the requeſt of his wife,As quicke of ſight abroade
as linx: but blin [...] at home. and ignoraunt of the ſtate of his owne houſe,
declared the miſchaunce of an other. You ſhall vnderſtande (ꝙ he) that the
wyfe of the Ful­ler my compaignion, who ſéemed to be a wyſe and chaſt woman,
regardinge her owne honeſtie, and the pro­fite of her houſe, was ſound this
night with her knaue. For whyle we wente to waſhe our handes, he and ſhee
weare togeather: Who beynge troubled by our preſence ranne into a corner,
where ſhe thruſt him into
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=104) a mew made
with twigges, apointed to laie on clothes to make them white with the ſmooke
and fume of brim­ſtone. Then ſhe ſat downe with vs at the table to co­lour the
matter: In the meane ſeaſon the yong man co­uered in the mewe, could not
forbeare ſnyſing, by rea­ſon of the ſmooke of the brymſtone. The good man
thin­king it had bene his wife that ſnyſed, cried Chriſt help: But when he
ſnyſed more and more, he ſuſpected the matter, and willinge to knowe who it
was, roſe from the table, and went to the mewe where he founde the yong man
well nte dead with ſmooke. When he vnder­ſtoode the whole matter, he was ſo
inflamed with an­ger, that he called for a ſwoorde to kil him: and
vndoub­tedly he had killed him, had not I reſtrained his violēt handes from
his purpoſe, aſſuring him that his enemy would die with the force of the
brymſtone without the harme which he ſhould doo: Howbeit, my woords would not
appeaſe his furie, but as neceſſitée required, we tooke the yonge man well nie
chooked, & carried him out at the doores. In the meane ſeaſon, I coūſeled his
wife to abſent her ſelfe at her neighbours houſes, til the co­ler of her
huſbande was pacified, leaſt he ſhould be mo­ued againſt her, as he was
againſt the yong man. And ſo being wery of their ſupper, I foorthwith returned
home.Abhorring ſuch crimes in others  [...] they vſe them ſelues. When the
Baker had tolde this tale, his impu­dent wyfe began to curſe and abhorre the
wife of the Fuller, and generally all other wiues which habandō their bodies
with any other then with their owne huſ­bandes, breaking the faith & bonde of
mariage, wherby ſhe ſaide they were woorthy to be burned aliue: But knowing
her owne gilty conſcience and proper whor­dom, leaſt her louer ſhould be hurt,
liyng in the bynne, ſhe willed her huſbande to goe to bedde, but he hauing
[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=104) eatē
nothing, ſaid that he would ſuppe before he went to reſt: wherfore ſhe was
compelled maugre her eyen, to ſette ſuche thinges on the table as ſhe had
prepared for her louer. But I, conſidering the great miſchiefe of this wicked
queane, deuiſed with my ſelf how I might reueale the matter to my maiſter, and
by kicking away the couer of the binne (where like a ſnaile the yonge mā was
couched) to make her whoredome apparant and knowē, at length I was aided by
y• prouidence of God, for there was an olde man to whome the cuſtodie of vs
was committed, that draue me poore Aſſe, and the other horſes the ſame time to
the water to drinke, then had I good occaſion miniſtred to reuenge the iniurie
of my maſter, for as I paſſed by I perceaued the fingers of the yonge man vpon
the ſide of the binne, and liftinge vp my héeles I ſpurned of the fleſhe with
the force of my hoofes, whereby he was compelled to crie out, and to throwe
downe the binne on the groūd,Whoredome wilbe knowen▪ & ſo the whore­dome of
the Bakers wife was knowen and reuealed. The Baker ſeing this, was litle moued
at the diſhone­ſtie of his wife, but he toke the yonge man tremblinge for
feare by the hande, & with cold and curteiſe woordes ſpake in this ſorte:
Feare not my ſonne nor thinke that I am ſo barbarous or cruell perſon, that I
would ſti [...]e thée vp with the ſmoke of Sulphur, as our neighbour
accuſtometh, nor I wil not puniſh thée according to the rigor of the lawe
Iulia, whiche cōmaundeth that adul­terers ſhould be put to death: No no, I
wil not execute my crueltie againſt ſo fayre and comely a yonge mā as you be,
but we wil deuide our pleaſure betwéene vs, by liynge all thrée in one bedde,
to the ende there may be no debate nor diſſentiō betwéene vs, but that either
of vs may be cōtented, for I haue alwaies liued with my
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=105) his necke
appeared to her in the night, declaringe the whole circumſtance of his death,
and how by inchaunt­ment he was deſcended to hell, whiche cauſed her to thinke
that her father was dead. After that ſhe had la­mented a good ſpace, & was
ſomewhat comforted by the ſeruauntes of the houſe, and when nine daies were
ex­pired, as inheritrix to her father, ſhe ſolde away all the ſubſtance of the
houſe, whereby the goodes chaunſed in­to diuers mens handes.

¶How Apuleius after the Baker was hanged, was ſolde to a Gardiner, and what
dreadfull thinges happened.

### 9.6. Cap. 42.

THere was a poore gardiner emongſt ye reſt, which bought me for the ſumme of
fiftie pence, whiche ſéemed to him a great price, but he thought to gaine it
againe by the continuall trauell of my bodie: The matter requireth to tell
likewiſe, how I was hād­led in his ſeruice. This gardiner accuſtomed to driue
me euery morning laded wt herbes to the next village, & when he had ſolde his
herbes, he would mount vpon my backe and returne to the gardein, & while he
dig­ged the grounde, and watred the herbes, and wente about other buſines, I
did nothing but repoſe my ſelfe with great eaſe, but when winter approched,
with ſharpe haile, raine, and froſtes, and I ſtanding alwaies vnder a hedge
ſide, was welnie killed vp with colde, and my maiſter was ſo poore that he had
no lodginge for him ſelfe, much leſſe he had any litter or place to co­uer me
withal, for he him ſelf alwaies lay vnder a litle roofe, ſhadowed and couered
with bowes. In the mor­ninge when I roſe, I founde my hoofes ſhriueled
toge­ther with colde, & vnable to paſſe vpon the ſharpe yſe, & [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=105) froſtie myre,
neither could I fill my belly with meate as I accuſtomed to doo, for my
maiſter & I ſupped toge­ther and had both one fare: Howbeit it was very
ſlēder ſince as we had nothing els ſauinge old and vnſauory ſallets, which
were ſuffred to grow for ſéede, like long broomes, and that had loſte all
their ſwéete ſape & iuice.Poore fare and poore lodginge in time of ne­ceſsitie
is good. It fortuned on a day that an honeſt mā of the next vil­lage was
benighted, and conſtrained by reaſon of the raine to lodge (very lagged and
wery) in our garden, where although he was but meanly receaued, yet it ſer­ued
wel inough conſidering time & neceſſitie. This ho­neſt man to recōpenſe our
entertainment, promiſed to giue my maſter ſome corne, oile, & two bottels of
wine: wherefore my maiſter not delaiyng the matter, laded me with ſackes &
bottels, and rode to the towne which was ſeuen miles of, when we came to the
honeſt mans houſe, he entertained & feaſted my maiſter excéeding­ly, and it
fortuned while they eate and dranke toge­ther, as ſigne of great amitie there
chaunſed a ſtraūge and dreadfull caſe:Terrible tokēs. for there was a henne
which ranne kacklinge about the yarde, as though ſhe woulde haue laide an
egge: The goodman of the houſe perceauinge her, ſaide: O good and profitable
pullet that féedeſt vs euery day with thy fruicte, thou ſéemeſt as though thou
wouldeſt giue vs ſome pittance for our dinner; Ho boy put the pannier in the
corner that the henne may lay. Then the boye did as his maiſter commaunded,
but the henne forſakinge the pannier came towardes her maiſter, and laid at
his féete not an egge whiche euery man knoweth, but a chickin with feathers,
clawes and eyes, whiche incontinently ranne péepinge after his dame.Suche
thinges happen before death and dreadfull chaū ­ſes, By and by, happened a
more ſtraunge thinge whiche would cauſe any man to abhorre, vnder
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=106) the table
where they ſatte the grounde opened, & there appeared a great well and
fountaine of bloudde, in ſo much that the droppes thereof ſprinkled about the
ta­ble: At the ſame time while they wōdred at this dread­full ſight, one of
the ſeruauntes came runninge out of the ſeller, and tolde that all the wine
was boiled out of the veſſelles, as though there had bene ſome great fire
vnder: By and by a Weſell was ſéene that drewe in­to the houſe a dead Serpent,
and out of the mouth of a ſhéepeherdes dogge leaped a liue frogge, and
imme­diatly after one brought woorde that a Ramme had ſtrangled the ſame dogge
with one bitte: All theſe thinges that happened aſtonied the good man of the
houſe, and the reſidewe that were preſent, in ſo muche they could not tell
what to doo, or with what ſacrafice to appeaſe the anger of the Goddes. While
euery man was thus ſtriken in feare: beholde one brought woorde to the goodman
of the houſe,The thinge which the ſaid ſtraunge tokens foreſhewed. that his
thrée ſonnes who had bene brought vp in good litrature, and endewed with good
manners were dead, for they thrée had great acquaintance and auncient amitie
with a poore man, which was their neighbour and dwelled harde by thē. And
nexte vnto him dwelled an other yonge man ve­rie riche bothe in landes and
goodes, but bendyng from the race of his progenies diſſentions, and rulinge
him ſelfe in the towne accordinge to his owne will. This yonge royſter did
mortally hate this poore man, in ſo muche that he woulde kill his ſhéepe,
ſteale his Oxen,Might, ouerco­meth right. and ſpoyle his corne and other
fruictes, before the time of ripenes, yet was he not contented with this, but
he woulde encroche vppon the poore mans grounde and clayme all his heritage as
his owne: The poore man whiche was very ſimple and fearfull, ſéeinge all his
[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=106) goodes
taken awaye by the auarice of the riche, called together and aſſembled many of
his fréendes to ſhowe them the metes and boundes of his lande, to the ende he
might haue but ſo muche grounde of his fathers he­ritage as mighte burie him.
Emongeſt whome he founde theſe thrée bretherne as fréendes to helpe and ayde
him in his aduerſitie and tribulation: How be it the preſence of theſe honeſt
Citizins, coulde in no wiſe perſwade him to leaue his extorte power, no nor
yet to cauſe any temperaunce of his tongue, but the more they wente aboute
with gentle woordes to tell him his faultes, the more woulde he frette and
fume, ſwearinge all the Othes vnder God, that he litle re­garded the preſence
of the whole Citie, whereupon in­continently he commaunded his ſeruantes to
take the poore manne by the eares, and carrie him out of his grounde, whiche
greatly offended all the ſtanders by: Then one of the brethern ſpake vnto him
ſomewhat boldely, ſayinge: It is but a foly to haue ſuche affiance in your
richeſſe, whereby you ſhould vſe your tirannie againſte the poore,The lawe
re­dreſſeth the poore mās cauſ [...] when as the lawe is common for all men,
and a redreſſe may be had to ſuppreſſe your in­ſolence.

Theſe woordes chaſed him more then the burninge oyle, or flaming brimſtone, or
ſcourge of whippes, ſai­yng: y• they ſhould be al hanged & their lawes too,
before he would be ſubiect to any perſon: and therewithall he called out his
bandogges, & great maſtiffes, whiche ac­cuſtomed to eate the karrein & karkeis
of dead beaſtes in the fieldes, and to ſette vpon ſuche as pāſſed by the way,
then he cōmaunded they ſhould be put vpō all the aſſiſtaunce to teare them
in pieces, who aſſone as they
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=107) harde the
hiſſe of their maiſters, ranne fiercely vppon them, inuading them on euery
ſide, in ſo much that the more they flied to eſcape away, the more cruell and
ter­rible were the dogges. It fortuned emongeſt all this fearfull companie,
that in running, the yongeſt of the thrée brethren, ſtumbled at a ſtone, and
fell downe to the grounde: Then the dogges came vpon him and tare him in
pieces with their teethe, whereby he was com­pelled to crie out for ſuccour:
His other twoo brethren hearing his lamentable voice, ranne towardes him to
helpe him, caſting their clokes about their left armes, tooke vp ſtones to
chaſe away the dogges, but all was in vaine, for they might ſée their brother
diſmembred in euerie part of his body: Who liyng at the very point of death,
deſired his brethren to reuenge his death a­gainſt the cruell tyrant: And
therewithall he gaue vp the ghoſt. The other twoo brethern perceiuing ſo great
a murder, and neglecting their owne liues, like deſpe­rat perſons dreſſed them
ſelues againſt the tyrant, and threw a great nomber of ſtones at him, but the
bloudy thiefe exerciſed to ſuch & like miſchiefes, tooke a ſpeare & thruſt him
cleane thorough the bodie: Howbeit he fell not downe to the grounde. For the
ſpeare that came out at his backe ranne into the yearth and ſuſtained him vp,
by and by came one of this Tirantes ſeruaūts the moſt ſturdieſt of the reſt
to helpe his maiſter, who at his firſt coming, toke vp a ſtone, & threw at the
third brother, but by reaſon the ſtone ranne alonge his arme it did not hurt
him, whiche chaunſed otherwiſe then all mens expectation was, by and by the
yonge man feig­ning that his arme was greatly wounded, ſpake theſe woordes
vnto the cruel bloudſucker: Now maiſt thou,  [...]hou wretche triumphe vpon
the deſtruction of all our [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=107) family, nowe
haſte thou fedde thy inſatiable crueltie with the bloud of thrée brethern,
nowe maiſte thou re­ioyſe at the fall of vs Citizins, yet thinke not but that
howe farre ſo euer thou doeſt remoue and extende the boundes of thy lande,
thou ſhalt haue ſome neighbour, but howe greatly am I ſory in that I haue
loſte mine arme wher withall I minded to cut of thy head, when he had ſpoken
theſe woordes: The furious thiefe drewe out his dagger, & running vpon the
yong man thought verely to haue ſlaine him, but it chaunſed otherwiſe: For the
yonge man reſiſted him ſtoutly, & in bucklinge together by violēce wreſted
the dagger out of his hād: whiche done, he killed the riche thiefe with his
owne weapon,Nothing worſe then to fall in­to the hādes of enemies. and to the
intent the yonge man would eſcape the handes of the ſeruauntes, whiche came
runninge to aſſiſte their maiſter, with the ſame dagger he cutte his owne
throate. Theſe thinges were ſignified by the ſtraunge and dreadful wonders
which fortuned in the houſe of the good man, who after he had harde theſe
ſo­rowfull tidinges coulde in no wiſe wéepe, ſo farre was he ſtroken with
dolor, but preſently takinge his knife wherewith he cutte his cheéſe and other
meate before, he cutte his owne throate like wiſe, in ſuche ſorte that he fell
vpon the borde and embrued the table with the ſtreames of his bloud in moſt
miſerable manner: Here­by was my maiſter the gardiner depriued of his hope,
and paying for his dinner the watry teares of his eies, mounted vpon my backe,
and ſo we wente homewarde the ſame way as we came.

¶How Apueeius was founde by his ſhadow.

### 9.7. Cap. 43.

AS we paſſed by the way we mette with a tale ſoul­diour (for ſo his habite and
countenaunce declared)
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=108) who with
proude and arrogant woordes, ſpake to my maiſter in this ſorte: Quorium vacuum
ducis à ſuum? My maiſter ſomwhat aſtonied at the ſtraunge ſightes which he ſaw
before, and ignorant of the latine tongue rode on & ſpake neuer a woorde: The
ſouldiour vnable to refraine his inſolence & offended at his ſilence, ſtrake
him on the ſhoulders as he ſatte vpon my backe, then my maiſter gently made
anſweare that he vnderſtoode not what he ſaide, whereat the Souldiour angerly
de­maunded againe whither he rode with his Aſſe: Mary (ꝙ he) to the nexte
Citie: but I (ꝙ the Souldiour) haue néede of his helpe, to carry the truſſes
of our Capi­tayne from yender Caſtell, and therewithall he toke me by the
halter, and woulde violently haue taken me away: but my maiſter wipinge away
the bloudde of the blowe which he receaued of the Souldiour, deſired him
gentely and cinily to take ſome pitie vppon him, and to lette him departe with
his owne, ſwearyng and affirminge that his ſlowe. Aſſe, we [...]nie dead with
ſick­nes, coulde ſkarſe carry a fewe handfulles of herbes to the nexte towne,
much leſſe he was able to beare any greater truſſes: but when he ſaw the
Souldiour would in no wiſe be entreated, but ready with his ſtaffe to cleaue
my maiſters head, my maiſter fell downe at his  [...]éete, vnder colour to
moue him to ſome pitie, but when he ſawe his time, he tooke the Souldiour by
the legges and caſte him vppon the grounde: Then he buf­feted him, thumped
him, bitte him, and toke a ſtone and beate his face and his ſides, that he
could not turn [...] or defende him ſelfe, but onely threaten that if euer he
roſe he woulde choppe him in pieces. The Gardener when he harde him ſay ſo,
drewe out his iauelin which he had by his ſide, and when he had throwen it
away, [[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=108)
he knockt and beatte him more cruelly then he did be­fore, in ſo muche that
the Souldiour coulde not tell by what meanes to ſaue him ſelfe, but by
feigninge that he was dead. Then my maiſter toke the iauelin and mounted vppon
my backe, ridinge in all haſte to the nexte village, hauinge no regarde to goe
to his gar­den, and when he came thither, he turned into one of his fréendes
houſe and declared all the whole matter, deſiringe him to ſaue his life, and
to hide him ſelfe and his Aſſe in ſome ſecrete place,A friēde in ad­uerſitie
is bet­ter then trea­ſure. vntill ſuche time as all daunger were paſte. Then
his fréende not forgettinge the auncient amitie betwéene them, entertained him
willingly, and drewe me vp a payre of ſteares into a chāber, my maiſter crept
into a cheſt & lay hidden there with the couer cloſed faſte: The Souldiour (as
I after­wardes learned) roſe vp as one awaked from a dron­ken ſléepe, but he
coulde ſkarſe goe by reaſon of his woūdes: how be it at length by litle and
litle thorough ayde of his ſtaffe he came to the towne, but he woulde not
declare the matter to any perſon, nor complaine to any iuſtice, leaſt he
ſhould be accuſed of cowardiſe or daſterdnes, yet in the ende he tolde ſome of
his cōpaig­nions of all the matter that happened, then they toke him, &
cauſed him to be cloſed in ſome ſecret place, thin­kinge that beſide the
iniury whiche he had receaued, he ſhould be accuſed of y• breche of his faith,
by reaſon of y• loſſe of his ſpeare, & when they had learned y• ſignes of my
maſter, thei wēt to ſearch him out: at laſt ther was an vnfaithful neighbour
y• tolde them where we were, then incōtinently the Souldiours went to the
Iuſtice, declaringe that they had loſt by the way a ſiluer goblet of their
Capitaines, and that a gardener had found it, who refuſing to redeleuer y•
goblet, was hiddē in one of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=109) his
fréendes houſe: by and by the Magiſtrates vnder­ſtandinge the loſſe of the
Capitaine, came to the doores where we were, and commaunded our Oſte to
deliuer my maiſter vpon paine of death: Howbeit theſe threat­ninges coulde not
enforce him to confeſſe that he was within his doores, but by reaſon of his
faithfull pro­miſe, and for the ſaluegarde of his friende: he ſaid, that he
ſawe not the gardener a great while, neither knew where he was: the ſouldiours
ſaide contrary, whereby to know the verity of the mater, the Magiſtrates
com­maunded their Sergeantes and miniſters to ſearche euery corner of the
houſe, but when they coulde finde neither gardi [...]er nor Aſſe: There was a
great conten­tion betwéene the Souldiours and our Oſte, for they ſaide we
weare within the houſe: and he ſaide no, but I that was very curious to know
the matter, when I harde ſo great a noyes, put my head out of the window to
learne what the ſtirre and tumulte did ſignifie. It fortuned that one of the
ſouldiours perceaued my ſha­dowe, whereupon he beganne to crie, ſaying: that
he had certainly ſéene me, then they were all gladde and came vp into the
chamber and pulled me downe like a priſoner, when they had founde me they
doubted no­thinge of the Gardiner, but ſéekinge about more nar­rowly, at
length they founde him couched in a cheſte. And ſo they brought out the poore
Gardiner to the Iu­ſtices, who was committed immediatly to pryſon, but they
could neuer forbeare laughing from the time they founde me by my ſhadow,
whereof is riſen a common prouerbe: The ſhadowe of the Aſſe.

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=109)

## 10\. The tenth Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.

¶Howe the Souldiour draue Apuleius away, and how he came to a Capitaines
houſe: And what happened there.

### 10.1. Cap. 44.

THe nexte daie howe my maiſter the Gardiner ſpedde. I knewe not, but the
gentle Souldiour, who was well beaten for his cowardiſe, ledde me to his
lodging without the contradictiō of any man: Where he laded me wel, and
garniſhed my bodie (as ſéemed to me) like an Aſſe of armes. For on the one
ſide I bare a helmet that ſhined excedingly: On the other ſide a ter­gat that
gliſtered more a thouſand folde. And on the toppe of my burthen, he had put a
longe ſpeare, whiche thinges he placed thus gallantlie, not becauſe he was ſo
expert in warre, (for the Gardiner proued contrary) but to thende he might
feare thoſe whiche paſſed by, when they ſawe ſuch a ſimilitude of warre. When
we had gone a good part of our iourney, ouer the plain and eaſie fieldes, we
fortuned to come to a little towne, where we lodged at a certaine Capitaines
houſe. And there the Souldiour tooke me to one of the ſeruauntes, while he him
ſelfe went towarde his Capitaine: Who had the charge of a thouſand men. And
when we had remained there a fewe daies, I vnderſtode of a wicked and
miſcheuous facte committed there,A pitifull  [...] of a ſtepdame and her ſonne
in lawe. whiche I haue put in wrytinge, to the [...]de you may knowe the ſame.

The maiſter of the houſe had a ſonne inſtructed in good litrature, and ende
[...]ed with vertuous manners,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=110) ſuch a one
as you would deſire to haue the like, longe time before his mother died. And
thē his father maried a newe wife, and had an other childe of the age of
.xij. yéeres. This ſtepdame was more excellent in beantie then honeſtie: For
ſhe loued this yonge man her ſonne in lawe, either becauſe ſhe was vnchaſt by
nature, or becauſe ſhe was enforced by fate of ſtepmother, to cō ­mit ſo
great a miſchiefe. Gentle Reader, thou ſhalt not reade of a fable, but rather
a tragedy: This womā whē her loue began firſt to kindle in her hart, coulde
eaſely reſiſt her deſire and inordinate appetite, by reaſon of ſhame and
feare, leſt her intent ſhould be knowē: But, after that it compaſſed and
burned euerie parte of her breſt,A thinge rooted deepe, can ſkars he pulled
vp. ſhe was cōpelled to yelde vnto the raginge flame of Cupid, and vnder
colour of the diſeaſe and infirmiti [...] of her body, to conceale the wound
of her reſtles mind. Euery man knoweth well the ſignes & tokens of loue, & the
maladie conuenient to the ſame: Her countenance was pale, her eies ſorrowfull,
her knées weake, & there was no comfort in her, but continuall wéepinge &
ſob­bing, in ſo much you would haue thought that ſhe had ſome ſpice of an
ague, ſauing that ſhe wepte vnmeaſu­rably. The Phiſitions knewe not her
diſeaſe, whē they felt the beating of her vaines, the intemperance of her
beat, the ſobbing ſighes, and her often toſſing on euery ſide: No, no, the
conning Phiſitions knewe it not, but a ſcholler of Venus court might eaſely
cōiect the whole. After that ſhe had bene long time tormented in her
af­fection, and was no more able to conceale her ardent de [...]er, ſhe cauſed
her ſonne to be called for (which woord Sonne, ſhe would faine put awaye, if
it weare not for ſhame): Then he nothing diſobedient to the commaun­dement of
his mother, with a ſadde and modeſt coun­tenance, [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=110) came into the
chamber of his Stepdame, the mother of his brother: but ſhe ſpeaking neuer a
woord, was in great doubt what ſhe might doo, and coulde not tell what to ſaie
firſt, by reaſon of ſhame. This yonge man ſuſpectinge no ill, with humble
curteſie demaun­ded the cauſe of her preſent diſeaſe. Then ſhe hauinge founde
an occaſion to vtter her wicked intente, with wéepinge eyes and couered face,
beganne bouldly to ſpeake vnto him in this manner. Thou, thou, art the
original cauſe of my preſent dolour: Thou art my com­fort and onely health,
for thoſe thy comly eyes, are ſo faſtened within my breſte, that vnleſſe thou
ſuccour [...] me, I ſhall certainly die: Haue pitie therfore vpon me, be not
the occaſion of my deſtruction, neither lette thy conſcience reclaime to
offend thy father, when as thou ſhalt ſaue the life of thy mother. Moreouer,
ſince as thou doeſt reſemble thy fathers ſhape in euerie point, it geueth me
cauſe the more to fancie thée: Nowe is mi­niſtred vnto thée tyme and place:
Nowe haſte thou oc­caſion to woorke thy will, ſéeing that we are alone. And it
is a common ſaiyng:

Neuer knowen, neuer done.

This yong man troubled in his mynde, at ſo ſodein an ill, although he abhorred
to cōmit ſo great a crime, yet he would not caſt her of with a preſent
deniall, but warely pacified her mynde with delaie of promiſſe. Wherfore he
promiſed her to doo all accordinge to her defier: And in the meane ſeaſon, he
willed his mother to be of good chere, and comforte her ſelfe, till as he
might finde ſome conuenient tyme to come vnto her, when his father was ridden
foorth: Wherwithal he got him away, frō the peſtilent ſight of his Stepdame.
And knowing that this matter touching the ru [...]ue of all the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=111) [...]
[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=111) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=112) whole
houſe, néeded the counſell of wyſe and graue perſones, he went incontinently
to a ſage old man, and declared the whole circumſtāce of the matter.VViſdome
lieth in hoare headed  [...]ge. The old man after long deliberatiō, thought
there was no bet­ter meane to auoide y• ſtorme of cruell fortune to come, then
to runne awaye. In the meane ſeaſon this wicked woman impacient of her loue,
and the lōg delaie of her ſonne, egged her huſbande to ride abroade into
farre countries. And then ſhe aſked the yong man the accom­pliſhment of his
promiſſe, but he to deliuer him ſelfe, entierly from her hādes, would finde
alwaies excuſes, till in the ende, ſhe vnderſtode by the meſſengers that came
in and out, that he nothing regarded her. Then the, by howe muche ſhe loued
him before, by ſo much & more ſhe hated him nowe. And by and by, ſhe called
one of her ſeruauntes, ready to all miſchiefes: To whome ſhe declared all her
ſecretes. And there it was conclu­ded betwenè them twoo, that the ſureſt waye
was to kill the yong man: Whereupon this Verlet went incō ­tinentlie to buie
poiſon, which he mingled with wine, to the intent he would giue it the yong
man to drinke, and thereby preſently to kill him. But while they were in
deliberation howe they might offer it vnto him. Be­holde, here happened a
ſtraunge aduenture. For the yonge ſonne of the woman that came from ſchole at
noone (being very thirſty) tooke the potte wherein the poyſon was mingled, and
ignorāt of the hidden venym dranke a good draught thereof, whiche was
prepared to kill his brother:A womā either loueth thee bur­ningly, or ha­teth
the extre­mely. Whereby he preſently fell downe to y• groūd dead. His
ſcholemaiſter ſeing this ſodain chaūce called his mother, and all the
ſeruauntes of the houſe with a loude voyce. Incontinently euerie man decla­red
his opinion, touching the death of the childe: But [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=112) the cruell
woman, the onely example of ſtepmothers malice was nothinge moued by the
bitter death of her ſonne, or by her owne conſcience of parracide, or by the
miſfortune of her houſe, or by the dolor of her huſbande but rather deuiſed
the deſtruction of all her family. For by and by ſhe ſent a meſſanger after
her huſband to tell him the great miſfortune which happened after his
de­parture. And when he came home the wicked woman declared that his ſonne had
empoiſened his brother, becauſe he would not conſent to his will, and tolde
him diuers other leſinges, adding in y• ende that he threat­ned to kill her
likewiſe, becauſe ſhe diſcouered the fact: Then the vnhappy father was ſtroken
with double do­lor of the death of his twoo children, for on the one ſide he
ſawe his yonger ſonne ſlaine before his eyes, on the other ſide he ſéemed to
ſée y• elder condēned to die for his offence: Againe where he behelde his
wife lamente in ſuch ſorte, it gaue him farther occaſiō to hate his ſonne
more deadly, but the funeralles of his yonger ſonne were ſkarſe finiſhed, when
the olde mā the father with wéeping eyes euen at the returne from the graue,
wēt to the Iuſtice and accuſed his ſonne of the ſlaughter of his brother, &
how he threatned to ſlea his wife, wher­by the rather at his weping and great
lamentation, he moued all the Magiſtrates & people to pitie, in ſo much that
without any delay, or further inquiſitiō they cried all that he ſhould be
ſtonied to death, but the Iuſtices fearinge a farther inconuenience: to ariſe
by a particu­lar vengeance,To proceede by lawe is iuſtice, for lawe is ve­ry
iuſtice. and to the ende there might fortune no ſedition emongſt the people,
praied the Decurious and other officers of the Citie, that they might procéede
by examination of witneſſes, and with order of Iuſtice ac­cordinge to the
auncient cuſtome, before the giuing of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=113) any haſtie
ſentence, or iudgement without hearinge of the cōtrary part, like as the
barbarous & cruell Tirāts accuſtome to vſe. Otherwiſe they ſhould giue an ill
ex­ample to their ſucceſſors, this opiniō pleaſed euery mā, wherfore the
Senators & counſelours were called, who being placed in order accordinge to
their dignitie, cau­ſed the accuſer & defender to be brought foorth, & by the
example of the Atheman law, and iudgement martial, their aduocates were
commauned to plead their cauſes briefly, without preambles or motions of the
people to pitie,The Aſſe ſpea­keth. whiche were to longe a proceſſe: And if
you de­maunde how I vnderſtoode al this matter, you ſhal vn­derſtand y• I hard
many declare the ſame, but to recite what woordes y• accuſer vſed in his
inuectiue, what an­ſweare the defendour made, the orations & pleadinges of ech
partie: verely I am not able to doo, for I was faſt bounde at the maunger, but
as I learned & knew by o­thers, I will God willing declare vnto you: So it was
ordred y• after the pleadinges of both ſides was ended, thei thought beſt to
trie & boulte out the veritie by wit­neſſes, all preſumptions & likelyhoodes
ſet a parte, & to cal in the ſeruant, who onely was reported to know al the
matter, by & by the ſeruaunt came in, who nothing abaſhed at y• feare of ſo
great a iudgemēt, or at the pre­ſence of y• Iudges, or at his own giltie
cōſcience, which he, ſo finely feigned but with a bold coūtenance preſen­ted
him ſelf before the Iuſtices, & confirmed the accuſa­tion againſt the yonge
man, ſaying: O ye Iudges, on a day whē this yonge mā lothed & hated his
Stepmother he called me, deſiring me to poiſon his brother, wherby he might
reuenge him ſelfe, & If I would doo it, & kéepe y• matter ſecrete, he promiſed
to giue me a good reward for my paines, but when the yonge man perceaued y• I
would not accorde to his will, he threatned to ſlea me: [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=113) wherupō he
went him ſelfe & bought poiſon, & after tē ­pred it with wine, & then gaue it
me to giue to y• childe, which when I refuſed, he offred it to his brother wt
his owne hādes. When the verlet with a trēbling counte­naunce had ended
theſe woordes, which ſeemed a likely­hoode of truth, the iudgement was ended:
neither was there foūd any Iudge or Counſelour ſo mercyful to the yong mā
accuſed as would not iudge him culpable, but y• he ſhould be put & ſowen in a
ſkinne, with a dogge, a cocke, a ſnake, & an Ape, accordinge to the lawe
againſt parracides:Thus they vſed in olde time to putte ſuche to death, as had
killed any of their kinrede. But that lawe was afterward abrogate. wherfore
there wanted nothing, but (as the aūcient cuſtome was) to put white ſtones &
blacke, into a potte, and to take them out againe, to ſée whether the yonge
man accuſed ſhould be acquited by iudgement or condēned, whiche was a thing
irreuocable. In y• meane ſeaſon he was deliuered to y• handes of the
executioner. But there aroſe a ſage & ancient Phiſitian, a mā of good
conſciēce & credite thorough out all the Citie, y• ſtopped the mouth of y•
potte wherin y• ſtones were caſt, ſaiyng: I am right gladde ye reuerende
Iudges, y• I am a mā of name & eſtimation emongſt you, wherby I am accomp­ted
ſuch a one as will not ſuffer any perſon to be put to death by falſe & vntrue
accuſations, conſideringe there hath bene no homicide or murder committed by
this yonge man in this caſe,Iudges are ſworne to exe­cute Iuſtice. neither you
(beinge ſworne to iudge vprightly) to be miſinformed & abuſed by inuen­ted
lies & tales: For I cānot but declare & open my con­ſcience, leaſt I ſhould
be founde to beare ſmall honour & faith to the Goddes: wherefore I pray you
giue eare, and I will ſhowe you the whole truth of the matter: you ſhal
vnderſtand y• this ſeruant which hath merited to be hāged, came one of theſe
daies to ſpeake with me, promiſing to giue me a hūdred crounes, if I would
giue [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=114) him a
preſent poyſon, whiche would cauſe a man to die ſodenly, ſaying: that he would
haue it for one that was ſicke of an incurable diſeaſe, to the ende he might
be de­liuered from all his torment, but I ſmelling his crafty and ſubtill
fetche, and fearinge leaſt he would worke ſome miſchiefe withall, gaue him a
drinke: but to the intent I might cléere my ſelfe from al daunger y• might
happen, I would not preſently take the money, which he offred: but leaſt any
one of the crownes ſhould lacke weight or be foūd coūtrefaite, I willed him
to ſeale the purſe wherein they were put with his manuell ſigne, wherby the
next day we might goe together to y• gold­ſmithe to trie them, which he did,
wherfore vnderſtan­ding that he was brought preſent before you this day, I
haſtely cōmaunded one of my ſeruantes to fetche the purſe which he had
ſealed, & here I bring it vnto you to ſée whether he will denie his owne ſigne
or no:and you may eaſely coniect that his woordes are vntrue, whiche he
alleaged againſt the yong man touching the biynge of the poyſon, conſideringe
he bought the poyſon him ſelfe. Whē the Phiſitian had ſpoken theſe woordes
you might perceaue how the trayterous knaue chaunged his colour, how he ſwette
for feare, how he trembled in euery part of his bodie: [...]vſeth theeues to
doo, when e­uident proufes are ſhowen. And how he ſet one legge vpon an other,
ſcratchyng his head, and grindinge his téeth, wherby there was no perſon but
would iudge him cul­pable. In the ende when he was ſomewhat returned to his
former ſubtiltie, he beganne to denie all that was ſaide, and ſtoutely
affirmed that the Phiſitian did lie. But the Phiſitian perceauinge that he was
rayled at and his woordes denied, did neuer ceaſe to confirme his ſaiynges and
to diſproue the verlet, til ſuch time as the officers by the commaundement of
the Iudges, bound [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=114) his handes and
brought out the ſeale, wherwith he had ſealed the purſe, which augmented the
ſuſpition which was conceaued of him firſt. Howbeit neither the feare of the
whele or any other torment (according to the vſe of the Grecians) whiche weare
ready prepared, no nor yet the fire coulde enforce him to confeſſe the matter,
ſo obſtinate and grounded was he in his miſchieuous minde, but the Phiſitian
perceauing that the menaces of thoſe tormentes did nothing preuaile, gan ſay:
I cā ­not ſuffer or abide that this yong man who is innocēt, ſhould againſt
all lawe and conſcience be puniſhed and condemned to die, & the other whiche
is culpable ſhould eſcape ſo eaſely, and after mocke & floute at your
iudge­ment: For I will giue you an euident proufe and ar­gument of this
preſent crime, you ſhall vnderſtande that when this caytife demaunded of me a
preſent and ſtronge poyſon, conſideringe that it was not my parte to giue
occaſion of any others death,The office of a Phiſician is to cute and not to
kill, as I haue harde tell many Phiſiciās of ſpe­culation haue done, before
thei haue come to practiſe. but rather to cure & ſaue ſicke perſons by meane
of medicines: And on the other ſide, fearinge leaſt if I ſhould denie his
requeſt I might miniſter a further cauſe of his miſchiefe, eyther that he
would bie poyſon of ſome other, or els returne and woorke his wicked intent
with a ſwoorde or ſome daungerous weapō, I gaue him no poiſon but a doling
drinke of Mandragora, which is of ſuch force that it wil cauſe any man to
ſléepe as though he weare dead: Nei­ther is it any meruell if this moſte
deſperate man, who is certainely aſſured to be put to death, ordained by an
auncient cuſtome, can ſuffer or abide theſe facill & eaſie tormentes: but if
it be ſo that the childe hath receaued the drinke as I tempred it with mine
owne handes, he is yet aliue and doth but ſléepe, and after his ſléepe he
ſhall returne to life againe: but if he be dead in déede,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=115) then may
you further enquire of y• cauſes of his death: The opinion of this aūcient
Phiſitian was found good, & euery man had a deſire to goe to the ſepulchre
where y• childe was laide, there was none of y• Iuſtices, none of any
reputatiō of the towne, nor any of the common people, but went to ſee this
ſtrange ſight: Emongſt thē al, the father of the childe remoued with his owne
hāds the ſtone of the ſepulchre, & founde his ſonne riſing vp after his dead
& Soporiferous ſléepe, whom whē he be­held he embraſed him in his armes, &
preſented him be­fore y• people with great ioye & conſolation, & as he was
wrapped & bound in his graue, ſo he brought him before the iudges, wherupon
the wickednes of the ſeruaunt, & the treaſon of the ſtepdame was plainly
diſcouered, & the veritie of the matter reueled, whereby the woman was
perpetually exiled,Sorrowe into gladnes, the women mentio­ned in the warres
that the Romaines had againſt the Carthaginiēſes, were ſo gladde when they
ſaw their ſonnes a­liue, who were reported to be dead, that their hartes bra
[...]e a ſonder, and ſo died for ioye. the ſeruaunt hanged on a gal­lowes, &
the Phiſitian had the crounes which was pre­pared to bie the poyſon: behold
how the fortune of y• old man was chaunged, who thinking to be depriued of all
his race & poſteritie, was in one moment made the fa­ther of twoo children.
But as for me I was ruled and handled by fortune, according to her pleaſure.

¶How Apuleius was ſolde to twoo brethern, whereof one was a Baker, and the
other a Cooke, and how finely and deintily he fared.

### 10.2. Cap 45.

THe Souldiour which paid neuer a penny for me, by the cōmaundement of his
Capitaine, was ſent vnto Rome to carry letters to the great Prince, & generall
of the Campe, & before he went he ſold me for eleuen pence, to twoo of his
cōpaignions, being ſeruāts to a man of woorſhip, wherof one was a Baker y•
baked [[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=115)
ſwéete bread & delicates: the other a Cooke, whiche dreſ­ſed fine and
excellent meates for his maiſter, theſe two liued in common, & would driue me
from place to place to carry ſuche thinges as was neceſſarie, in ſo muche that
I was receaued by theſe twoo, as a thirde brother and compaignion, and I
thought I was neuer better placed then with them: For when night came y•
ſupper was done & their buſines ended, they would bring ma­ny good morſels
into their chamber for thē ſelues: One wold bring pigges, chickins, fiſh, &
other good meates, the other fine bread, paſties, tartes, cuſtardes, & other
delicate ionckettes dipped in honie. And when thei had ſhutte their chamber
doore and went to the baynes: (O Lorde) how I woulde fill my guttes with thoſe
goodly diſhes: Neither was I ſo muche a foole, or ſo very an Aſſe, to leaue
the deintie meates & grinde my téeth vpō harde hey. In this ſort I continued
a great ſpace, for I plaied the honeſt Aſſe, takinge but a litle of one diſhe,
and a litle of an other, whereby no man miſtruſted me. In the ende I was more
hardier & beganne to deuoure the whole meſſes, of the ſwéeteſt delicates,
which cau­ſed the Baker & the Cooke to ſuſpect, how be it they ne­uer
miſtruſted me, but ſearched about to apprehēde the théefe: At length they
began to accuſe one an other of thefte, & to ſette the diſhes & morſels of
meate in order, one by an other, becauſe they would learne what was takē
away, wherby one of thē was cōpelled to ſay thus to his fellow: is it reaſon
to breake promiſe and faith in this ſorte, by ſtealinge away the beſte meate,
and to ſell it to augment thy good, and yet neuertheleſſe to haue thy parte of
the reſidew that is lefte, if our part­nerſhippe doo miſlike thée, we wilbe
parteners and bro­thers in other thinges, but in this we will breake of:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=116) for I
perceaue that the great loſſe which I ſuſtaine wil at length be a cauſe of
great diſcorde betwéene vs: Thē anſweared the other, verely I prayſe thy
great conſtā ­cie and ſubtilnes, in that (when thou haſt ſecretely takē away
the meate) doeſt beginne to cōplayne firſt, wher­as I by longe ſpace of time
haue ſuffred thée, becauſe I woulde not ſéeme to accuſe my brother of thefte,
but I am right gladde in that we are fallen into commnnica­tion of this
matter, leaſt by our ſilence like contention might ariſe betwéene vs, as
fortuned betwéene Ethe­  [...]les and his brother, when thei had reaſoned
together in this ſort: they ſwoore both earneſtly that neyther of them ſtale
or toke away any iote of the meate, where­fore they concluded to ſearche out
the théefe by al kinde of meanes. For they coulde not imagine or thinke that
the Aſſe, who ſtoode alone there woulde eate any ſuche meates, neither coulde
they thinke that myce or ſlies, were ſo rauenous as to deuoure whole diſhes of
meate, like the byrdes Harpies which carried away y• meates of Phineus kinge
of Archadia. In the meane ſeaſon while I was fedde with deintie morſelles I
gathered together my fleſh, my ſkinne waxed ſofte, my heare be­ganne to ſhine,
and I was gallant on euery parte, but ſuche fayre and comely ſhape of my bodie
was cauſe of my diſhonour, for the Baker and the Cooke merueled to ſée me ſo
ſlike and fine, conſidering I did eate no hay at all: Wherefore on a time at
their accuſtomed houre they wente to the baynes & locked their chamber doore.
It fortuned that eare they departed away, they eſpied me thorough a hole how I
fel roundly to my victuales: Then they merueled greatly, and litle eſtéeminge
the loſſe of their meate laughed excéedingly, callinge y• ſer­uauntes of the
houſe, to ſhowe them the gréedy gorge [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=116) and appetite
of the Aſſe. Their laughinge was ſo im­moderate, that the maiſter of the houſe
harde them, & demaūded the cauſe of their laughter, and when he vn­derſtoode
all the matter, he looked thorough y• hole like­wiſe, wherwith he toke ſuch a
delectation that he com­maūded the doore to be opened, that he might ſée him
at his pleaſure. Then I beholding euery man laugh, was nothing abaſhed, but
rather more bold, whereby I ne­uer reſted eating, til ſuch time as the maſter
of y• houſe commaunded me to be brought into his parler as a no­ueltie, &
theere cauſed al kindes of meates, which were neuer touched to be ſet on the
table, which (although I had eaten ſufficiently before, yet to winne the
further fauour of the maiſter of the houſe) I did gréedely de­uoure, & made a
cleane riddance of the delicate meates. And to proue my nature wholy, they
gaue me ſuche meate as euery Aſſe doth greatly abhorre: for they put before me
biefe and vinegre, bi [...]des and pepper, fiſhe & vergiſſe, in the meane
ſeaſon, thei that beheld me at the table did nothing but laugh: Then one of
the ſeruaūts of the houſe ſaid to his maiſter, I pray you ſir giue him ſome
drinke to his ſupper: Mary (ꝙ he) I thinke thou ſayeſt true: For ſo it may be
that to his meate, he wold drinke likewiſe a cuppe of wine. No boy, waſhe
yon­der potte, and fill it with wine, whiche done carrie it to the Aſſe, and
ſay that I haue dronke to him. Then all the ſtanders by looked on, to ſée what
woulde come to paſſe, but I (aſſone as I behelde the cuppe) ſtayed not long,
but gathering my lippes together, ſupped vp all the wine at one draught: The
maiſter being right ioy­full hereat, cauſed the Baker and the Cooke, which had
bought me to come before him, to whome he deliuered fower times as much for me
as they paide, which done
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=117) he
committed me to one of his riche libertines, and charged him to looke wel to
me, and that I ſhould lacke nothinge, who obayed his maiſters commaūdement in
euery pointe: And to the ende he would crepe further into his fauour, he
taught me a thouſande qualities. Firſt he inſtructed me to ſitte at y• table
vpon my taile, and how I ſhould leape & daunce holding vp my former féete,
moreouer he taught me how I ſhould anſweare whē any body ſpake vnto me, with
nodding my head, which was a ſtraūge & meruelous thing, & if I did lacke
drinke, I ſhould looke ſtill vpon the potte. All whiche thinges I did
willingly bring to paſſe, & obeyed his do­ctrine: howbeit I could haue done al
theſe things with­out his teaching, but I feared greatly leaſt in ſhowing my
ſelfe conning without a maſter, I ſhoulde portende ſome great and ſtraunge
wonder, & therby be throwen out to wilde beaſtes. But my fame was ſpredde
about in euery place, and the qualities which I could doo, in ſo much y• my
maſter was renoumed thorough out all the countrie by reaſon of me. For euery
man woulde ſay: Beholde the gentleman that hath an Aſſe, that will eate and
drinke with him, that will daunce, and vn­derſtādinge what is ſaid to him,
will ſhow his fantaſie by ſignes. But firſt I will tel you (which I ſhould
haue done before) who my maiſter was, and of what coūtry, his name was
Thiaſus, he was borne at Corinth, which is the principal towne of al Achaia,
he had paſſed many offices of honour, till he had taken vppon him the degrée
Quinquenuall, accordinge as his birth and dignitie required, who to ſhowe his
woorthines, and to purchaſe the beneuolence of euery perſon, apoynted publique
ioyes and triumphes, to endure the ſpace of thrée dayes, and to bringe his
endeuor to paſſe, he came [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=117) into Theſſalie
to bie excellēt beaſtes, & valiant fighters for the purpoſe.

¶How a certaine Matron fell in loue with Apuleius, and howe he had his
pleaſure with her, and what other thinges happened.

### 10.3. Cap. 46.

WHen he had bought ſuch thinges ss was ne­ceſſary, he woulde not returne home
into his country in chariottes, or waggons, neither would he ride vpon
Theſſalian horſes, or gennettes of fraunce, or ſpaniſhe mules, which be moſt
excellēt that can be founde, but cauſed me to be garniſhed and trim­med with
trappers & bardes of golde, with braue har­neſſe, with purple coueringes, with
a bridle of ſiluer, with pictured clothes, & with ſhrillinge belles, & in this
manner he code vpon me louingly, ſpeaking & entrea­ting me with gentle
woordes, but aboue all thinges he did greatly reioyſe, in that I was his
ſeruant to beare him vpon my backe, and his compaignion to féede with him at
the table: After long time whē we had traueled aſwel by ſea as lande, &
fortuned to arriue at Corinth, the people of the towne came about vs on euery
ſide, not ſo muche to doo honour vnto Thiaſus as to ſée me: For my fame was ſo
greatly ſpredde there, y• I gained my maiſter muche money, and when the people
was deſirous to ſée me play qualities, they cauſed the gates te be ſhutte, and
ſuche as ent [...]ed in ſhould pay money, by meanes wherof, I was a profitable
compaignion to them euery day: There fortuned to be emongſt the aſ­ſembly a
noble and riche Matron, that conceaued much delight to behold me, in ſo much
that ſhe was amorous of me, and coulde finde no remedie to her paſſions and
diſordinate appetite, but cōtinually deſired to haue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=118) her
pleaſure with me, as Paſiphae had with a Bull. In the ende ſhe promiſed a
great rewarde to my kéeper for the cuſtodie of me one night, who for gayne of
a li­tle money acccorded to her deſire, and when I had ſup­ped in a parler
with my maiſter, we departed away and went into our chamber, where we found
the fayre matron, who had tarried a great ſpace for our com­minge: I am not
able to recite vnto you how al thinges there were prepared, there weare fower
Eunuques that laide a bedde of downe on the grounde with bol­ſters accordingly
for vs to lie on, the couerlette was of clothe of Golde, and the pillowes
ſofte and tender, wheron the delicate Matron had accuſtomed to lay her head,
then the Eunuques not mindinge to delay any lenger the pleaſure of their
Miſtris, cloſed the doores of the chamber and departed away, within the
cham­ber weare lampes that gaue a cléere light all the place ouer: Then ſhe
put of all her garmentes to her naked ſkinne, and takinge the lampe that
ſtoode nexte to her, beganne to annointe all her body with baulme, and mine
likewiſe, but eſpecially my noſe, whiche done ſhe kiſſed me, not as thei
accuſtome to doo at the ſtewes, or in brothell houſes, or in the courtiſant
ſchooles for gayne of money, but purely, ſincerly, and with great affection,
caſtinge out theſe and like louinge woordes: Thou arte he whome I loue, thou
arte he whome I onely deſire, without thée I cannot liue, and other like
preamble of talke, as women can vſe well inoughe, when they minde to ſhowe or
declare their burninge paſſions and great affection of loue: Then ſhe toke me
by the halter and caſte me vpon the bedde, whiche was nothinge ſtraunge vnto
me, conſideringe that ſhe was ſo beautifull a Matron, and I ſo well bolen out
with [[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=118)
wyne, and perfumed with balme, whereby I was rea­dely prepared for the
purpoſe: But nothing greued me ſo much, as to thinke how I ſhould with my huge
and great legges embraſe ſo faire a matrō, or how I ſhould touche her fine,
deintie, and ſilkē ſkinne, with my hard hoofes, or howe it was poſſible to
kiſſe her ſoft, her pre­tie and ruddie lippes, with my monſtrous mouthe and
ſtony téeth, or how ſhe, who was ſo yonge and tender, could be able to receiue
me. And I (verely thought) if I ſhould hurte the womā by any kind of meane, I
ſhould be throwen out to the wilde beaſtes: But in the meane ſeaſon ſhe kiſſed
me, and looked on me with burninge eies, ſaiyng: I holde thée my cony, I hold
thée my nops, my ſparowe, and therewithall ſhe eftſones embraſed my bodie
round about, and had her pleaſure with me, whereby I thought the mother of
Minotaurus, did not cauſeleſſe quenche her inordinat de [...]ier with a Bull.
When night was paſſed,Here I haue lef [...] out certain lines propter
honeſta­tem. with muche ioye and ſmall ſleape: The matron went before daie to
my kéeper, to bargaine with him for an other night, whiche he wil­lingly
graunted, partly for gaine of money, and partly to finde newe paſtime for my
maiſter. Who after he was enformed of all y• hiſtorie of my luxurie, was right
glad, and rewarded my kéeper wel for his peines, min­ding to ſhowe before the
face of all the people what I could doo: but becauſe they would not ſuffre the
matron to abide ſuche ſhame, by reaſon of her dignitie, and be­cauſe they
could finde no other that would endeuour ſo great a reproche. At length they
obteined for money, a poore woman, which was condemned to be eatē of wild
beaſtes, with whome I ſhould openly haue to doo. But firſt I will tell you
what a tale I hard, concerning this woman. This woman had a huſbande, whoſe
father [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=119)
minding to ride foorth, commaunded his wife which he left at home great with
childe, that if ſhe weare deliue­red of a doughter, it ſhould incontinently be
killed.

Whē the time of her deliuery came, it fortuned that ſhe had a daughter, whome
ſhe would not ſuffer to be ſlaine, by reaſon of the natural affection which
ſhe bare vnto her childe, but ſecretly cōmitted her to one of her neighbours
to nource. And when her huſbande retur­ned home, ſhe declared vnto him, that
ſhe was deliue­red of a daughter, whome as he commaunded, ſhe had cauſed to be
put to death. But when this childe came to age, and readie to be maried: The
mother knew not by what meanes ſhe ſhould endow her daughter, but that her
huſband ſhould vnderſtand and perceiue it. Wher­fore ſhe diſcouered the matter
to her ſonne, who was the huſband of this woman, condemned to be eaten of
wilde beaſtes: For ſhe greatly feared, leſt he ſhold vn­wares, fancie or fall
in loue with his owne ſiſter. The yong man vnderſtanding the whole matter (to
pleaſe & gratifie his mother) wēt immediatly to the yōg maidē, keping the
matter ſecret in his hart, for feare of incon­uenience & (lamenting to ſée his
ſiſter forſaken, both of mother and father) incontinently after, endowed her
wt part of his owne goodes, and would haue maried her to one of his eſpeciall
& truſty frendes: But although he brought this to paſſe very ſecretly &
ſagely, yet in the ende cruell and enuious fortune, ſowed great ſedition in
his houſe. For his wife, who was now cōdemned to beaſtes, waxed ielous of her
huſband, and began to ſu­ſpect the yong woman as a harlot and commō queane,
in ſo much that ſhe inuented all manner of meanes to diſpatche her out of the
way. And in the end, ſhe inuen­ted this kinde of miſchiefe: She priuely ſtale
away her [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=119) huſbandes
ringe, & went into the coūtrey, where as ſhe cōmaunded one of her truſtie
ſeruaūtes, to take y• ringe & to carie it to the maiden. To whom he ſhould
declare y• her brother did pray her to come into y• coūtrie to him, & that
ſhe ſhould come alone without any other perſon. And to thēd ſhe ſhold not
delay but come with al ſpede, he ſhould deliuer her the ringe, which ſhould be
a ſuffi­ciēt teſtimony of his meſſage. The maidē, aſſone as ſhe had receiued
y• ring of her brother, being very willing & deſirous to obey his
cōmaundement: (For ſhe knew no otherwiſe but that he had ſent for her) went
in al haſte as y• meſſenger willed her to do. But whē ſhe was come to the
ſnare & engin whiche was prepared for her: The miſcheuous womā, like one that
were mad, & poſſeſſed with ſome il ſpirit, ſcourged her firſt with roddes from
top to too, & when y• poore maidē called for help wt a loud voice to her
brother, y• wicked harlot (wéening y• ſhe had inuented & feigned y• matter)
tooke a burning fireband & thruſt it into her ſecret place, whereby ſhe died
miſera­bly. The huſband of this maiden, but eſpecialy her bro­ther, aduertiſed
of her death, came to y• place where ſhe was ſlain, & after great lamētation
& weping, thei cau­ſed her to be buried honorably. The yongman her bro­ther,
taking in ill part y• miſerable deeth of his ſiſter, as it was conuenient he
ſhould, cōceiued ſo great dolour within his mind, & was ſtroken wt ſo
peſtilent furie of bitter anguiſhe, that he fell into the burning paſſions, of
a daūgerous ague, wherby he ſéemed in ſuch neceſſi­tie, y• he néeded to haue
ſome ſpéedy remedy to ſaue his life. The woman y• ſlew the maidē, hauing loſt
y• name of wife together wt her faith, wēt to a traiterous Phiſi­tiō, who
had killed a great many perſons in his daies, & promiſed him fifty pieces of
gold if he would giue her a preſēt poiſō to kil her huſbād out of hād, but
in preſēce of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=120) her
huſband, ſhe feigned that it was neceſſarie for him, to receiue a certaine
kinde of drinke, whiche y• maiſters and doctours of phiſick, doo call a ſacred
potion, to thin­tent he might purge choller, and ſkowre the interior partes of
his bodie. But the Phiſition, in ſtéede of that drinke, prepared a mortall and
deadly poyſon, and whē he had tempred it accordingly, he tooke the potte in
pre­ſence of all the familie, and other neighbours & frendes of the ſicke
yonge man, and offred it vnto the patient. But the bolde and hardie woman, to
thende ſhe might accompliſh her wicked intent, and alſo gaine the mony whiche
ſhe had promiſed the Phiſition, ſtaide the potte wt her hand, ſaying: I praie
you maiſter Phiſition, mi­niſter not this drinke vnto my déere huſbande,
vntill ſuche time as you haue dronke ſome part thereof your ſelfe: For what
knowe I, whether you haue mingled any poyſon in the drinke or no, wherein I
pray you not to be offended: For I know that you are a man of wiſ­dome and
learning, but this I doo to thintent the con­ſcience and loue that I beare to
the health & ſaluegarde of my huſband, may be apparant. The Phiſition being
greatly troubled at the wickednes of this miſchieuous woman, as voide of all
councell and leiſure to conſider on the matter, and leaſt he might geue any
cauſe of ſu­ſpition to the ſtanders by, or ſhowe any ſcruple of his gilty
conſcience, by reaſon of long delaie, tooke the pott in his hande, & preſently
dronke a good draught therof, which done, the yonge man hauing no miſtruſt,
dronke vp the reſidue. The Phiſition would haue gone imme­diatly home to
receiue a contrepoiſon, to expell & driue out the firſt poyſon: But the wicked
woman perſeue­ring in her miſchiefe, would not ſuffer him to departe one
foote, vntill ſuch time as y• poyſon began to woorke [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=120) in him, and
then by much prayer and interceſſiō, ſhe li­cenſed him to goe home: By the
way the poyſon inua­ded the intrailes and bowels of the whole bodie of the
Phiſitian, in ſuch ſort that with great paine he came to his owne houſe, where
he had ſkarſe time to ſpeake to his wife, and to will her to receaue the
promiſed ſalary of the death of twoo perſones, but he yéelded vp y• ghoſt: And
the other yong man liued not long after, but like­wiſe died, emongſt the
feigned and deceitfull teares of his curſed wife. A few daies after, when the
yong man was buried, and the funeralles ended, the Phiſicians wife demaūded
of her the fiftie pieces of golde, whiche ſhe promiſed her huſband for the
drinke, whereat the ill diſpoſed womā, with reſemblance of honeſtie,
anſwea­red her with gentle woordes, and promiſed to giue her the fiſtie pieces
of golde, if ſhe woulde fetche her a litle of that ſame drinke, to proceede
and make an end of all her enterpriſe. The Phiſitians wife, partely to winne
the further fauour of this riche woman, and partely to gayne the money, ranne
incōtinently home, & brought her the whole potte of poiſon, which when ſhe
ſaw, ha­uing now occaſion to execute her further malice, began to ſtretche out
her bloudy handes to murder, ſhe had a da [...]ghter by her huſbande (that was
poiſoned) who ac­cordinge to order of law, was appointed heyre of al the
lādes & goodes of her father, but this woman knowyng that the mothers,
ſuccede their children and receaue all their goodes after their death,
purpoſed to ſhow her ſelf a like parent to her childe, as ſhe was a wife to
her huſ­bande, wherupon ſhe prepared a dinner with her owne handes, and
empoiſoned both the wife of the Phiſitian and her owne daughter: The childe
beynge yong and tender died incontinently, by force of the drinke, but
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=121) the
Phiſitians wife beinge ſtoute and of ſtronge com­plexion, féelinge the poiſon
t [...]ill downe into her bodie doubted the matter, & therupon knowyng of
certaintie that ſhe had receaued her baine, ranne foorthwith to the Iudges
houſe, that what with her cries and excla­matiōs, ſhe raiſed vp the people of
the towne, and pro­miſinge them to reueale and ſhowe diuers wicked and
miſcheuous actes, cauſed that the doores and gates of the Iudge were opened,
whē ſhe came in, ſhe declared from the beginninge to the ende, the
abhomination of this woman, but ſhe had ſkarſe ended her tale, when o­peninge
her falinge lippes, and grindinge her téeth to­gether, ſhe fel downe dead
before the face of the iudge, who incontinently to trie the truth of the
matter, cau­ſed the curſed woman and her ſeruauntes to be pulled out of the
houſe, and enforced by paine of torment to confeſſe the veritie, whiche beynge
knowen, this miſ­chieuous woman, farre leſſe then ſhe deſerued, but be­cauſe
there coulde be no more cruell a death inuented for the qualitie of her
offence, was condemned to be ca­ten of wilde beaſtes: beholde with this woman
was I appointed to haue to doo before the face of al the people, but I beyng
wrapped in great anguiſhe, and enuiynge the day of the triūphe, whē we twoo
ſhould ſo abandon our ſelues together, deuiſed rather to  [...] my ſelf, then
to pollute my body wt this miſcheuous harlot, and ſo for euer to remaine
deffamed, but it was impoſſible for me to doo, conſidering that I lacked
handes, & was not able to hold a knife in my hoofes: howbeit ſtāding in a
pretie cabyn, I reioyſed in my ſelf to ſée that ſpring time was come, & that
all thinges floriſhed, & that I was in good hope to finde ſome roſes, to
render me to my humaine ſhape. When the day of the triumph came, I was ledde
[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=121) with
great pompe and magnificence to the appointed place, whither when I was
brought, I firſte ſawe the preamble of the triumphe, dedicated with daūſers
and mery tauntyng ieſtes,Here the trīuph is expreſſed. and I in the meane
ſeaſon, was placed before the gate of the Theatre, whereas on the one ſide, I
ſawe the gréene and freſhe graſſe growinge before the entrie thereof, whereon
I greatly deſired to féede: On the other ſide I conceaued a great delecta­tion
to ſée when the Theatre gates were opened, how al thinges was finely prepared
& ſette foorth: For there I might ſee yonge children and maydens in the flowre
of their youth, of excellent beautie, and attyred gorge­ouſly, daunſing &
mouing in comely order, according to the order of Grecia, for ſometime they
would daunce in length, ſomtime rounde together, ſometime deuide thē ſelues
in fower partes, & somtime loſe handes on euery ſide, but when the trumpet
gaue warnyng y• euery mā ſhould retire to his place: Then began the triumphe
to appeare. Firſt there was a hil of woodde, not much vn­like that whiche the
Poet Homer called Idea, for it was garniſhed about with all ſorte of gréene
verdu [...]es and liuely trées, from the toppe whereof rāne downe a cléere &
freſh foūtaine, nouriſhinge the waters below, about which woodde were many
yōg & tender Goates, pluckyng & féeding deintily on the budding trées, then
came a yonge man a ſhéepeherde repreſentinge Paris, richly arraied with
veſtmentes of Barbarie, hauinge a mitre of gold vpō his head, & ſéeming as
though he kept y• goates. After him enſewed an other yong mā all na­ked,
ſauing y• his left ſhoulder was couered with a rich cloke, and his head
ſhininge with gliſteringe heares, & hangyng downe, through whiche you might
perceaue twoo litle winges, wherby you might cōiecture that he
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=122) was Mercury
with his rodde called Caduceus, he bare in his right hand an apple of golde,
and with a ſéemely gate went towardes him that repreſented Paris, and after
that he had deliuered him the apple, he made a ſigne ſignifiyng that Iupiter
had commaunded him ſo to doo, whē he had done his meſſage, he departed away:
And by and by, behold there approched a fayre & come­ly maiden, not much
vnlike to Iuno, for ſhe had a Dia­deme of golde vpon her head, and in her
hande ſhe bare a regall Sceptre: then followed an other reſemblinge Pallas,
for ſhe had on her head a ſhining ſallett, wher­on was bounde a garlande made
of Oliue braunches, hauinge in one hande a targette or ſhilde, and in the
o­ther a ſpeare as though ſhe would fight: then came an other, which paſſed
the other in beautie, & repreſented the goddeſſe Venus, with the colour of
Ambroſia, whē ſhe was a mayden, and to the ende ſhe would ſhow her perfect
beautie, ſhe appeared all naked, ſauing that her fine and deintie ſkinne was
couered with a thinne ſmocke, whiche the winde blewe hither and thither, to
teſtifie the youth and flowre of the age of the Dame, her colour was of twoo
ſortes, for her bodie was white, as deſcended from heauen, & her ſmocke was
blewiſhe as arriued from the ſea: After euery one of the virgins whiche ſéemed
Goddeſſes, followed certaine waytinge ſeruauntes, Caſtor and Pollux went
behind Iuno, ha­uinge on their heades helmettes couered with ſtarres. This
virgin Iuno ſowned a feewte, whiche ſhe bare in her hand, and moued her ſelfe
towardes the ſhéepeherd Paris, ſhowyng by honeſt ſignes and tokens, and
pro­miſinge that he ſhould be Lord of all Aſia, if he would iudge her the
faireſt of the thrée, & to giue her the apple of golde: The other mayden
whiche ſéemed by her ar­mour [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=122) to be Pallas,
was accompaigned with two yong men, armed and brandiſhinge their naked
ſwoordes in their handes, wherof one was named Terror, and the other Feare,
behinde them approched one ſoundinge his trumpet to prouoke and ſtirre men to
battaile, this maiden began to daunce and ſhake her head, throwyng her fierce
and terrible eyes vpon Paris, and promiſing that if it pleaſed him, to giue
her the victory of beawtie, ſhe would make him the moſt ſtronge & victorious
man aliue. Then came Venus and preſented her ſelfe in the middle of the
Theatre, with much fauour of al the peo­ple, for ſhe was accompaigned with a
great number of youth, whereby you would haue iudged them to be all Cupidoes,
eyther to haue flowen from heauen, or els frō the riuer of the ſea, for they
had winges, arrowes, and the reſidew of their habite according in eche point,
& they bare in their handes, torches lighted, as though it had bene a day of
mariage, then came in a great mul­titude of fayre maidens: On the one ſide
were the moſt comely Graces: on the other ſide the moſte beautifull Howres,
carriyng garlandes and looſe flowres, & ma­kinge great honour to the Goddeſſe
of pleaſure, the flewtes, and pypes yéelded out the ſwéete ſounde of Li­dians,
whereby they pleaſed the mindes of the ſtāders by excéedingly, but the more
pleaſinge Venus moued forwarde more and more, & ſhakinge her head, anſwea­red
by her motion and geſture, to the ſounde of the in­ſtrumentes: For ſometimes
ſhe woulde winke gen­tely, ſometimes threaten and looke aſperly, and ſome­time
daunce onely with her eies: Aſſone as ſhe was come before the Iudge, ſhe made
a ſigne and token to giue him the moſte fayreſt ſpouſe of all the worlde, if
he woulde preferre her aboue the reſidew of the God­deſſes,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=123) then the
yonge Phrigian ſhéepeherde Paris,The offer of loue, paſſed kingdomes and
treaſure. with a willinge minde deliuered the Golden apple to Venus, whiche
was the Victorie of beawtie. Why doo ye meruell ye Orators, ye Lawiers, &
Aduocates, if many of our Iudges nowe a dayes ſell their iudge­mentes for
money, when as in the beginninge of the world, one onely Grace corrupted the
ſentēce betwéene God and men, and that one ruſticall iudge and ſhéepe­herde,
appointed by the counſell of the great Iupiter, ſolde his iudgement for a
litle pleaſure, which was the cauſe afterwarde of the ruine of all his
progeny: by like māner of meane was ſentence giuen betwéene the noble
Gréekes: For the noble and valiaunt perſonage Palamades was conuicted and
atteinted of treaſon, by falſe perſwaſion and accuſation, and Vliſſes being
but of baſe condition, was preferred in Martiall proweſſe aboue great Aiax,
what iudgement was there likewiſe emongſt the Atheman lawyers, ſage and expert
in all ſciences, was not Socrates who was preferred by the God Apollo aboue
all the wiſemen of the worlde, by enuie and malice of wicked perſons,
empoysoned with the hearbe Cicuta, as one that corrupted the youth of the
countrie, whome alwaies he kepte vnder by corre­ction: For we ſée now a daies
many excellent Philoſo­phers greatly deſire to follow his ſecte, and by
perpe­tuall ſtudie to volue and reuolue his woorkes, but t [...] the ende I
may not be reproued of indignation, by any one that might ſay, what ſhal we
ſuffer an Aſſe to play the Philoſopher? I will returne to my former purpoſe.
After the iudgement of Paris was ended, Iuno & Pal­las departed away angerly,
ſhowynge by their geſture that they would reuēge them ſelues on Paris, but
Ve­nus that was right pleaſed and gladde in her harte, [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=123) daunſed about
the Theatre with much ioye. This done from the toppe of the hill through a
priuie ſpoute, rāne a floudde of the colour of Saffran, whiche fell vpon the
Goates, & chaūged their white heare into yellow, with a ſoote odour to all
thē of the Theatre. By & by after, by certaine engins, the ground opened &
ſwalowed vp the hill of woodde: and then beholde there came a man of armes
thorow the middle of y• multitude, demaunding by the conſent of the people,
the woman who was con­dēned to the beaſtes, & appointed for me to haue to doo
withall: our bedde was finely & brauely prepared, & co­uered with ſilke &
other thinges neceſſary, but I beſide the ſhame to cōmitte this horrible
facte, & to pollute my body wt this wicked harlot, did greatly feare the
daūger of death: For I thought in my ſelfe, that when ſhe & I were together,
the fauage beaſt appointed to deuoure the womā, was not ſo inſtructed &
taught, or would ſo temper his gréedines, as y• he would teare her in pieces
liyng vnder me, and ſpare me with a regarde of mine innocēcie. Wherfore I was
more carefull for the ſalue­garde of my life, thē for the ſhame that I ſhould
abide, but in the meane ſeaſon while my maiſter made reddy the bedde, and all
the reſidew did greatly delight to ſée the hunting and pleaſantnes of the
triumphe, I began to thinke and deuiſe for my ſelfe, and when I percea­ued
that no man had regarde to me, that was ſo tame and gentle an Aſſe, I ſtole
out of the gate that was next me, and then I ranne away with all my force, and
came to Cenchris, whiche is the moſte famous towne of all the Carthaginiens,
borderinge vpon the ſeas cal­led Ageum and Saronicum, where is a great &
mighty hauen frequented with many a ſondry nation. There becauſe I would
auoide the multitude of people, I wēt
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=124) to a
ſecrete place of the ſea coſte, where I lay me down vpon the ſande to eaſe and
refreſhe my ſelfe, for the day was paſte and the Sunne gone downe, and I
li­yng in this ſorte on the grounde did fall in a ſounde ſléepe.

## 11\. The eleuenth Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.

¶How Apuleius by Roſes and praier, returned to his humaine ſhape.

### 11.1. Cap. 47.

WHen midnight came, that I had ſlept my firſt ſléepe, I awaked with sodein
feare, and ſawe the Moone ſhininge bright, as when ſhe is at the full, and
ſéeming as though ſhe leaped out of the Sea. Then I thought with my ſelfe
that, that was the moſte ſecret time, when the Goddeſſe Ceres had moſt
puiſance and force, conſidering that all humaine thinges be gouer­ned by her
prouidence: And not onely all beaſtes pri­uate and tame, but alſo all wilde
aud ſauage beaſtes be vnder her protection: And conſideringe that all bodies
in the heauens, the earth, and the ſeas be by her encre­ſinge motions
encreaſed, and by her diminiſhinge mo­tions diminiſhed: as wery of all my
cruell fortune and calamitie, I founde good hope and ſoueraigne remedie,
though it were very late, to be deliuered from all my miſery, by inuocation &
prayer to the excellent beautie of the Goddeſſe: whome I ſawe ſhininge before
mine eyes, wherfore ſhaking of mine Aſſy and drowſie ſléepe [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=124) I aroſe with a
ioyfull face, and moued by a great affe­ction to purifie my ſelfe, I plonged
my head ſeuē times into the water of the ſea, which nomber of ſenen is cō
­uenable and agréeable to holy and diuine thinges, as the woorthy and ſage
philoſopher Pythagoras hath de­clared. Then with a wéeping contenaūce, I made
this orayſon to the puiſſant Goddeſſe, ſaiynge: O bleſſed quéene of heauen,The
Aſſes pray­er to the Moone. whether thou be the Dame Ceres which art the
original & motherly nource of al fruictful thinges in the yearth, who after
the findinge of thy daughter Proſerpina, through the great ioye whiche thou
diddeſt preſently conceaue, madeſt the barrein & vnfruictful grounde to be
plowed and ſowen, and now thou inhabiteſt in the land of Eleuſie, or whether
thou be the celeſtiall Venus, who in the beginninge of the world diddeſt cople
together all kinde of thinges wt an engendred loue, and by an eternall
propagation of hu­maine kinde, art now woorſhipped within the Tēples of the
yſle Paphos, thou whiche art the ſiſter of the god Phebus, who nouriſheſt so
many people by the gene­ration of beaſtes, & art now adored at the ſacred
places of Epheſis, thou which art called horrible Proſerpina, by reason of the
deadly houlinges which y• yeldeſt, that haſt power to ſtoppe & put away the
inuaſiō of hegges and ghoſtes whiche appeare vnto men, & to kéepe them downe
in y• cloſures of the earth: thou which arte woor­ſhipped in diuers manners, &
doeſt luminate al the bor­ders of the yearth by thy feminine ſhape, thou
whiche nouriſheſt all the fruictes of the worlde by thy vigor & force, with
what ſo euer name or faſhion it is lawful to call vpon thée, I pray thée to
ende my great trauell and miſerie, and deliuer me from the wretched fortune
whiche hath ſo longe time purſued me. Graunt peace
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=125) and reſt if
it pleaſe thée to my aduerſities, for I haue endured to to much labour and
perill. Remoue frō me the ſhape of mine Aſſe, & rēder me to my priſtine
eſtate: and if I haue offended in any point thy diuine Maieſtie let me rather
die then liue, for I am full wery of my life. When I had ended this orayſon, &
diſcouered my plaintes to the Goddeſſe, I fortuned to fall ſléepe and by and
by appeared to me a diuine and venerable face, woorſhipped euen of the Goddes
them ſelues: Then by litle and litle I ſéemed to ſée the whole figure of her
bo­die, mountinge out of the ſea and ſtandinge before me: wherfore I purpoſe
to deſcribe her diuine ſemblaūce, if y• pouertie of my humaine ſpeach will
ſuffer me, or her diuine power giue me eloquence therto. Firſt ſhe had a great
abondance of heare, diſparſed & ſcattred about her necke, on y• crowne of her
head ſhe bare many garlādes enterlaced with flowres, in the middle of her
forehead, was a cōpaſſe in faſhiō of a glaſſe, or reſembling y• light of the
moone, in one of her handes ſhe bare ſerpentes, in the other blades of corne,
her veſtmēt was of fine ſilke yelding diuers colours, ſometime white,
ſometime ye­low, ſometime roſie, ſometime flamy, & ſomtime (which troubled my
ſpirit sore) darke & obſcure couered with a blacke robe in māner of a shield,
& pleatted in moſt ſub­till faſhion, at the ſkirtes of her garment, y• weltes
ap­peared comely, where as here & there y• ſtarres glimp­ſed, & in the middle
of them was placed y• Moone, which ſhone like a flame of fire, roūd about y•
robe was a coron or garlande made with flowers & fruictes: In her right hande
ſhe had a timbrel of braſſe which gaue a pleaſaūt founde, in her left hande
ſhe bare a cuppe of golde, out of the mouth whereof the ſerpent Aſpis lifted
vp his head, with a ſwellinge throate, her odoriferous féete [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=125) were couered
with ſhoes enterlaced & wrought with victorious palme. Thus the diuine ſhape
breathing out the pleaſant ſpice of fertil Arabia, dayned not with her diuine
voice to vtter theſe woordes vnto me: Beholde Lucius I am come,The woordes of
the God deſſe, to the Aſſe. thy weeping & prayers hath moued me to ſuccour
thée, I am ſhe that is the natural mother of all thinges, miſtris and
gouerneſſe of all the Ele­mentes, the initiall progeny of worldes, chiefe of
the powers diuine, Quéene of heauen, the principall of the Goddes celeſtiall,
the light of the Goddeſſes, at my wil the Planettes of the ayre, the holſome
windes of the Seas, and the ſilences of Hell be diſpoſed, my name, my
diuinitie, is adored thoroughout all the worlde, in diuers manners, in
variable cuſtomes, and in ma­ny names, for the Phrigiens call me the mother of
the Goddes: The Atheniens, Minerue: the Cipriens, Ve­nus: the Candians, Diana:
the Sicilians, Proſerpi­na: the Eleuſians, Ceres: ſome Iuno, other Bellona,
other Hecate: and principally the Ethiopians whiche dwell in the Orient, and
the Egiptians whiche are ex­cellent in all kinde of auncient doctrine, & by
their pro­pre ceremonies accuſtome to woorſhippe me, doo call me Quéene Iſis:
Behold I am come to take pitie of thy for­tune and tribulation, beholde I am
preſent to fauour & ayde thée, leaue of thy wepinge and lamentation, put away
al thy ſorrow, for behold the healthful day which is ordeined by my
prouidence, therefore be ready & at­tentife to my cōmaundement, the day which
ſhall come after this night, is dedicate to my ſeruice by an eternal Religion,
my prieſtes & miniſters, doo accuſtome after the tempeſtes of the Sea be
ceaſed, to offer in my name a newe ſhippe, as a firſte fruicte of their
nauigation, I commaunde thée, not to prophane or deſpiſe the ſacri­fice
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=126) in any
wiſe, for the great Prieſt ſhal carry this day following in proceſſion by my
exhortatiō a garlande of Roſes next to the timbrell of his right hand: Follow
y• my proceſſion emongſt the people, and when thou co­meſt to the prieſt, make
as though thou wouldeſt kiſſe his hande, but ſnatch at the roſes, wherby I wil
put a­way the ſkinne & ſhape of an Aſſe,The onely helpe of the Aſſe. which
kinde of beaſt I haue longe time abhorred and deſpiſed, but aboue all things
beware thou doubt not nor feare of auy of thoſe thinges as harde & difficill
to be brought to paſſe, for in this ſame houre y• I am come to thée, I haue
commaun­ded the Prieſt by a viſion what he ſhal doo, & all the peo­ple by my
cōmaundement ſhalbe compelled to giue thée place & ſay nothing, moreouer
thinke not y• emongſt ſo faire & ioyful ceremonies. & in ſo good a cōpany,
that any perſon ſhall abhorre thy ilfauored and deforme figure, or that any
man ſhalbe ſo hardy, as to blame & reproue thy ſodaine reſtoration to humaine
ſhape, whereby they ſhould gather or conceaue any ſiniſter opiniō, and know
thou this of certainty that the reſidew of thy life vntil the howre of death
ſhalbe bounde & ſubiect to me: And thinke it not an iniurie to be alwaies
ſeruiſeable towardes me, ſince as by my meane and benefite thou ſhalt become a
mā: thou ſhalt liue bleſſed in this world, thou ſhalte liue glorious by my
guide and protection, and when thou deſcendeſt to hell, where thou ſhalt ſée
me in that ſubterre [...] place, ſhininge (as thou ſeeſt me now) in the
darknes of Acheron, and reigninge in the déepe profūditte of Stix, thou ſhalt
woorſhip me as one that hath bene fauorable to thée, and if I perceaue that
thou art obedient to my commaūdement, addict to my religion, and merite my
diuine grace, know thou that I will prolonge thy daies aboue the time that the
fates [[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=126)
haue appointed, and the celeſtiall planetes ordeined. When the deuine image
had ſpoken theſe woordes, ſhe vaniſhed awaie: By and by, when I awaked I
aroſe, hauing the members of my body mixt with feare, ioye, and ſweate, and
merueiled at the cleare preſence of the puiſſaunt goddeſſe, and being
ſprincled with the water of the Sea, I recounted orderly her admonitions and
deuine commaundementes. Sone after, the darkenes chaſed away, and the cleare
and golden Sunne aroſe, when as behold, I ſawe the ſtreates repleniſhed with
people, going in a religious ſorte, & in great triumphe. All thinges ſéemed
that daie to be ioyfull, as well all maner of beaſtes, and the verie houſes,
as alſo the very daie it ſelfe ſéemed to reioyce. For after the horefroſt,
enſued the whote and temperat Sunne, whereby the litle birdes wening that the
ſpring time had ben come, did chirp and ſing in their ſteuen melodiouſly: The
mo­ther of ſtarres, the parent of times and miſtres of all ye worlde: The
fruitfull trées reioyſed at their fertilitie: The barrein and ſterrill were
contented at their ſha­dowe, rendring ſwete and pleaſant ſhrilles: The ſeas
were quiet from wyndes and tempeſtes: The heauen had chaſed away the cloudes,
and appeared faire and cleare with his propre light. Beholde, then more and
more appeared the pompes and proceſſions, attired in regall manner, and
ſinging ioyfully: One was girded about the middle like a man of armes: An
other bare a ſpeare, and had a cloke and highe ſhooes as a hunter: an other
was attired in a roobe of ſilke, and ſockes of gold, hauing his heare layde
out, and dreſſed in fourme of a woman: There was an other which ware
legharnes, & bare a target, a ſalette, & a ſpeare, like a martiall ſoul­diour:
After him marched one attired in purple, with
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=127) vergers
before him like a Magiſtrate: After him folo­weth one with a mantell, a
ſtaffe, a paire of pautofles, and with a graie bearde, ſignifiyng a
Philoſopher: Af­ter him went one with lyme, betokening a fowler, An other with
hookes, declaringe a fiſher. I ſawe there a méeke and tame beare, whiche in
matron habit was ca­ried on a ſtole: An Ape with a bonnet on his head, and
couered with lawne reſemblinge a ſhéepeherde, and bearing a cuppe of golde in
his hande: An Aſſe whiche had winges glewed to his back, and went after an
olde man, wherby you would iudge, the one to be Pegaſus, and the other
Bellephoron. Amongeſt theſe pleaſures and populer delectations, whiche wandred
hither and thither. You might ſée the pampe of the Goddeſſe triū ­phantlie
marche forwarde: The women attired in whyte veſtmentes, and reioyſinge in that
they bare garlandes and flowers vpon their heades, beſpred the wayes with
herbes, whiche they bare in their aprons, where this regall and deuout
proceſſion ſhoulde paſſe. Other caried glaſſes on their backes, to teſtifie
obei­ſaunce and honour to the Goddeſſe whiche came after. Other bare combes of
Iuorie, and declared by their geſture & motions of their armes, that they were
or­deined and reddy to dreſſe the Goddeſſe. Other drop­ped in the waies as
they went, baulme and other preti­ous oyntmentes: Then came a great number, as
well of men as of women, with candles, torches, and other lightes, doing
honour to y• celeſtial goddeſſe: After tht ſounded the muſicall armonie of
inſtrumentes: Then came a faire company of youth, apareled in white
veſti­mentes, ſinginge both metre & verſe, with a cōly grace which ſome
ſtudious Poete had made in honour of the Muſes. In the meane ſeaſon, arriued
ye blowers of trū ­pettes, [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=127) which were
dedicate vnto Serapis, & to the tē ­ple before them, were officers & bedles,
preparing rome for the goddeſſe to paſſe. Then came the great company of men &
women, which had takē deuine orders, whoſe garmentes gliſtned al the ſtretes
ouer. The wemē had their heare anointed, & their heads couered with linnē:
but the men had their crownes ſhauen, which were the terren ſtarres of the
goddeſſe, holdinge in their handes inſtrumentes of braſſe, ſiluer, & gold,
which rendred a pleaſant ſound. The principal prieſtes, which were ap­pareled
wt white ſurpleſſes hanging down to yt groūd, bare yt relickes of yt puiſant
goddeſſe. One caried in his hand a light, not vnlike to thoſe whiche we vſed
in our houſes, ſauing yt in the middle thereof appeared a bole which rendred a
more bright flame. The ſecond attired like the other, bare in his handes an
aultar, whiche the goddeſſe her ſelfe named the ſuccour of nations. The third
held vp a trée of palme, with leaues of golde, & the verge of Mercurie. The
fourth ſhowed out a token of equitie by his left hande, which was deformed in
euery place, ſignifiyng thereby more equitie then by the right hande. The ſame
prieſt caried a round veſſell of golde, in forme of a cap. The fifte bare a
Van, wroughte with ſpringes of gold, and an other caried a veſſel for wyne: By
and by after, the goddeſſe followed a foote as men doo, and ſpecially
Mercurie, the meſſenger of the God­deſſe infernall and ſupernall, with his
face ſometyme blacke, ſometyme fayre, liftinge vp the head of the dogge Ambis,
and bearing in his lefte hand his verge, and in his right hande, the braunche
of a palme trée, after whome folowed a cowe with an vpright gate,
repreſentinge the figure of the great Goddeſſe, and he that guyded her,
marched on with muche grauitie.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=128) And other
caried after the ſecretes of their religiō, clo­ſed in a coffer. There was
one that bare on his ſtomack the figure of his God, not formed like any beaſt,
birde, ſauage thinge, or humaine ſhape, but made by a newe inuention, whereby
was ſignified that ſuch a religion ſhould not be diſcouered, or reueled to any
perſon. There was a veſſell wrought with a rounde bottome, hauing on the one
ſide pictures figured like vnto the manner of the Egiptians, and on the other
ſide was an eare, wherevpon ſtoode the ſerpent Aſpis, holdinge out his ſkaly
neck. Finally, came he which was appointed to my good fortune, according to
the promiſſe of ye god­deſſe. For the great prieſte whiche bare the
reſtoration of my humaine ſhape, by the commaundement of the goddeſſe,
approched more and more, bearing in his left hande the timbrell, and in the
other a garland of roſes to giue me, to thende I might be deliuered from
cruell fortune, which was alwaies mine enemy, after the ſuf­ferance of ſo
muche calamitie and poine, and after the endurance of ſo many perilles: Then
I, not runninge haſtely, by reaſon of ſodaine ioye, leſt I ſhould diſturbe the
quiet proceſſion with mine importunitie: But go­ing ſoftly through the preſſe
of people, whiche gaue me place on euery ſide, went after the prieſt. The
prieſt being admoniſhed the night before, as I might well perceiue, ſtoode
ſtill, and holding out his hande, thruſt out the garlande of roſes into my
mouth, whiche I (trē ­bling) deuoured with a great affection: And aſſone as I
had eaten thē, I was not deceiued of the promiſe made vnto me. For my deforme
and Aſſy face abated, and firſt the rugged heare of my body fell of, my thick
ſkyn waxed ſoft and tender, the hoofes of my féete chaunged into toes, my
handes returned againe, my neck grewe [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=128) ſhort, my head
& mouth became rounde, my long eares were made litle, my great and ſtony téeth
waxed leſſe like the téeth of men, and my taile whiche combred me moſt,
appeared no where, thē the people began to mer­uell, and the religious
honored the Goddeſſe for ſo eui­dent a miracle, they wondred at the viſions
which they ſawe in the night, and the facilitie of my reformation, whereby
they rendred teſtimony of ſo great a benefite which I receaued of the
Goddeſſe, when I ſaw my ſelf in ſuch eſtate, I ſtode ſtil a good ſpace and
ſaid nothing, for I coulde not tell what to ſay, nor what woorde I ſhould
firſt ſpeake, nor what thankes I ſhould render to the Goddeſſe, but the great
prieſt vnderſtanding all my fortune and miſery by diuine aduertiſement,
com­maunded that one ſhould giue me garmentes to couer me: Howbeit aſſone as I
was tranſformed frō an Aſſe to my humaine ſhape, I hidde the priuities of my
body with my handes as ſhame and neceſſitie compelled me: Then one of the
companie put of his vpper robe, and put it on my backe, which done: the Prieſt
loking vpon me with a ſwéete and benigne voyce, ganne ſay in this ſorte: O my
fréende Lucius, after the endurance of ſo many labors, & the eſcape of ſo many
tempeſtes of for­tune, thou arte now at length come to the porte & hauē of
reſt and mercie: Neither did thy noble lignage, thy dignitie, neither thy
doctrine any thing preuaile, but that thou haſt endured ſo many ſeruill
pleaſures, by a litle folly of thy youthfulneſſe, wherby thou haſt had a
ſiniſter rewarde of thy vnproſperous curioſitie, but howſoeuer the blindenes
of fortune tormented thée in diuers daungers: So it is that nowe vnwares to
her, thou art come to this preſent felicitie, let fortune goe, & fume with
furie in an other place, let her finde ſome
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=129) other
matter to execute her cruelty, for fortune hath no puiſance againſt them which
ſerue and honour our Goddeſſe, for what auailed the theeues? the beaſtes
ſa­uage? thy great ſeruitude? the ill & daungerous waies? the longe paſſages?
the feare of death euery day? know thou that now thou art ſalue, and vnder the
protection of her, who by her cléere light doth lighten the other Goddes:
wherefore reioyſe, and take a conuenable coū ­tenance to thy white habite,
followe the pompe of this deuout & honorable proceſſion, to the ende ye ſuch
which be not deuout to the Goddeſſe, may ſée & acknowledge their errour.
Beholde Lucius thou art deliuered frō ſo great miſeries, by the prouidence of
the Goddeſſe Iſis, reioyſe therfore and triumphe of the victory of fortune, to
the ende thou maiſt liue more ſalue and ſure, make thy ſelfe one of this holy
order, dedicate thy minde to the obſequie of our religion, & take vpon thée a
volun­tary yoke of miniſterie: And when thou beginneſt to ſerue and honor the
Goddeſſe, then ſhalt thou féele the fruicte of thy libertie: After that the
great Prieſt had prophecied in this manner, with often brethinges, he made a
concluſion of his woordes: Then I went emōgſt the company of the reſte and
followed the proceſſion: Euery one of the people knewe me, & pointinge at me
with their fingers, ſaide in this ſorte: beholde him who is this day
tranſformed into a man by the puiſſance of the ſoueraigne Goddeſſe, verely he
is bleſſed and moſt bleſſed that hath merited ſo great grace from heauen, as
by the innocēcy of his former life, and as it were by a newe regeneration is
reſerued to the obſequie of the Goddeſſe. In the meane ſeaſon by litle and
litle we ap­proched nighe vnto the ſea coaſte, euen to that place where I lay
the night before beinge an Aſſe. There, [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=129) after the
images & reliques were orderly diſpoſed, the great Prieſt compaſſed about with
diuers pictures ac­cording to the faſhion of the Egiptians, did dedicate &
conſecrate with certaine prayers a fayre ſhippe made very cunningly, &
purified the ſame wt a torch, an egge, & ſulphur, the ſayle was of white
linnen cloth, wheron was writē certaine letters, which teſtified the
nauiga­tion to be proſperous, the maſte was of a great length made of a pine
trée, rounde, & very excellent with a ſhi­ning toppe, ye cabbin was couered
ouer with couerings of golde, & all the ſhippe was made of Citron trée very
fayre, then al the people aſwell religious as prophane toke a great nūber of
Vannes repleniſhed with odors & pleaſaūt ſmelles, and threw them into the ſea
mingled with milke, vntill the ſhippe was filled vp with large giftes and
proſperous deuotions, when as with a plea­ſant winde it launched out into the
déepe: but whē thei had loſt the ſight of the ſhippe, euery mā carried again
that which he brought, and went towarde the Temple in like pompe and ordre as
they came to the ſea ſide. When we were come to the Temple, the great Prieſt
and thoſe whiche were deputed to carry the diuine fi­gures, but ſpecially
thoſe whiche had longe time bene worſhippers of the Religiō, went into the
ſecrete chā ­ber of the Goddeſſe, where they put & placed the Ima­ges
according to their order. This done one of the com­pany whiche was a Scribe or
interpretour of letters, who in forme of a preacher, ſtoode vp in a chayre
before the place of the holy colledge, & began to read out of a booke, & to
enterpret to the great Prince, the Senate, and to all the noble order of
Cheualry, and generally to all the Romaine people, and to all ſuche as be
vnder the puiſſance and iuriſdiction of Rome, theſe woordes
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=130)
following,Populis miſsio. [...], which ſignified y• ende of their diuine
ſeruice, and that it was lawfull for euery man to depart, whereat all the
people gaue a great ſhoute, & repleniſhed with much ioye, bare all kinde of
herbes and garlandes of flowres home to their houſes, kiſſing and embraſing
the ſteppes where the Goddeſſe paſſed: howbeit I could not doo as the reſt,
for my minde wold not ſuffer me to departe one foote away, ſo earneſt and
attentife was I to beholde the beautie of the Goddeſſe, with remembraunce
likewiſe of my great trauell and miſerie, which I had endured.

¶How the Parentes and freendes of Apuleius, harde newes that he was aliue and
in health.

### 11.2. Cap. 48.

IN the meane ſeaſon newes was carried into my countrie (as ſwifte as the
flight of birdes, or as the blaſte of windes) of the grace and benefite whiche
I receaued of the goddeſſe, and of my fortune woorthy to be had in memory.
Then my parentes, fréendes, & ſer­uauntes of our houſe, vnderſtandinge that I
was not dead as thei were falſely enformed, came towardes me with great
diligence to ſée me, as a man rayſed from death to life: And I likewiſe which
did neuer thinke to ſée them againe, was as ioyfull as they, acceptinge and
takinge in good part, their honeſt giftes and oblations which they gaue, to
the intent I might bie ſuch things as was neceſſary for my body: After that I
had made relation vnto them of all my priſtine miſery, & preſent ioyes, I
wente againe before the face of the Goddeſſe, and hired me a houſe within the
cloiſture of the tēple, to the ende I might continually be ready to the
ſeruice of the Goddeſſe, and ordinarily frequent the company [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=130) of the
prieſtes, wherby I would wholy become deuout to the Goddeſſe, and an
inſeparable woorſhipper of her diuine name: It fortuned that the Goddeſſe
appeared to me oftentimes in the night, perſwadinge and com­maundinge me to
take the order of her religion, but I although I was endewed with a deſirous
good wil, yet the reuerende feare of the ſame withhelde me, conſide­ringe that
her obeyſaunce was harde and difficill, the chaſtetie of the Prieſtes
intollerable, and the life fraile & ſubiect to many incōueniences, beinge
thus in doubte I refrained my ſelfe from all thoſe thinges, as ſéeming
impoſſible: On a night the great Prieſt appeared vnto me preſenting his lappe
full of treaſure, and whē I de­maunded what it ſignified, he anſweared that
it was ſent me from the countrie of Theſſaly, and that a ſer­uaūt of mine
named Candidus was arriued like wiſe: whē I was awaked, I muſed in my ſelf
what this vi­ſtō ſhould portēde, cōſidering I neuer had any ſeruaūt called
by that name: but whatſoeuer it did ſignifie, this I verely thought that it
was a fore ſhow of gaine & pro­ſperous chaunce: while I was thus aſtonied I
went to the Temple, and tarried there till the openinge of the gates, then I
wente in, & began to pray before the face of the Goddeſſe, the Prieſt prepared
and ſet the diuine thinges on euery Aultour, & pulled out of the foūtaine the
holy veſſell with ſolempne ſupplication. Then they began to ſinge the mattens
of the mornyng, teſtifiyng thereby the howre of the pryme. By and by beholde
ar­riued my ſeruauntes whiche I had left in the countrie, whē Fotis by errour
made me an Aſſe, bringyng with thē my horſe, recouered by her through
certaine ſignes and tokens which he had vpon his backe. Then I per­ceaued the
enterpretatiō of my dreame, by reaſon that
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=131) beſide the
promiſſe of gaine, my white horſe was reſto­red to me, which was ſignified by
the argument of my ſeruaunt Candidus. This done I retired to the ſeruice of
the Goddeſſe in hope of greater benefites, conſide­ring I had receaued a ſigne
and token, wherby my cou­rage encreaſed euery day more & more to take vpon me
the orders and Sacramētes of the Temple: In ſo much that I oftentimes
cōmuned with the Prieſt, deſiringe him greatly to giue me the firſt degree of
the Religion, but he which was a mā of grauitie, & well renoumed in y• order
of prieſthood, differd my affection frō day to day with comfort of better
hope, as parentes cōmonly bri­dle the deſires of their children, when they
attempt or endeuor any vnprofitable thing, ſaying: yt the day, whē any one
ſhould be admitted into their order, is appoin­ted by the Goddeſſe, the Prieſt
which ſhoulde miniſter the ſacrifice, is choſen by her prouidence, and the
neceſ­ſarie charges of the ceremouies, is allotted by her com­maundement, all
which thinges he willed me to attēde with meruelous patience, and that I
ſhould beware ei­ther of to much haſtines or to great ſlacknes, conſide­ringe
that there was like daunger, if beynge called I ſhould delay, or not called I
ſhould be haſtie: moreouer he ſaide, that there was none of his company eyther
of ſo deſperate a minde, or ſo raſhe and hardie as to en­terpriſe any thinge
without the commaūdement of the Goddeſſe, wherby he ſhould committe a deadly
offēce, conſidering that it was in her power to dampne & ſaue all perſons,
and if any were at the point of death and in the way to damnation, ſo that he
were capable to receaue the ſecretes of the Goddeſſe, it was in her power by
diuine prouidence to reduce him to the pathe of health, as by a certaine kinde
of regeneratiō: Finaly [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=131) he ſaide that
I muſte attende the celeſtiall precept, al­though it was euident and playne
that the Goddeſſe had already vouchſaued to call and appointe me to her
miniſtery, and to will me to refraine from prophane & vnlawful meates, as
thoſe prieſts which were already receaued, to ye ende I might come more apte &
cleane to the knowledge of ye ſecretes of the religiō. Then I was obedient
vnto theſe woordes, and attentife with méeke quietnes, & probable
taciturnitie, I dayly ſerued at the temple: in the ende the holeſom gentlenes
of y• goddeſſe did nothinge deceaue me, for in a night ſhe appeared to me in a
viſion, declaryng y• the day was come whiche I had wiſhed for ſo longe, ſhe
told me what prouiſiō and charges I ſhould be at, and how that ſhe had
appointed her principal prieſt Mithra to be a miniſter with me in my
ſacrifices. When I had harde theſe diuine cōmaun­dementes I greatly reioyſed,
and aroſe before day to ſpeake with the great prieſt, whom I fortuned to eſpie
cominge out of his chamber: Then I ſaluted him, and thought with my ſelf to
aſke and demaunde his coūſell with a bolde courage, but aſſone as he
perceaued me, he began firſt to ſay: O Lucius now knowe I well yt thou are
moſte happy and bleſſed, whom the diuine goddeſſe doth ſo greatly accept with
mercy, why doeſt y• delay: Behold the day which thou diddeſt deſire, whē as
thou ſhalt receaue at my handes y• order of religiō, & know y• moſt pure
ſecretes of the goddeſſe, wherupō the old mā toke me by the hand, & ledde me
to the gate of the great temple, where at his firſt entrie he made a ſolēpne
cele­bratiō, and after yt the morning ſacrifice was ended, he brought out of
the ſecrete place of the temple certaine bookes, partly writen with vnknowen
charecters, and partely peincted with figures of beaſtes, declarings
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=132) briefly
euery ſentence, with toppes and tayles turned roūde in faſhiō of a whéele,
which were wholy ſtraūge & impoſſible to be reade of the prophane people:
There he enterpreted to me ſuche thinges as were neceſſary to the vſe and
preparation of mine order. This done, I gaue in charge to certaine of my
compaignions to bie liberaly what ſo euer was néedefull and conuenient, then
he brought me to the next baynes, accōpaned with all the religious ſorte, and
demaundinge perdon of the Goddes, waſhed me and purified my body according to
ye cuſtome: After this when noone approched he brought me backe againe to the
Temple, and preſented me be­fore the face of the Goddeſſe, giuinge a charge of
cer­taine ſecrete thinges vnlawfull to be vttered, and cō ­maunding me, and
generally all the reſt, to faſt by the ſpace of tenne continuall dayes,
without eating of any beaſt, or drinking of any wine, which thinges I
obſer­ued with a meruelous continencie. Then beholde the day approched, when
as the ſacrifice ſhould be done, & when night came there arriued on euery
coaſt a great multitude of Prieſtes, who accordinge to their order offered me
many preſentes and giftes, then was all the Laitie & prophane people
cōmaunded to depart, & when they had putte on my backe a linnē robe, they
brought me to the moſt ſecrete and ſacred place of the Temple. You would
perauēture demaūde, you ſtudious reader, what was ſaide and done there,
verely I would tel you if it were lawfull for me to tell, you ſhould know if
it were conuenient for you to here, but both thy eares and my tongue ſhall
incurre the like paine of raſhe cu­rioſitie: Howbeit I wil content thy minde
for this pre­ſent time, which peraduenture is ſomewhat religious and giuen to
ſome deuotion, liſten therefore & beleue [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=132) it to be true:
thou ſhalt vnderſtande that I approched nere vnto Hell, euē to the gates of
Proſerpina, & after that I was rauiſhed throughout all the Elementes, I
returned to my proper place: About midnight I ſawe the ſonne ſhine, I ſaw
likewiſe the Goddes celeſtiall, and Goddes infernall, before whome I preſented
my ſelfe and woorſhipped them: beholde now haue I tolde thée, which although
thou haſt harde, yet it is neceſſary that you conceale it, for this haue I
declared without offence, for the vnderſtanding of the prophane. When morninge
came and that the ſolempnities were fini­ſhed, I came foorth ſanctified with
twelue  [...]toles & in a religious habite, wherof I am not forbiddē to
ſpeake, conſideringe that many perſons ſawe me at that time: there I was
commaunded to ſtande vppon a ſeate of woodde which ſtoode in the middle of the
temple, before the figure and remembraūce of the Goddeſſe, my veſt­ment was
of fine linnen, couered & embrodered with flowres, I had a pretious cope vpon
my ſhoulders han­ginge downe to the grounde, whereon were beaſtes wrought of
diuers colours, as Indian Dragons, & Hy­perborian Gryphones, whome in forme of
brides the other world doth engender, the Prieſtes cōmonly call ſuch a habit,
a celeſtiall Stole: in my right hande I car­ried a light torche, and a
garlande of flowres vpon my head, with Palme leaues ſtroutinge out on euery
ſide: I was adorned like vnto the Sunne, and made in fa­ſhion of an Image, in
ſuche ſorte that all the people compaſſed about to beholde me: Then they
beganne to ſolemniſe the feaſt of my natiuitie, and the newe pro­ceſſion with
ſumptuous bankets and delicate meates: the thirde day was likewiſe celebrate
with like cere­monies, with a religious dinner, and with all the con­ſummation
of the order, when I had continued there
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=133) a good
ſpace I conceaued a meruelous pleaſure and cō ­ſolation in beholding
ordinarily the Image of the god­deſſe, who at length admoniſhed me to departe
home­warde, not without rendringe of thankes, whiche al­though were not
ſufficient, yet they were according to my power: How be it I could vnneth be
perſwaded to depart, before I had fallen proſtrate before the face of y•
Goddeſſe, and wiped her ſteppes with my face, where­by I beganne ſo greatly to
wéepe and ſighe, that my woordes were interrupted, and as deuouring my pray­er
I began to ſay in this ſorte: O holy & bleſſed Dame, the perpetuall comfort of
humaine kinde, who by thy bountie and grace nouriſheſt all the world, and
beareſt a great affection to the aduerſities of the miſerable as a louing
mother, thou takeſt no reſt, neyther arte thou idle at any time in giuinge thy
benefites, and ſucco­ringe all men aſwell on lande as ſea, thou arte ſhe that
putteſt away all ſtormes and daungers from mans life by thy right hande,
whereby likewiſe thou reſtray­neſt the fatall diſpoſitions, appeaſeſt the
great tem­peſtes of fortunes, and kéepeſt backe the courſe of the ſtarres, the
Gods ſupernall doth honour thée: the Gods infernall hath thée in reuerence:
thou enuironeſt al the worlde, thou giueſt light to the Sunne, thou gouer­neſt
the world, thou treadeſt downe the power of Hell: By thy meane the times
returne, the Planets reioyſe, the Elementes ſerue: at thy cōmaūdement the
windes doo blowe, the cloudes encreaſe, the ſéedes proſper, and the fruictes
preuayle, the birdes of the ayre, the beaſtes of the hill, the Serpentes of
the denne, and the fiſhes of the ſea, doo tremble at thy maieſtie, but my
ſpirite is not able to giue thée ſufficient prayſe, my patrimonie is vnable to
ſatiſfie thy ſacrifice, my voyce hath no power to vtter that which I thinke,
no if I had a thou­ſande [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=133) mouthes and ſo
many tongues: How be it as a good religious perſonne, and according to my
eſtate, I wil alwaies kéepe thée in remembraunce, and cloſe thee within my
breſt. When I had ended mine orayſon, I wente to embraſe the great Prieſte
Mithra my ſpiri­tuall Father and to demaunde his pardon, conſidering I was
vnable to recompence the good whiche he had done me: After great gréetinges &
thankes I departed from him to viſitte my parents & fréendes. And within a
while after by the exhortatiō of the Goddeſſe, I made vp my packquette and
toke ſhippyng towardes ye Citie of Rome, where, with a proſperous winde I
arriued a­bout the twelfe day of December. And the greateſt de­ſire which I
had there was daily to make my praiers to y• ſoueraigne Goddeſſe Iſis, who by
reaſon of the place where her temple was builded, was called Cāpenſis, &
cōtinually adored of the people of Rome: Her miniſter & woorſhipper was I
howbeit I was a ſtraunger to her Church, & vnknowen to her religion there:
When the yeare was ended, & that the Goddeſſe warned me again to receaue this
newe order & conſecration, I merueled greatly what it ſhould ſignifie, & what
ſhould happen, conſidering that I was a ſacred perſon already. But it fortuned
yt while I partly reaſoned with my ſelfe, and partely examined ye thing with
the Prieſtes & Biſhops, there came a newe & meruelous thought to my minde,
that is to ſay: I was onely religious to ye goddeſſe Iſis, but not ſacred to
the religion of great Oſiris the ſoue­raigne Father of all the Goddes,
betwéene whome, although there was a religious vnitie and concorde, yet there
was a great difference of order and ceremo­nie. And becauſe it was neceſſary
that I ſhoulde like­wiſe be a miniſter vnto Oſiris, there was no longe de­lay:
For in the night after appered vnto me one of that
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=134) order,
couered with linnen robes, holding in his hādes ſpeares wrapped in yu [...]e,
and other thinges not conue­nient to declare, which he lefte in my chamber,
and ſit­tinge in my ſeate,  [...] to me ſuche thinges as were neceſſary for
the ſumptuons bankette of mine entry. And to the ende I might knowe him
againe, he ſhowed me how the ankle of his left foote was ſomewhat may­med,
whiche cauſed him a litle to halte. After that I did manifeſtly knowe the will
of the God Oſiris, when Mattins was ended, I wente from one to an other to
finde him out whiche had the haltinge marke of his foote, accordinge as I
learned by my viſion, at length I founde it true: for I perceaued one of the
company of the Prieſtes who had not onely the token of his foote, but the
ſtature and habite of his body, reſemblyng in euery point as he appeared in
the night, he was called Aſinius Marcellus, Aſinius by ta­king away the letter
i. is made Aſinus. a name not muche diſagreynge from my tranſformation, by and
by I wēnte to him, whiche knew well inough all the matter, as beynge moniſhed
by like precept in the nighte: for the night before as he dreſſed the flowres
and garlandes about the head of yt God Oſiris, he vnderſtoode by the mouth of
his Image, which tolde the predeſtinations of all men, how he had ſent a poore
man of Madaura, to whom he ſhould mini­ſter his ſacramentes, to the ende y• he
ſhould receaue a rewarde by diuine prouidence, and the other glory, for his
vertuous ſtudies, when I ſawe my ſelfe thus de­puted vnto religion, my deſire
was ſtopped by reaſon of pouertie, for I had ſpente a great parte of my goodes
in trauell and peregrination, but moſt of all in the citie of Rome, whereby my
lowe eſtate withdrewe me a great while: In the ende, being oftentimes ſtirred
for­warde, not without great trouble of minde, I was cō ­ſtreined to ſel my
roabe for a litle money: howbeit, ſuf­ficient [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=134) for all my
affaires. Then the Prieſte ſpake vnto me, ſaiyng: How is it that for a little
pleaſure thou art not aferde to ſell thy veſtimentes, and entring into ſo
great ceremonies, doſt feare to fall into pouertie▪ pre­pare thy ſelfe, and
abſtaine from all animall meates, as beaſtes and fiſhe. In the meane ſeaſon I
did frequent the ſacrifices of Serapis, whiche were done in y• night, which
thing gaue me great comfort to my peregrina­tion, and miniſtred vnto me more
plentifull liuing, cō ­ſidering I gained ſome money in haūting to the court,
by reaſon of my lattin tongue. Immediatly after, I was eftſones called and
admoniſhed by the god Oſiris, to receiue a thirde order of Religiō. Then I
was great­ly aſtonied, becauſe I coulde not tell what this newe viſion
ſignified, or what the intent of the Celeſtiall Goddes was, doubting leaſt the
former Prieſtes had giuen me ill councell, and fearinge that they had not
faithfully enſtructed me, beinge in this maner as it were incenſed. The God
Oſiris, appeared to me the night! folowing, and geuing me admonition, ſaiynge:
There is no occaſion why thou ſhouldeſt be aferd with ſo often order of
Religion, as though there were ſom­what omitted, but that thou ſhouldeſt
rather reioyſe, ſince as it hath pleaſed ye Goddes to cal thée thrée times,
when as there was neuer yet any perſone that atchie­ued to the order but once:
Wherfore thou maiſt thinke thy ſelfe moſt happy for ſo great benefites. And
knowe thou that the Religion which thou muſt nowe receiue, is right neceſſary,
if thou meane to perſeuer in the woorſhipping of the Goddeſſe and to make
ſolempnitie on the feſtiual day with thy bleſſed habite, which thing ſhalbe a
glory and renoume to thée. After this ſorte the diuine maieſtie perſwaded me
in my ſléepe, where­upō by and by I went towardes the Prieſt, and decla­red
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=135) all that
which I had ſéene, then I faſted the ſpace of tenne daies according to the
cuſtome, and of mine own proper wil I abſtained lenger then I was cōmaunded:
And verely I did nothing repent of the paine whiche I had taken, & of the
charges which I was at, conſidering that the diuine prouidence had giuen me
ſuch an order that I gayned much money in pleadinge of cauſes: Fi­nally after
a few dayes the great God Oſiris appeared to me in the night, not deſguiſed in
any other forme but in his owne eſſence, cōmaundinge me that I ſhould be an
Aduocate in the court, & not feare the ſclaunder & enuie of ill perſons,
whiche bare me ſtomacke & grudge by reaſon of my doctrine, whiche I had gotten
by much labour: moreouer he woulde not that I ſhoulde be any lenger of the
nomber of his Prieſtes, but he allotted me to be one of the Decurious &
Senatours: and after he appointed me a place within the auncient Pallaice,
which was erected in the time of Silla, whereas I exe­cuted mine office in
great ioy with a ſhauen crowne.

FINIS.

## Appendix A

❧The Table of the firſt Booke of Lucius Apuleius of the Golden Aſſe.

  * HOvve Apuleius ridinge into Theſſalie, fortuned to fall into cōpanie vvith tvvo ſtraū ­gers, that reaſoned together of the mightye povver of VVitches. Cap. 1. fol. 1.
  * Hovv Apulcius told to the tvvoo ſtraūgers, what he ſavv a Iug­lar doo in Athēs. Cap. 2. fol. 1.
  * Hovv Socrates in his returne frō Macedonie to Lariſſa, vvas ſpoiled and robbed, and hovv he fell acquainted vvith one Meroe, a VVitch. Cap. 3. fol. 3.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=135) Hovve Meroe the VVitche turned di­uers perſons into miſerable Beaſtes. Cap. 4.
  * Hovv Socrates and Ariſtomenus ſlept to­gether in one chāber, and hovve they vvere hādled by VVitches. Cap. 5. fol. 5.
  * Hovv Apuleius came to a Citie called Hi­pate, and vvas lodged in one Malos houſe, and brought him letters from Demea of Corinth. Cap. 6. fol. 9.
  * Hovve Apuleius goeinge to bie Fiſhe mette vvith his compaignion Pithias. Cap. 7. fol. 10.

¶The ſeconde Booke.

  * ¶Hovv Apuleius fortuned to meete vvith his cofin Byrrhena. Cap. 8. fol. 12.
  * Hovve Apuleius fell into loue vvith Fo­tis. Cap. 9. fol. 14.
  * Hovv Birrhena ſent victualles vnto Apu­leius, and hovv he talked vvith Milo of Diophanes, and hovv he laye vvith Fotis. Cap. 10. fol. 16.
  * Hovv Apuleius ſupped vvith Birrhena, and vvhat a ſtraūge tale Bellephoron tolde at the table. Cap. 11. fol. 18.

¶The thirde Booke.

  * ¶Hovv Apuleius vvas taken and putte in priſon for Murder. Cap. 12. fol. 24.
  * Hovve Apuleius vvas accuſed by an olde man, and hovv he anſvveared for him ſelfe. Cap. 13. fol. 24.
  * Hovv Apuleius vvas accuſed by tvvo vvo­men, and hovv the ſlaine bodies vvere foūde blovven bladders. Cap. 14. fol. 26.
  * Hovve Fotis tolde to Apuleius, vvhat VVitchecrafte her Miſtris did vſe. Cap. 15. fol. 28.
  * Hovv Fotis brought Apuleius to ſee her Miſtris Enchaunt. Cap. 16. fol. 31.
  * Hovve Apuleius thinkinge to be turned into a Birde, vvas turned in to an Aſſe, and hovve he vvas ledde avvaye by Theeues. Cap. 17. fol. 32.

¶The fourth Booke.

  * ¶Hovv Apuleius thinking to goe to eate Roſes, vvas cruelly beaten by a Garde­ner and chaſed by Dogges. ca. 18. fol. 34.
  * Hovv Apuleius vvas preuēted of his pur­poſe, and hovve the Theeues came to their denne. Cap. 19. fol. 35.
  * Hovve Thraſileon vvas diſguiſed in a Beares ſkinne, and hovv he vvas hand­led. Cap. 20. fol. 39.
  * Hovve the Theeues ſtole avvay a Gentel­vvoman, and brought her to their denne. Cap. 21. fol. 41.
  * The moſte pleaſaunt and delectable tale of the Marriage of Cupide and Pſy­ches. Cap. 22. fol. 45.
  * Hovv Apuleius carried avvay the Gentle­vvoman, and hovv they vvere taken a­gaine by the Theeues, and vvhat a kinde of death vvas inuented for thē. Cap. 23. fol. 63.

¶The ſeuenth Booke.

  * ¶Hovv he that vvas lefte behinde at Hip­pata to bringe nevves concerning the robbery of Milos houſe, came home and declared to his compaigniōs that all the faulte was layde to one Apu­leius charge. Cap. 24. fol. 66.
  * How the death of the Aſſe, and the Gen­telvvoman vvas ſtaide. Cap. 25. fol. 69.
  * Hovv all the Theeues vveare brought in a ſleape by their nevve companion. Cap. 26. fol. 70.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=136) Hovv the Gētlevvomā vvas carried home by her huſbande vvhile the Theeues vvere a ſleape, and hovve muche Apu­leius vvas made of. Cap. 27. fol. 71.
  * Hovve Apuleius vvas made a cōmon Aſſe to fetche home vvoodde, and hovv he vvas handled by a boye. Cap. 28. fol. 72.
  * Hovv Apuleius vvas accuſed of lecherie by the Boye. Cap. 29. fol. 74.
  * Hovve the Boye that ledde Apuleius to the fieldes, vvas ſlaine in the vvoodde. Cap. 30. fol. 75.
  * Hovv Apuleius vvas cruelly beaten by the mother of the boye that vvas ſlaine. Cap. 31. fol. 76.

¶The eight Booke.

  * ¶Hovv a yonge man came and declared the miſerable death of Lepolemus, and his vvife Charites. Cap. 32. fol. 77.
  * Hovve Apuleius vvas ledde avvay by the horſekeper, and vvhat daungers he vvas in. Cap. 33. fol. 81.
  * Hovv the Shepeherdes determined to a­bide in a certayne vvoodde to cure their vvoundes. Cap. 34. fol. 83.
  * Hovv a vvoman killed her ſelfe, and her childe, becauſe her huſbande haunted harlottes. Cap. 35. fol. 84.
  * Hovv Apuleius vvas cheapened by diuers perſons, and hovve they loked in his mouth to knovv his age. Cap. 36. fol. 84.

¶The ninth Booke.

  * ¶Hovve Apuleius ſaued him ſelfe from the Cooke by breakinge his halter, and of other thinges that happened. Cap. 37. fol. 87.
  * Of the deceipte of a vvoman, vvhich made her huſbād Coockolde. Cap. 38. fol. 89.
  * Hovv the Prieſtes of the goddeſſe Syria, vvere taken and put in pryſon, and hovve Apuleius was ſolde to a Baker. Cap. 39. fol. 90.
  * Hovve Apuleius vvas handled by the Ba­kers vvife, whiche vvas a harlotte. Cap. 40. fol. 92.
  * Hovv Barbasus being ielous ouer his vvife, cōmaunded that ſhe ſhould be kepte cloſe in his houſe, and vvhat happe­ned. Cap. 41. fol. 93.
  * Hovv Apuleius after the Baker vvas han­ged, vvas ſolde to a Gardiner, and vvhat dreadful things happened. Ca. 42. fol. 97.
  * Hovve Apuleius vvas founde dy his ſha­dovv. Cap. 43. fol. 100.

¶The tenth Booke.

  * ¶Hovve the Souldiour draue Apuleius awaye, and hovve he came to a Capi­tains houſe: and vvhat happened there. Cap. 44. fol. 102.
  * Hovv Apuleius vvas ſolde to two brethern, vvhereof one vvas a Baker, and the o­ther a Cooke, and hovve finely and deintily he fared. Cap. 45. fol. 106.
  * Hovv a certaine Matron fell in loue vvith Apuleius, and hovve he had his plea­ſure vvith her, and what other things happened. Cap. 46. fol. 109.

¶The eleuenth Booke.

  * ¶Hovve Apuleius by Roſes and pray­er, returned to his humaine ſhape. Cap. 47. fol. 115.
  * Hovv the Parentes and freendes of Apu­leius, harde nevves that he vvas aliue and in health. Cap. 48. fol. 121.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=23299&page=136)

[Home](/)

Apuleius.. Date: 1566  

