---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The delectable history of Poor Robin the merry sadler of Walden Shewing many
merry passages of his life, of harmless mirth, to lengthen delight, and frive
away melancholly

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=1)

The Delectable Hiſtory OF Poor Robin The Merry Sadler of WALDEN.

SHEWING Many merry Paſſages of his Life, of harm­leſs Mirth, to lengthen
Delight, and drive away Melancholly.

_[figure]_

Printed for J. Conyers, Bookſeller, at the ſign of the black Raven in Fetter-
Lane, near Holborn.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=2)

## To his unknown Friend, POOR ROBIN, the Subject of this merry Hiſtory.

SIR, you are happy thus to have your name

Inrolled in the Kalender of fame:

What others with much hazard ſcarce attain,

You by the kindneſs of your friend do gain.

You'l need no Monument over your Grave

To tell the world you were; this book will ſave

Such needleſs coſt, and make your name ſurvive

So long as any one ſhall be alive.

You by his pen have equal honour won,

With Scoggin, Archy, and the Knight o'th'Sun.

Come when it will, your deaths uncertain hour

Which o're your Body only hath a power;

Yet ſhall your fame ſurvive, your name ſhall live

Such grace the Muſes to theſe lines do give.

William Lawſintney.

## Table of contents

  * To his unknown Friend, POOR ROBIN, the Subject of this merry Hiſtory.
  * 1\. CHAP. 1. The Birth of Poor Robin; how he was bound Apprentice to a Sadler, and what a trick he ſerved his Maſter.
  * 2\. CHAP 2. How poor Robin ſerved his Maſter for ſitting up late at Night.
  * 3\. Chap. 3. How poor Robin ſerved a Rich Miſer.
  * 4\. CHAP. 4. How poor Robin marryed, and ſet up for himſelf.
  * 5\. CHAP. V. How poor Robin ſerved one of his▪ Companions a ſlovens trick.
  * 6\. CHAP. 6. Of a very ſad diſaſter that befel unto poor Robin.
  * 7\. CHAP. 7. How poor Sarah was cheated of her Mutton.
  * 8\. CHAP. 8. How poor Robin kiſt his Wifes Back-ſide inſtead of her Mouth.
  * 9\. CHAP. 9. How poor Robin eat Dogs-ſtones inſtead of Lambs ſtones.
  * 10\. CHAP. X. A witty Jeſt that poor Robin gave to a Serjeant
  * 11\. CHAP. XI. How poor Robin won five ſhillings by kiſſing his Hoſteſs.
  * 12\. Chap. 12. Poor Robins ſayings of Ambitious men.
  * 13\. Chap. 13. Poor Robins Journey to London.
  * 14\. Chap. 14. A Tale of a Pack of Cards.
  * 15\. CHAP. XV. How poor Robin ſerved a Bricklayer.
  * 16\. Chap. 16. A Scottiſh Marriage.
  * 17\. Chap. 17. Poor Robins perambulation about the City.
  * 18\. Chap. 18. Many odd Whimſies and Conceits of poor Robin.
  * Appendix A Books printed for and ſold by Joſhua Conyers at the Black Raven in Fetter-lane.

# [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=2)The
Delectable HISTORY of Poor Robin, The Merry Sadler of VValden.

## 1\. CHAP. 1. The Birth of Poor Robin; how he was bound Apprentice to a
Sadler, and what a trick he ſerved his Maſter.

POor Robin was born in Saffron Wal­den, in the County of Eſſex, of ho­neſt
plain Parents, who brought him up not as our nice Dames do now adays, by
ejecting of him how much he ſhould eat, but as the faſhion was then, full fed
with groſs meats; to that in few years he grew a ſturdy Lad and conſidering
his growth and manners, a man might well ſay, Better fed than taught: His
Father being willing he ſhould be able to live in the World another day,
[...]ound him an Apprentice to a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=3) Sadler, one
who fitted Robins humour to a hair; for the Maſter loving ſtrong drink, he
thought it ſhould go hard if the man likewiſe did not ſometimes wet his lips
with it. It fortuned one time his Maſter had brewed a Barrel of Beer ſtronger
than ordinary, to the drinking up of which poor Robin one night in­vites five
or ſix of his Comrades, who before the next morning drank it all up: Poor
Robin to excuſe himſelf draws the Spigot out, and throws a Pail full of ſmall
Beer, and two or three Pails full of Water under the Tap, and by a wile gets a
great Sow into the Cellar; ſo the next morning when his maſter aroſe, all was
quiet, and the Sow was blamed for what the Boar-Pig had done.

## 2\. CHAP 2. How poor Robin ſerved his Maſter for ſitting up late at Night.

POor Robins Maſter had gotten a Cuſtom that the man did not like of, which was
that after he had tippled all day, (ſometimes till ten or eleven a Clock at
night) he would then come home, and fall aſleep in a Chair: during which time
his man muſt not go to Bed, but wait until his Maſter awaked. Poor Robin to
break him of this evil Cuſtom: one night when his Maſter came home ſoundly
fuddled, and [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=3)
fallen aſleep in his Chair, as he was uſed to do, he made a great fire, and
then draws his maſters Legs ſo near thereto, that his Toes touched ſome of the
Coals; which being done, he ſits him down in the other corner, to obſerve the
ſe­quel: long had he not ſate, but his maſters Shooes began to fry, whereupon
he ſuddenly awakes, and jumps about as if he had been mad: the man all this
while Counterfeits himſelf aſleep, nor would not ſeem to awake for a good
ſpace: at laſt ſeeming much to pitty his Maſters misfortune, they went to bed:
but never after that would his maſter ſit up again to ſleep in his Chair.

## 3\. Chap. 3. How poor Robin ſerved a Rich Miſer.

IN the ſame Town lived a Rich Miſer, who had wealth enough to have been
Treaſu­rer of the Town, and Wisdom anſwerable for a Beadle of a Pariſh: this
man fuller of faith than good Works, would neither feaſt the Poor, to relieve
their wants, nor yet the Rich, to maintain Brotherly Unity. Poor Robin, who
hated bad houſe-keeping as he hated the Devil, reſolved to put a trick upon
him, the time of year (being then Chriſtmas) made fit for his purpoſe, and
counterfeiting himſelf to be the Gentlemans man, about ten or eleven a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=4) Clock at
night, juſt when people were in Bed, he calls at ſundry mens doors, inviting
them the next day to his Maſters (naming the Gentle­mans name) to Dinner;
whereupon the next day appeared the number of two and twenty in their Roaſt-
meat Apparel, but contrary to their expectation, finding ſmall preparation
towards a Dinner, they began to wonder wherefore he had invited them: the
Gentleman as much wondered wherefore they came: at laſt the truth being
cleared on both ſides, ſome laugh'd, and ſome frown'd, and ſo they all
departed home.

## 4\. CHAP. 4. How poor Robin marryed, and ſet up for him­ſelf.

POor Robin having ſerved out his Appren­tiſhip, would needs ſet up for
himſelf, and thereupon hires him a Houſe and Shop; yet conſidering it was
inconvenient for him to live alone, and that two heads were better than one,
he reſolv'd to do as many others have done, marry in haſte, though he repented
at leiſure. But yet his fortune was better than his de­ſerts: for though ſhe
were but a homely Wo­man with▪whom he joyned in Matrimony, yet was ſhe
provident to live in the World▪ and for his own part, he ſtood not much upon
beauty, but had rather have a fat Purſe than a fair Wife, ſeeing there was
great profit in the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=4) one, and leſs
danger of being made a Cuckold by the other; never did couple agree more
lovingly together than did this pair at firſt; inſomuch, that Duck and Lamb
were the ordinary terms he beſtowed upon her: Whereupon a Wit▪ of the Town
hearing this loving language betwixt them, made this Epigram to be read by any
that can underſtand it.

Poor Robin thinks his Wife excells moſt Dames,

And calls her Duck and Lamb, with ſuch kind Names;

A Duck's a Fowl, a Lamb's a Beaſt we know

Poor Robin's Wife's a foul Beaſt then I trow.

## 5\. CHAP. V. How poor Robin ſerved one of his▪ Com­panions a ſlovens trick.

POor Robin having ſet up for himſelf, (as you have heard) he would oftentimes
travel abroad into the Country, to get acquain­tance amongſt the Gentry; it
happened one time, being belated homeward, and his Brain intoxicated with the
juice of Bacchus, that he took up his Quarters in a Country Ale­houſe, where
notwithſtanding he had gotten a luſty jag before, yet fell he to drinking of
Beer and Sider as if his belly▪ were bottom­leſs: at length growing ſleepy, he
went to [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=5) bed,
where it was his chance to be lodged in the ſame Chamber where one of his
Ac­quaintance was already in Bed: who as he lay down ſooner than poor Robin,
ſo the next morning was he ſooner got up, providing a Pot and a Toaſt ready
againſt poor Robin a­roſe, but a foul miſchance befell poor Robin in the mean
time, for the Wine, Beer, and Syder not agreeing together in his Body, he very
mannerly (ſir reverence) beſhit the Bed. Whereupon not knowing what to do, and
being loath to be diſcredited, a Crotthet came in his Crown, which he
preſently put in Execution: he takes the ſtinking Sheets from off his own bed,
and lays them on his Friends, and then takes his and lays them on his own bed:
ſo ſpreading the Coverlid, as if nothing were amiſs, he makes himſelf ready,
and down Stairs he goes; no ſooner was he below, but his friend Arreſts him at
Mr. Fox's Suit, and by all means would make him pay his Groat for being drunk;
poor Robin excuſed himſelf as well as he could, and would be judged by his
Landlord whether he was fuddled or no; whilſt they were thus brangling about
paying the Groat, the Maid went up into the Chamber to make the beds; but▪
finding the one of them in a pittiful pickly, ſhe came chafing down, calling
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=5) the man
beaſtly fellow, and naſty Knave, with other Billings-gate Language, ſuch as
came firſt at her tongues end, the man imagined her to be mad, thus to ſcold
for nothing, till in the end ſhe told him in plain terms, he had be­ſhit the
bed. La ye now, quoth poor Robin, I will be judged by my Landlord, whether of
us was moſt fuddled laſt night: Truly, ſaid the Hoſt, I can judge no other
ways but that he was, elſe would he never a plaid ſuch a naſty Trick:
Whereupon it was adjudged by all the company that the man ſhould pay his
Groat, and poor Robin go ſcot-free.

## 6\. CHAP. 6. Of a very ſad diſaſter that befel unto poor Robin.

IT hapned on a time during theſe late un­happy Warrs, that all the Eſſex
Train-Bands were aſſembled at Walden, to Reſiſt the Kings Forces, who in a
Bravado had made their Excurſions as far as unto Hunt­ington: amongſt other
Military Weapons of Deſtruction, they brought with them a Drake, which they
planted juſt under poor Robin's Chamber window, to be ſhot off at nine of the
Clock in the night, for a warning to all people to repair home. Poor Robin and
his wife were at that time newly gone to Bed: now it is to be underſtood, that
the Chamber [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=6)
where they lay went but half way over the Room below, a Rail of about ſome
four foot high being ſet up by the ſide to  [...]ep them from falling, cloſe
by which Rail was poor Robins Bed: the ſeaſon then being indifferent warm, and
poor Robin apt for Uenerial Exerciſes, he would needs have a touch upon
Cracket with his Wife, but whilſt they were buſie at their port, the Drake was
ſhot off, which poor Sa­rah his wife hearing▪ in a marvellous fright, gave a
ſudden ſtart, and threw poor Robin quite over the Rail into the Room below,
and very fouly be wrayed the bed, poor Robin himſelf much bruiſed in body, and
half dead, at length got up, but his Courage was ſo cooled with the greatneſs
of the fall, that he had more mind to go to a Chyrurgion than a wench.

## 7\. CHAP. 7. How poor Sarah was cheated of her Mutton.

POor Sarah on a time had made a very great Pye, wherein ſhe had put a whole
Loin of Mutton, beſides ſtore of other Meat, ſo that it was valued to be worth
fiue or ſix ſhillings at ſeaſt; this Pye ſhe ſent to the common Oven to bake,
which being perceived by three or four mercy Blades, they reſolved if they
could poſſibly to cheat her of the Pye, which at laſt
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=6) they brought
to paſs, in this manner: at ſuch time as the Baker uſed to draw, two of them
went and held poor Sarah in a Tale, whilſt the other ſent one of her
Neighbours boys to the Bake-houſe with a Peal, a Nap [...]in, and Money for
the baking. The Baker miſtruſting no Knavery, delivered the Boy the Pye, which
was preſently carried to the next Ale-houſe, whither inviting ſome more of▪
their Companions unto them, with much mirth and laughter they eat it up: and
becauſe the ieſt ſhould be publique­ly known, they ſet the Cryer to work,
[...] publiſhed the ſame in euery. Corner of the Town.

## 8\. CHAP. 8. How poor Robin kiſt his Wifes Back-ſide inſtead of her Mouth.

POor Robin having been out very late one night, his underſtanding being
Eclips'd, he miſtook himſelf, and went in at the Beds-feet inſtead of the head
of it: where remem­bring how by his ll husbandry he had offen­ded his Wife, to
appeaſe her anger, he falls to kiſſing her poſteriors, imagining it had been
her Mouth, but finding the platform big­ger than his face, he asks her the
queſtion if her Cheeks were ſwell'd: ſhe for anſwer returns him a Foiſt, which
made him to ask
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=7) her again, if
her breath did ſtink: whereupon ſhe burſting out in a very great laughter, let
fly ſuch a crack, that the grains flew about his face: whereupon in a great
rage turning him on the other ſide, You beaſtly quean (quoth he) muſt you ſpit
in my face, the Devil himſelf ſhall kiſs you, e're I will kiſs you again.

## 9\. CHAP. 9. How poor Robin eat Dogs-ſtones inſtead of Lambs ſtones.

AS poor Robin was more addicted to fleſh than to fiſh, ſo of all ſorts or
fleſh he lo­ved a diſh of Lambs-ſtones beſt: a merry-diſ­poſed Companion
knowing his Appetite, re­ſolved to put a trick upon him: a Gentleman of the
Town who kept a park of Hounds, having gelt his Dogs, he gets the Stones, and
with a few Swéet-kreads, preſents them to poor Re­vin as a dainty diſh. Poor
Robin very thank­ful for ſo great a kindneſs, would not ſtay, but preſently
had them dreſſed, making all the haſte he could for fear any ſhould come in to
be parta­kers with him in his Dinner: but having eaten them and underſtood the
truth, he fell on ſpew­ing as if his Gall would come up with it: Poor Sarah in
like manner diſgorged her Stomach. that who ſhould have ſeen them, would have
concluded them drunk with eating.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=7)

## 10\. CHAP. X. A witty Jeſt that poor Robin gave to a Serjeant

THe Bleu Regiment of Train Souldiers being on a time at Walden, one of the
Serjeants to ſhow his bravery, had gotten a great Bleu Scarf about his middle,
being as much or more than the Enſign had in his Co­lours. Poor Robin thinking
him to be too fine to fight, would venture to put a jeer upon him: and calling
to him, asked if he wanted any work, why, quoth the Serjeant, what makes you
to ask? O, cry you mercy, quoth poor Robin, I was miſtaken in you, I took you
at firſt for a Shoo-maker, becauſe you had gotten your Eleu Apron before you.

## 11\. CHAP. XI. How poor Robin won five ſhillings by kiſſing his Hoſteſs.

POor Robin with ſome other of his Mates, being drinking in an Ale-houſe where
was an exceeding tall Hoſtels, one of them proffered to lay five ſhillings,
(becauſe poor Robin was low) that he ſhould not kiſs her as
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=8) he ſtoo [...]
upon the ground: Poor Robin nothing daunted at his words, accepted the
challenge and covered the Money: but when he went to kiſs her, his mouth would
not reach much high­er than her Apron ſtrings: Whereupon pro­ffering as though
he would put his hand under her Coats, he made her ſtoop to put it by; then he
claſping his Arms about her neck, gave her a kiſs, and ſo won the wager.

## 12\. Chap. 12. Poor Robins ſayings of Ambitious men.

POor Robin being in company with ſome Gentlemen, who were talking of the
Am­bition of many men now a days, that would venture the loſs of their Souls
for the gaining of a Kingdom: yea, (quoth poor Robin) but the ſucceſs of many
of them is far different from King Saul's: for he in ſeeking for Aſſes found a
Kingdom: and they in ſeeking a King­dom, find themſelves to be Aſſes.

## 13\. Chap. 13. Poor Robins Journey to London.

POor Robin having never been at London in his Life, and very deſirous to ſee
the City. whoſe ſame rang ſo ſoud in every Mans mouth, he reſolved to make a
Journey thither, and ſpend ſome time in viewing the Ra­rities of the ſame: but
becauſe he was unac­quainted
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=8) with the City
cuſtoms, he got a com­panion of his to go along with him: no ſooner were they
paſt Aldgate, but poor Robin ſeeing ſuch a number of ſigns, he whiſpered with
his friend, Certainly (quoth he) they muſt néeds he all drunkards that lives
in this place, I ne­ver ſaw ſo many Ale-houſes together in my Life: and
thereupon beckoning to his Com­panion, enters into one of the Shops, and calls
for a Jugg of Beer: but they making him acquainted with his errour, how they
Sold no drink, but if he wanted any thing elſe they could furniſh him with it:
he preſently without any ſtudying, asks them to ſhew him a pair of Hedging
Gloves: whereupon chang­ing their opininion, inſtead of a fool they took him
for a jeering Companion: and to fit him for his Gloves, had him to the Pump,
and ſoundly vedrencht him from the head to the foot. Yet notwithſtanding this
[...]art [...] En­tertainment at firſt, having occaſion to go through
Birching-Lane, and being asked by the Sales-men, Country-man, what lack▪ you?
Marry, quoth he, that which I fear you cannot furniſh me withal: and being
importuned by them to know what it was, Why, (quoth he) that which you have
none of, I mean Honeſty. Night approaching, Poor Robin and his walking Mate
repaired [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=9) to
their Inn, where after they had ſupt, and drank five or ſix Juggs of Beer with
the Hoſt of the Houſe and ſome of his men, (for Inn­keepers ſervants drink
moſt of their Beer at other mens coſt) his Friend loving no To­bacco, and poor
Robin himſelf defying that Heatheniſh Weed, to paſs away the time, they agreed
amongſt themſelves, that every one of the Company ſhould either tell a Tale,
or ſing a Song. Poor Robin, who firſt mentioned the ſame, beginning in this
manner.

## 14\. Chap. 14. A Tale of a Pack of Cards.

NOt many Ages ſince, a Parſon of a Country Uillage, was accuſed to a Committee
that he was a great Gameſter at Cards: being ſo addicted thereunto, that he
would oftentimes play on Sundays: the Com­mittee thus informed, ſent forthwith
for the Parſon, to anſwer his accuſation: who receiving the Warrant, made no
excuſes or delay, but with all the haſte he could, made his appearance before
them; with whom alſo came the Infor­mer to juſtifie his Accuſation. Being thus
met together, the Committee began to ſchool the Parſon, that one of his
calling ſhould be ad­dicted to ſuch Uice, as to be noted for a Common player
at Cards. Indeed, ſaid the Parſon, I am ſo far from the ſame, that I do not
know [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=9) what a
pair of Cards meaneth. Sir, qd. the In­former, if you pleaſe to ſearch his
Pockets, I believe you will find a pair there at this pre­ſent, for he ſeldom
goeth without ſuch tack­ling; whereupon the Committee commanding his pockets
to be ſearcht, they found a pair of Cards there indeed: but the Parſon denied
them for to be Cards, ſaying, they may be Cards to you, but to me they are an
Almanack: and be­ing demanded how he could make it appear, he anſwered thus:
Firſt (quoth he) here is as many ſuits of Cards as there be quarters in a
year; and as many Court Cards as there be months in a year; as many Cards as
there are weeks in a year; and as many ſpots as there be days in a year. Then
when I look upon the King, it puts me in mind of the alle­giance that I owe to
my Soveraign Lord the King, looking upon the queen, puts me in mind of the
like Allegiance that I owe to the Queen; the ten puts me in mind of the ten
Command­ments, the nine of the nine Muſes; the eight of the eight Altitudes;
the ſeven of the ſeven liberal Sciences; the ſix of the ſix days we ought to
labour in: the five of the five Sen­ſes; the four of the four Evangeliſts; the
three of the Trinity; the two of the two Sa­craments: & the Ace, that we ought
to worſhip but one God. Truly, quoth the Committee,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=10) if this he
all the uſe you can make of them. I can ſind no great fault with you; but Mr.
Parſon, of all the Cards that you have nomi­nated, you have forgotten the
Knave, pray what uſe make you of him? O ſir, ſaid he, pointing to him that was
his accuſer) that I ſuppoſe is your Worſhips Informer.

## 15\. CHAP. XV. How poor Robin ſerved a Bricklayer.

NOt long after, poor Robin having been late abroad amongſt his Pot-companions
and being elevated with Béer, he reſolved once more to counterfeit himſelf a
Gentlemans man, at the ſame time was a very deep Snow, whereupon he calls at a
Bricklayers houſe, tel­ling him his Maſter (naming a Gentleman that lived ſome
two mile off, and where he knew that Bricklayer uſed to work) would have him
come on the morning, and bring. a bunch of Lath with him, to mend up a ſeiling
which the Snow had broken down; the next morning the Bricklayer got up be
times, and with a bunch of Lath on his ſhoulder, went to the Gentlemans houſe,
being each ſtep almoſt up to the knees in Snow, but the weather was not more
cold than his entertainment, for the Gentleman thinking he came to jeer him,
ſwore at him like a Cut-purſe. Whereupon the poor Bricklayer was forced to go
home again like a fool as he came.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=10)

## 16\. Chap. 16. A Scottiſh Marriage.

VVE don't uſe to Wad in Scotland as you wad in England; Jocky comes to the
Kirk, & takes ſir Donkyn by the Rochet and ſays good morn ſir Donkyn. What's
the matter Jocky, what's the matter? a Wad­ding, a Wadding ſays he, Deant you
ſee the Hoppets and the Skippets, and all the Lads of the Gang? Iſe do, Iſe
come to you be­lieve. Then Sir Donkyn Gangs to the Kirk; I ſpee, and I ſpee;
ho a Deal do you ſpee? Jocky of the high Lane, and Jenny of the long Cliff: if
any know why theſe twa may not be wadded together, let them now ſpeak, or hold
their tongues in the Deals Name. Jocky, wilt thou ha Jenny to thy wadded Wife?
I ſha, Jocky ſan after me, I ſha; Jocky wilt thou ha Jenny to thy wadded Wife,
forſaking all Soons, Lubbar-loons, ſwig-bellied Calves, black Lips, and blew
Noſes? ay forſooth. If theſe twa be not as well wadded as e're I wadded two
theſe ſeven years, the Deal and St. Andrew part them.

The wadding being ended, all the company went to bed; where we will leave them
till the next morning, to relate poor Robins pe­rambulation about the City.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=11)

## 17\. Chap. 17. Poor Robins perambulation about the City.

NO ſooner did Apollo begin to appear in the Eaſtern Horizon, but poor Robin
ſhaking off melaneholly ſleep rouzed his com­panion to prepare himſelf for
their intended perambulation: and having armed themſelves with a pot of happy
Ale, they took their firſt walk to ſee the Royal Exchange, a moſt magni­ficent
ſtructure, built by Sir Thomas Greſham, from thence they went to take a view
of Lea­den Hall, but, the exceeding bravery of the Ex­change had ſo dimned the
beauty of this place, that was nothing pleaſing to poor Robins eye, he made no
tarrying there, but went preſently down to the Tower, where having ſeen the
Ly­ons, and from the Wharf taken a ſuperficial view of the Bridge, as alſo of
ſome Ships, up­on the River of Thames, weary of beholding ſuch triaial matters
as theſe, he had far more devotion to go ſee a Puppet-play; where for one
penny charges he ſaw that which gave him far more content than any thing he
had ſeen before, ſo admirable pleaſing to his fancy was it, to ſee how thoſe
little pretty things hop'd about: but leſt he ſhould take a ſurfeit with ſuch
raviſhing delights, his Friend perſwaded him to go ſee the ancient Cathedral
of St. Paul, being at that preſent made a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=11) Horſe-guard
by the Souldiers, which poor Robin beholding, What bleſſed Reformation, quoth
he, have we here, for in our Country can we ſcarce perſwade men to go to
Church, and here comes men and horſes too; but ha­ving quickly ſatisfied
themſelves with the ſight of Pauls, they would in the next place to viſit
Weſtminſter, the rather becauſe it was at that preſent Term time; where
be­holding ſuch a number of Lawyers in their Gowns, Good God, ſaid he, ſend me
ſafe out of this place, if two or three make ſuch a quar­ter in our Town,
certainly there would be no abiding there for men in their wits. A Coun­try
Gentleman over-hearing hint, I remember (quoth he) I over-heard a ſtory of a
certain man, that went down into Hell, wherein he beheld men of all
profeſſions, age, and conditi­ons, ſaving only Lawyers, which made him the
more to wonder, becauſe he imagined them all there, and asking the Devil the
reaſon thereof, he made this reply, We have them here though you ſee them not,
but we are forced to keep them in a Room by themſelves, leaſt they ſhould ſet
all the devils in Hell at variance. Poor Robin laughed very heartily at this
tale, and having now ſatisfied his mind concerning London, he returned to his
Inn, and having diſcharged all reckonings, his friend and he returned home.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=12)

## 18\. Chap. 18. Many odd Whimſies and Conceits of poor Robin.

POor Robin daily frequenting the Tavern and Alehouſe, had learned of his
Compa­nions many drunken Whimſies and other odd Conceits, as the five
properties that belongs, to an Hoſt, that He muſt have the Head of a Stag, the
back of a Nag, the Belly of a Hog, skip up and down like a Frog, and lye and
fawn like a Dog. As alſo. four ingrepients whereof a womans tongue is made,
viz. The ſound of a great Bell, the wagging of a Dogs tail, the ſhaking of an
Aſpen-leaf, tempered with Running Water. Theſe following Pa­radoxes were alſo
very often rehearſed by poor Robin.

Spurs would be out of faſhion were it not for Horſe-courſers.

True men would be ſcarce, were not Tay­lors ſo plentiful.

Many men are fore'd to climb the Gallows, yet few like Dogs are hanged for
their skins.

A Miller is a right time-obſerver, for he evermore turns with the Wind.

A ſilent Woman is a Creature to be admi­red, (if ſcarceneſs may breed
admiration.)

When poor Robin had gotten a cup in his crown, as it oftentimes happened, he
would [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=12) be
then playing the Poet, and nothing but rhime ſhould come out of his mouth; for
as one writes:

Poet and Pot do differ but one letter,

And that makes Poet love the pot the better

Amongſt other of his Conceits, this fol­lowing Compariſon was much uſed by
him.

Like a purſe that hath no chink in't,

Or a Celler, and no drink in't;

Like a Iewel never worn,

Or a Child untimely born:

Like a Song without a foot,

Or a Bond and no Hand to it:

Such doth ſhe ſeem vnto mine eyes

That lives a Virgin till ſhe dyes.

Women, ſaid he, are all in extreams, ei­ther too willing, or too wilful; too
forward, or too froward; too courteous, or too coy; too friendly, or too
fiendly, the mean they al­waies meanly account of. This made  [...] a Ruler in
Carthage, refuſe to  [...]; ſaying. If I marry a Wife, ſhe will be wilfull, if
wealthy, then wanton; if poor, then  [...]; if beautiful, then proud; if
deformed, then loathſome, and the leaſt of theſe is able to kill a thouſand
men.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=13)

## Appendix A Books printed for and ſold by Joſhua Con­yers at the Black Raven
in Fetter-lane.

  * 1\. THe Rules of Civility, or the Art of good Breeding and Behaviour.
  * 2\. Lillies new E [...]a pater, or prognoſtication for ever.
  * 3\. The Engliſh Fortune-teller, deſcribing by the Moles of the Face, and by palmiſtry by the Lines of the hand, and Dreams, the good and bad fortune of Men and Women.
  * 4\. The Shepherds new Kalender, a Book of Fortune.
  * 5\. A hundred notable things for a peny.
  * 6\. The Engliſh Mountebanks new Book of Merry Conceits.
  * 7\. Second part of Dr. Fauſtus.
  * 8\. The Hiſtory of Fortunatus.
  * 9\. A new Academy of Complements, with new Songs, ſung at Court and play-houſe.
  * 10\. A new parliament of Women.
  * 11\. Dr. Lillies laſt Legacy, a Book of choice Receipts of phyſick.
  * 12\. Dr. Culpeper's Engliſh phyſicians daily practiſe, a Book of choice Receipts of phyſick
  * 13\. Dr. Salvator Winter's new Book of choice Receipts of phyſick and Chyrurgery.
  * 14\. The Ladies cabinet, a new Book of cookery
  * 15\. The Hiſtory of Reynard the Fox.

Where Chapmen may be furniſhed with all ſorts of Books and Baltads.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=35938&page=13)

[Home](/)

Winstanley, William, 1628?-1698.. Date: 1680  

