---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The Oglin of traytors including the illegal tryall of His Late Maiesty :
with a catalogue of their names that sat as judges and consented to the
judgment : with His Majesties reasons against their usurped power and his late
speech : to which is now added the severall depositions of the pretended
witnesses as it is printed in the French coppy : with the whole proceedings
against Colonel J. Penruddock of Compton in Wilts and his speech before he
dyed : as also the speech of the resolved gentleman, Mr. Hugo Grove of
Chissenbury, Esquire, who was beheaded the same day, not before printed.

# 1\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=1)

The Oglio of Traytors: Including the Illegal Tryall of his late MAIESTY.

With a Catalogue of their names that ſat as Judges and conſented to the
Judg­ment: With his MAJESTIES Reaſons againſt their uſurped power and his late
ſpeech.

To which is now added, the ſe­verall depoſitions of the preten­ded Witneſſes,
as it is Printed in the French Coppy:

With the whole proceedings a­gainſt Colonel J. Penruddock of Compton in Wilts,
and his ſpeech before he dyed.

As alſo, the ſpeech of that reſolved Gentleman, Mr. Hugh Grove of Chiſſen­bury
Eſquire, who was beheaded the ſame day: not before Printed.

London, Printed by T. M. for William Shears at the Bible in Bedford ſtreet.

### 1\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=2)

#### 1.1. The Firſt Dayes Proceeding of the High Court of Ju­ſtice, &c.

THe Triall and the Execution of the laſt King of England, be­ing ſtill as much
the wonder as the diſcourſe of Chriſtendome I ſhall en­deavour to repreſent it
to you, with the exacteſt faithfullneſſe that can poſſibly be deſired; and
although others have gone before me on the ſame ſubject, by the be­nifit of
time; I doubt not but that I ſhall exceed them, by the advantage of truth.

In the Supream Tribunall of Juſtice ſitting at Whitehall in Weſtminſter,
Serjeant Bradſhaw being Preſident, and about ſeventy other perſons, elected to
be his Judges, being preſent; the Cryer of the Court, having proclaimed his O
yes, to invite the people to atten­tion, ſilence was commanded, and the
Ordinance of the Commans in Parlia­ment, in reference to the Examination
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=3) of the King
was read, and the Court was ſummoned, all the Members there­of  [...]ſing as
they were called.

The King came into the Court, his head covered, Serjeant Dendy being
remarkable by the Authority of his Mace, did uſher him in; Colonel Hatcher,
and about thirty Officers and Gentlemen did attend him as his Guard.

The Court being ſat the Lord Preſi­dent Bradſhaw ſpeak thus unto him.

Charles Stuart King of England, the Commons of England aſſembled in
Parliament, being touched with the ſenſe of the Calamities which have happned
to this Nation, and of the innocent bloud ſpilt, of which you are accuſed to
be the Author, have both according to their office, which they ow to God, this
Nation and themſelves, according to the power & fundamental faith intruſted
with them, by the people; Conſtituted this Supream Court of Juſtice▪ before
which you are now brought to hear your Charge, on which this Court will
proceed.

Mr. Crook the Solliciter Generall.

Sir▪ In the Name of the Commons of England, and of all the people there­of:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=3) I do charge
Charles Stuart here preſent, as guilty of Treaſon, and other great defaults,
and in the name of the Commons of England, I require that his charge may be
read unto him.

The King.

Stay alittle.

L. Preſident.

Sir the Court hath given order, that the Charge ſhall be read: If you have any
thing afterwards to plead for your ſelf, you may be heard: Hereupon the Charge
was read.

THat the ſaid Charles Stuart be­ing admitted King of England, and therein
truſted with a limmitted Power, to govern by; and according to the Laws of the
Land, and not other­wiſe; And by his truſt, Oath, and Of­fice, being obliged
to uſe the Power com­mitted to him. For the good and benefit of the People,
and for the preſervation of Kights, and Libir [...]ies: yet never­theleſſe out
of a wicked Deſigne, to erect, and uphold in himſelfe and unlimited and
Tyrannical power, to rule accord­ing to his Will, and to overthrow the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=4) Rights and
liberties of the people; Yea, to take away, and make void the foun­dations
thereof, and all the redreſs and remedy of miſgovernment, which by the
fundamental conſtitutions of this King­dome, were reſerved on the peoples
be­halfe, in the right and power of fre­quent and ſucceſſive Parliaments, or
nationall meetings in Councel, he the ſaid Charles Stuart, for accompliſhment
of ſuch his deſignes, and for the protect­ing of himſelf and his adherents, in
his and their wicked practiſes, to the ſame ends, hath traterouſly and
maliciouſly leavied war againſt the preſent Parlia­ment, and the people
therein repreſent­ed.

Particularly, upon, or about the thir­tieth day of June, in the year of our
Lord one thouſand ſix hundred forty and two, at Beverly, in the County of
York, and upon, or about the 30. day of July, in the year aforeſaid, in the
County of the City of York; and upon, or about the 24. day of Auguſt, in the
ſame year, at the County of the town of Nottingham (when and were he ſet up
his Standard of war) And alſo on, or about the twenty
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=4) third
[...]ay of October in the ſame year at Edghill, and Kenton field, in the
County of Warwick; and upon or aboue the thirtieth day of November, in thet
ſame year at Brainchford, in the County of Midaleſex: And upon, or about the
thirtieth day of Auguſt in the year of our Lord, One thouſand ſix hundred
forty and three, at Caveſham bridge neer Reading, in the County of Berks; and
upon, or about the thirtieth day of October, in the year laſt mentioned, at,
or neer the City of Gloſter; and upon, or about the thirtieth day of No­vember
in the year laſt mentioned, at Newbury, in the County of Berks; And upon, or
about the one & thirtieth day of July, in the year of our Lord one thouſand
ſix hundred forty and four, at Cro­predybridge in the County of Oxon, And
upon, or about the thirtieth day of September, in the year laſt mentioned, at
Boamin, and other places near ad­jacent in the County of Cornwall And upon, or
about the thirtieth day of No­vember; in the year laſt mentioned, at Newbery
aforeſaid; and upon, or about the eighth day of June, in the year of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=5) our Lord one
thouſand ſix hundred for­ty and five, at the Town of Leiceſter; And alſo upon
the fourteenth day of the ſame month, in the ſame year, at Na­ſeby field, in
the County of Norhamp­ton. At which ſeverall times and places, or moſt of
them, and at many other places in the Land, at ſeverall other times, within
the year afore mentioned And in the year of our Lord, One thou­ſand ſix
hundred forty and ſix; he the ſaid Charles Stuart, hath cauſed and procured
many thouſands of the Free-peo­ple of the nation to be ſlain; and by
Di­viſions, parties and inſurrections. within this land, by invaſions from
For­ragine parts, endeavoured and pro­cured by him, and by many other evill
wayes and meanes. He the ſaid Charles Stuart, hath not onely main­tained &
carried on the ſaid War, both by land and ſea, during the year before
mentioned; but alſo hath renewed, or cauſed to be renewed, the ſaid war
againſt the Parliament, and good people of this Nation, in this pre­ſent year.
One thouſand ſix hundred fourty and eight, in the Counties of Kent
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=5) Eſſex, Surry,
Suſſex, Middleſex, and many other Counties and places in England and Wales and
alſo by ſea, and particularly, he the ſaid Charles Stuart, hath for that
purpoſe, given Commiſſion to his Son the Prince and o­thers, whereby beſides
multitudes of other perſons, many ſuch as were by the Par­liament intruſted
and imployed, for the ſafety of the Nation, being by him and his agents,
corrupted, to the betraying of their Truſt, and revolting from the Parliament,
have had entertainment and commiſſion, for the continuing and renewing of war
and hoſtility, againſt the ſaid Parliament and people as a­foreſaid. By which
cruel and unna­turall wars by him, the ſaid Charles Stuart, levied, continued,
and re­newed as aforeſaid, much innocent bloud of the Free-people of this
nation hath been ſpilt, many families have been undone, the publick trea­ſury
waſted and exhauſted, trade obſtructed, & miſerablely decayed; vaſt expence
and damage to the Nation incurred, and many parts of the land ſpoiled, ſome of
them even to de­ſolation.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=6) And for
further proſecution of his ſaid evill deſigns he the ſaid Charles Stuart doth
ſtill continue his Commiſſions to the ſaid Prince, and other Rebels and
Revolters, both Engliſh and For­raginers, and to the Earl of Ormand, and to
the Iriſh Rebles and Revolters, aſſociated with him, from whom fur­ther
invaſions upon this Land are thret­ned, upon the procurment, and on the
behalfe of the ſaid Charles Stuart.

All which wicked deſignes, wars, and evill practiſes of him. The ſaid Charles
Stuart, have been and are carried on, for the advancing and upholding of the
perſonall Intereſt of Will and Power, and pretended Prerogative to himſelf and
family, againſt the publique intreſt, Com­mon Right, Liberty, Juſtice, and
peace of the people of this Nation, by and for whom he was entruſted, as
afore­ſaid.

By all which it appeareth, that he the ſaid Charles Stuart, hath been, and is
the occaſioner, author, and contriver of the ſaid unnatural, cruel, and bloudy
wars, and therein guilty of all the trea­ſons, murthers, rapines, burning,
ſpoils, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=6)
deſolations, damage and miſchief to this Nation, acted or committed in the
ſaid wars, or occaſioned thereby.

And the ſaid John Cook, by prote­ſtation (ſaveing on the behalf of the people
of England, the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Charge
againſt him the ſaid Charles Stuart and alſo of the replying to the Anſwers
which the ſaid Charles Stuart ſhall make to the premiſes, or any of them, or
a­ny other Charge that ſhall be ſo exhibited) doth for the ſaid treaſons &
crim's, on the behalf of the ſaid people of England, im­peach the ſaid Charles
Stuart, as a Ty­rant, Tration, Murtherer, and a publick, & an implacable enemy
to the Common-wealth of England: And pray, That the ſaid Charles Stuart King
of Eng­land, may be put to anſwer all and every the premiſes, that ſuch
proceedings, exam­minations, tryals, ſentence, and Judge­ment may be there
aupon had, or ſhall be agreable to Juſtice.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=7) The King was
often times obſerved to ſmile in indignati­on, during the reading of the
Charge eſpacially at the words Tyrant, TRATOR, MUR­DERER, and publick enemy to
the Common-wealth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=7)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=8)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=8)

#### 1.2. The full Proceedings of the High Court of Juſtice againſt King
Charls I. In Weſtminſter Hall, on Saturday the 20. of Ianuary, 1648.

L. Preſident Bradſhaw.

SIR, You have now heard the Charge read, containing ſuch matters, as do appear
therein; you have obſerved, that in the Concluſion thereof, It is required of
the Court, in the Name of the Com­mons of England, that you anſwer [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=9) to your charge,
which the Court doth expect.

The King.

I would be ſatisfied by what power I am called hither? It is not long ſince
that I was in the Iſle of Wight▪ How I came thither, the ſtory is longer than
I conceive fitting in this place to declare; But I there entered upon a Treaty
with both Houſes of Parliament, with as much publick faith, as its poſ­ſible
to be obtained from any people in the World. I there treated with a number of
honourable Lords and Gentlemen, and I treated honeſtly and faithfully with
them; I cannot ſay, but they dealt very ingenuouſly with me; and we proceeded
ſo far, that the Treaty was even conclu­ded. Now I would underſtand by what
Authority, (I mean lawfull) I am brought hither? There are many un­lawfull
Authorities in the world, as Thieves and Plunderers in the high-wayes. I would
know by what authority I was taken from thence, and carried from place to
place, I know not where? When I have underſtood the lawfulneſſe of the
Authority, I will make my Anſwer: In the mean time remember, that I am [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=9) your King, your
lawfull King, and weigh well with your ſelves, what ſins you heap on your own
heads, and the anger and judgements of God which you will bring upon this
land, I ſay ſeriouſly weigh it be­fore you further do proceed from one ſin to
a greater. Therefore declare unto me, by what lawfull Authority I ſit here,
and I will not refuſe to Anſwer you. In the mean time I will not betray my
truſt. I have a truſt committed to me by God, by an ancient and lawfull
ſucceſſion, I will not betray that by anſwering to a new and an unlawfull
Authority; wherefore ſatisfie me in this, and you ſhall hear fur­ther from me.

L▪ Preſident Bradſhaw.

If you had but pleaſed to obſerve what the Court did ſuggeſt unto you, when
you firſt came hither, you had un­derſtood by what Authority you were brought
hither; which Autho­rity doth require of you, in the Name of the People of
England, by whom you are elected King, than you make anſwer to them.

King▪

No Sir, I deny that.

L. Preſident Bradſhaw.

If you do [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=10)
not acknowledge the Authority of the Court, they ought to proceed againſt you.

King.

I tell them that England was never an elective Kingdom, but heredita­ry, for
almoſt theſe two thouſand years. Therefore declare unto me, by what Au­thority
I am brought hither. I labour more for the liberty of my people than any of
you, who pretend to be my Judges; and therefore I ſay, declare unto me, by
what lawfull Authority I am placed here, and I will anſwer you; otherwiſe I
ſhall make no anſwer at all.

L. Preſident Bradſhaw.

Sir, how well you have adminiſtred the power committed to you, is ſufficiently
known: The method of your An­ſwering is to put Interrogatories to the Court,
which doth not become you in this Condition. Twice or thrice it hath been
repreſented to you.

King.

There is preſent here a Gentle­man, Lieutenant Colonel Cobbet, de­mand of him,
if he did not bring me from the Iſle of Wight by force: I come not hither to
ſubmit my ſelf in this [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=10) Court. I will do
as much for the Pri­viledges of the Houſe of Commons, rightly underſtood, as
any other: I ſee not here the Houſe of Lords, which is able to conſtitute a
Parliament, and the King ought to be the Super-intendent there. Is this to
bring the King to his Parli­ament? Is this to bring the publick Trea­ty to an
end, by the publick Faith of the world? Either ſhew me your Authority
eſtabliſhed by the Scriptures, which are the Word of God, or confirmed by the
conſtitutions of the Kingdom, and I will anſwer you.

L. Preſident Bradſhaw.

Sir, you have propounded a queſtion, and an anſwer hath been rendred, but if
you will not anſwer to what they do propound, the Court will take it in­to
their conſideration, how to pro­ceed againſt you. In the mean time, they who
brought you hither, ſhall return you back again. The Court deſireth to be
ſatisfied whether this be all the Anſwer that you will give them or not.

King.

I deſire that you would reſolve me and all the world, in this one parti­cular.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=11) Give me
leave to acquaint you, that it is a thing of no ſmall importance which you go
about. I am ſworn to keep the peace according to the duty, which I ow to God
and to my Land; and I will here perform it to the laſt breath of my Body: you
ſhall therefore do well firſt to ſatis­fie God, and afterwards the Land, by
what Authority you do this. If you do it by an uſurped Authority, you cannot
defend it. God who ſitteth in the Heavens, will call you, and all thoſe, who
have conferred this power on you, to give him an account of it. Satisfie me in
this, and I ſhall anſwer you, for otherwiſe I ſhould betray the Faith
committed to me, and the li­berties of my people: Wherefore conſider of it,
and I ſhall be willing to anſwer you. For I do profeſs, it is as great a ſin
to reſiſt a lawfull Authority, as to ſubmit unto a Tyrannicall, or any other
unlawfull au­thority: wherefore reſolve me in this par­ticular, and you ſhall
receive my An­ſwer.

L. Preſident Bradſhaw.

The Court expecteth that you ſhould give them a final Anſwer, and will adjourn
un­till Munday next: If you cannot ſa­tisfie [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=11) your ſelf;
although we tell you our Authority, our Authority will ſatisfie our ſelves;
And it is accord­ing to the Authority of God and and the Kingdome, and the
Peace (of which you ſpeak) ſhall be preſer­ved in the Adminiſtration of
Juſtice, and that is our preſent work.

King.

I give you this for my Anſwer, you have not ſhewn me any lawfull Au­thority,
which may ſatisfie any reaſonable man.

L. Preſident Bradſhaw.

It is only your apprehenſion, we are fully ſatis­fied, who are your Judges.

King

It is not my apprehenſion, nor yours which ought to determine this.

L. Preſident Bradſhaw.

The Court hath heard you, and diſpoſed of you accordingly as their diſcretions
have thought expedient.

The Court adjourneth to the Painted Chamber, untill Munday at ten of the clock
in the morning, and from thence hither.

Something that was ominous, ought not to be paſſed by in ſilence, [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=12) when the Charge
was read againſt the King, the ſilver head of his ſtaff did full off, which he
much did wonder at, and obſerving no man ſo officious to aſſiſt him, he
ſtooping towards the ground did take it up himſelf.

As the King returned, looking on the Court, he ſaid, I fear not thee, mean­ing
the Sword. As he came down the ſtaires, the people, who were in the Hall,
cryed out, ſome of them, God ſave the King; but the greater part, Juſtice,
Juſtice.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=12)

#### 1.3. The ſecond dayes pro­ceeding againſt the King, January 22, &c.

THe Cryer having thrice pro­nounced his Oyes, and ſilence commanded, after
that the Judges were called, and every one did particulary anſwer to his Name.
Silence was again commanded under pain of impriſonment, and the Cap­tain of
the Guards was ordered to ap­prehended any that ſhould endea­vour to make a
tumult.

At the commanding of the King into the Court, there was a great ſhout and the
Court commanded the Captain of the Guards to apprehend and impriſon thoſe, who
ſhould make either a noiſe or tumult.

The Court being ſat, the Sollicitor turn­ing to the Preſident, ſaid, May it
Pleaſe your [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=13) Lordſhip, my
Lord Preſident, In the former Court on Saturday, in the Name of the Commons of
England, I exhibited and offered to this Tribunal the charg of high Treaſons,
and other grievous crimes againſt the Priſoner, with which I did charge him In
the Name of the People of England, and his charge was read, and his Anſwer
demanded. My Lord, It pleaſed him at that time t [...] return no anſwer at
all, but inſtead of anſwering, he queſtioned the Au­thority of the High Court:
My moſt humble motion to this High Court in the Name of the people of the
Kingdome of England, is that the priſoner may be compelled to give a poſitive
anſwer, either by way of Confeſſion or Negation, which if he ſhal refuſe, that
the ſubject of his Charge may be taken for gran­ted, & the Court proceed
acording to iuſtice.

L. Preſident.

Sir, you may remember that on the laſt convention of this Court, the cauſe was
expounded to you, for which you were brought hi­ther, and you heard the charge
againſt you read, it being a charge of High Treaſon and other grievous crimes
againſt the Kingdom of England: you heard likewiſe, that it was required
[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=13) in the
Name of the people, that you ſhould anſwer to your charge, that there ſhould
be a proceeding thereon, as ſhould be agreable unto Juſtice: you were then
pleaſed to move ſome ſcruples concerning the authority of this Court, and you
deſired to be ſa­tisfied in your knowledge, by what authority you were brought
hither: you ſeverall times did propound your queſtions, and it was often
an­ſwered to you, that it was by authori­ty of the Commons of England
aſſem­bled in Parliament, who did iudge it requiſite to call you to an
account, for the great and greivous crimes of which you are accuſed. After
that the Court did take into their ſerious con­ſideration, thoſe things which
you objected, and they are fully ſatisfied in their authority; and do conceive
it requiſite, that you ſhould admit it; they therefore require that you give a
poſitive and a particular Anſwer to the charge exhibited againſt you: they do
expect that you ſhould either confeſſe or deny it. If you ſhall deny it, it
will be proved in the behalfe of [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=14) the Kingdome,
the whole world doth approve of their Authority. So that the Kingdome is
ſatisfied, and you ought thereby to be ſatisfied your ſelf; you ought not
therefore to waſte time but to give your poſitive anſwer.

King.

It is true, that when I was laſt here I moved that queſtion: and indeed, if if
it where onely my buſineſse in particular, I ſhould have ſatisfied my ſelfe
with that proteſtation, I then interpoſed againſt the lawfulneſſe of this
Court; and that a King cannot be judged by any ſuperiour juriſdi­ction on
earth; but my on intereſts are not on­ly involved in it: but the liberties
alſo of the people of England; and pretend what you will, I doe indeavor more
for their liberties, than any whatſoever. For if Power without laws, can make
laws change the Fundamen­tall laws of the Kingdome, I know not what ſubject in
England can be ſecure of his life, or of any thing which he doth call his own:
Wherefore when I came hither, I expected particular reaſons, that I might
underſtand by what law, and what Authority you would proceed againſt me. I
ſhould then perceive what moſt eſpecially I have to ſay unto you; for the
affirmative is to be proved, which [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=14) ſeldome the
Negative is capable of; but be­cauſe I cannot perſwade you thus, I will give
you my Reaſon as briefly as I can.

The Reaſons for which in conſcience and duty which I ow, firſt unto God, and
after­wards to my people, for the preſervation of their lives, their
liberties, and their for­tunes: I believe I cannot anſwer untill I am
ſatisfied of your legality of it. All pro­ceeding againſt any man whatſoever,—

Preſident.

Sir, I muſt interrupt you, which I would not do, but that which you do,
agreeth not with the pro­ceeding of any Tribunal of Juſtice, you enter into a
controverſie, and diſpute againſt the Authority of this Court, before which
you appeare a priſoner, and are accuſed as a great Delinquent, If you will
take upon you to controvert the Authority of this Court, we cannot give way
unto it; neither will any tribunall of Ju­ſtice admit it; you ought to ſubmit
unto the Court, and to give an exact and direct Anſwer, whether you will
anſwer to your charge or not, and what is the anſwer that you make.

King.

Sir I know not the formalities [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=15) of the law, I
know the law and reaſon; and although I am no profeſſed Lawyer, I know the law
as well as any Gentleman in Eng­land, and I am more eager for the Liber­ties
of the people of England than you are? and if I ſhould believe any man,
without he gives me Reaſons what he ſaith, It would be abuſed; but I ſay unto
you, that the Rea­ſons which you give is no wayes ſatisfacto­ry.

L. Preſident.

Sir I muſt interrupt you, for it cannot be permitted to you in this manner to
proceed: you ſpake of law and reaſon, it is fit that there ſhould be both law
and reaſon, and they are both againſt you. Sir the Vote of the Commons of
England Aſ­ſembled in Parliament, is the reaſon of the Kingdome, and they
ordained this law according to which you ought to Reign, Sir, It is not
lawfull for you diſpute againſt our Authori­ty. This again hath been told you
by the Court. Sir, Notice will be taken that you contemn the Court, and this
contempt of yours will be recor­ded.

King.

I know not how a King can be [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=15) interpreted to
be a Delinquent, but by any law that I ever heard, all men, whether
Delinquent, or what you will, may lawfully make objections againſt their
Profeſſe; this is that which I require, and I again deſire that my Reaſons may
be heard. If you deny this, you deny Reaſon.

L. Preſident.

Sir, you have objected ſomething to the Court; I will declare unto you their
opinion. Sir, it is not lawfull for you or any man elſe to diſpute againſt
this ſubject; It is De­creed, you ought not to diſpute a­gainſt the
juriſdiction of this Tribu­nall; If you ſhall yet do it, I muſt inti­mate unto
you, that they are above objections. They ſet here by Autho­rity of the
Commons of England; and all your Predeceſſors and you your ſelfe are bound to
be account­able to them.

King.

I sdeny that, ſhew me one exam­ple.

L. Preſident

Sir, you ought not to interrupt, but attend whilſt the Court ſpeakes unto you.
This ſubject is not to be diſputed by you, neither will the Court permit that
you ſhould [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=16) object againſt
the jurisdiction of it, they have conſidered of their juriſdi­ction and do
approve it.

King.

Sir, I ſay that the Commons of England were never a Court of judicature, and I
would fain know, how they came to be made ſo now?

Preſident

Sir, it is not permitted to you to proceed in thoſe diſcourſes.

Then the Secretary of the Court did read as followeth.

Charles Stuard King of England you have been accuſed in the Name of the people
of England of High Trea­ſon, and other grievous Crimes. The Court hath
determined that you ſhal anſwer to your charge.

King.

I will anſwer as ſoon as ever I ſhall underſtand, by what authority you do
theſe things.

Preſident.

If this be all that you will ſpeake: Gentlemen, you who brought the priſonner
hither, take him back again.

King.

I demand, that I may be permitted to exhibite my Reaſons why I anſwer not unto
the Charge, and give me time to per­form this.

Preſident.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=16)

Sir, it is not for priſon­ers to demand.

King.

Priſoners Sir! I am no ordinary priſoner.

Preſident.

The Court hath con­ſidered of their own juriſdiction, and they have alſo
confirmed their juriſ­diction: If you will not anſwer, we will give order that
your Default be recorded.

King.

You have not yet heard my Rea­ſons▪

Preſident.

Your Reaſons are not to be heard againſt the Supreme Juriſdi­ction.

King.

Shew me that juriſdiction in the world, where Reaſon is not to be heard.

Preſident.

Sir, we ſhew it you here, the Commons of England; and the next time you are
brought hither, you ſhall underſtand further of the pleaſure of the Court, and
perad­venture their finall ſentence,

King.

Shew me, where the Houſe of Commons was ever a Court of Judicature in that
kind.

Preſident.

Serjeant take away the Priſoner.

King.

[[Page 18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=17)

Sir, Remember that the King is not ſuffered to declare his Reaſons, for the
Libertie and Immunities of his ſub­jects.

Preſident.,

Sir That Freedome of ſpeech is not permitted to you, how great a friend you
have been to the laws and the Liberties of the people, let England and all the
world judge!

King.

Sir, by your leave, I have alwayes loved the Liberty, the Immunities, & Laws
of the ſubjects; If I have defended myſelf by Arms, I have not taken them up
againſt the people, but for them.

Preſident.

You muſt obey the De­cree of the Court, you give no anſwer to the Charge
againſt you.

King.

Well Sir!

And ſo was he brought to the Houſe of Sir Robert Cotton; and the Court was
adjourned to the Painted Chamber, untill Wedneſday following at twelve of the
clock at what hour they intended to adjourn a­gain to Weſtminſter-hal, where
all, whom it doth concern, are commanded to be pre­ſent.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=17)

#### 1.4. The third dayes proceedings againſt the late King at the High Court
of Juſtice, Tueſday Jan. 23. 1648.

THe Cryer according to the Cuſtome, having with his Oyes commanded ſilence and
at­tention; the King being ſate, Mr. At­turney Genrall turning to the L.
Pre­ſident ſpake in theſe words.

May it pleaſe your Lordſhip: This is now the third time that by the great
grace and favour of this High Court the Priſoner hath been brought to the Bar,
and yet by reaſon of his refuſall to put in his Anſwer, there is yet no iſſue
joyned in the cauſe. My Lord, I did at the firſt exhibit a Charge againſt him,
containing the higheſt practices of Treaſon, that were ever wrought on the
Theater of England. That a King of England truſted to keep the Lawes of
England, and who had taken an Oath ſo to do, & had tribute paid him for that
end, [[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=18)
ſhould be guilty of ſo wicked a deſign as to ſubvert our Laws, and introduce
an arbitrary and tyrannical Govern­ment, and ſet up his ſtandard of warre
againſt his Parliament and his people, and I did humbly pray in the behalf of
the people of England, that he might ſpeedily be required to make an anſwer to
his charge.

But my Lord, inſtead of making an anſwer, he did then diſpute the Authority of
this Tribunal, and your Lordſhip being pleaſed to give him a further day to
put in his anſwer, which was yeſterday, I did move a­gaine that he might be
required to put in a direct and poſitive anſwer to his charge, either by
denying or confeſſing it; but he was then pleaſed to debate the Juriſdiction
of the Court, although he was commanded to give a poſitive anſwer.

My Lord, by reaſon of this great de­lay of Juſtice, I ſhall humbly move for
ſpeedy judgement againſt him I may preſſe your Lordſhip upon the known Rules
of the Laws of the Land, that if a priſoner ſhall ſtand in contempt [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=18) and not plead
guilty or not guilty to the charge given againſt him, it, by an implicite
confeſſion, ought to be taken pro confeſſo, as I may inſtance in divers who
have deſerved more favor then the priſoner at the Bar hath done But I ſhall
preſſe upon the whole fact. The Houſe of Commons, the Supream Authority of the
Kingdome, have de­clared, (my Lord) that it is notorious. The matter of the
charge is true, and clear as chryſtall, or as the Sun that ſhineth at Noon
day, in which my Lord Preſident, if your Lordſhip and the Court be not
ſatisfied, I have ſeve­rall witneſſes on the behalf of the people of England
to produce, and therefore I do humbly pray, and not ſo much I, as the innocent
blood that hath been ſhed, the cry whereof is great for Juſtice and Judgement,
that ſpeedy Judgement may be pronoun­ced againſt the priſoner at the Bar.

Preſident.

Sir, you have heard what hath been moved by Mr. Sol­licitor on the behalfe of
the King­dome againſt you. Sir you may well remember, and if you do not, the
[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=19) Court
cannot forget the delayes which you have made. You have been pleaſed to
propound ſome Queſtions, and amply you have had your reſolu­tion on them, you
have been often told that the Court did affirm their own juriſdiction; & that
it was not for you nor any other man to diſpute the Juriſdiction of the
higheſt Authority of England, from which there is no ap­peal, and touching
which there muſt be no diſpute; yet you did deport your ſelf in that manner,
that you gave no obedience, nor did acknow­ledge any Authority either in them
or the Supream Court of Parliament that conſtituted this high Court of
Juſtice. Sir, the Court gives you to underſtand that they are very ſen­ſible
of theſe demurres, and that be­ing thus authoriſed by the High Court of
England, they ought not to be trifled withall, eſpecially, ſeeing if they
pleaſe, they may take advantage of theſe delayes, and according to the rules
of Juſtice, proceed and pro­nounce Judgement againſt you: Ne­vertheleſſe they
are ſo favourable as [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=19) to give
direction to me, and therefore on their behalfe I do require you to make a
poſitive anſwer to this charge, that hath been read againſt you. Ju­ſtice
knows no reſpect of perſons. You are to give your poſitive and finall Anſwer
in plain Engliſh, whether guilty or not guilty, of the Treaſon laid to your
charge.

The King having meditated a little did anſwer in theſe words. When I was here
yeſterday, I deſired to ſpeak for the Liberties of the people of England, I
de­ſire yet to know, whether without interru­ption, I may ſpeak freely or not.

Preſident.

Sir, on the like Queſtion you had yeſterday the reſolution of this Court; you
were told that ha­ving a charge of ſo high a nature a­gainſt you, your work
was to acknow­ledge the Juriſdiction of the Court, and to anſwer the charge;
after you have done that, you ſhall be heard at large to make what defence you
can for your ſelf; but Sir, the Court com­mands me to make known unto you that
you are not permited to run into any other diſcourſes, untill ſuch time [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=20) that you have
returned a poſitive Anſwer to the matter that is charged upon you.

King.

I value not the charge a ruſh: It is the Liberty of the people of England that
I ſtand for. For me who am your King, and ſhould be an example to all the
Courts in England to uphold Juſtice, and main­tain the old Laws; for me I ſay
to acknow­ledge a new Court, that I never heard of before, is a thing that I
knowe not how to do. You did ſpeak very well on the firſt day. I came hither,
concerning the obliga­tions that I have laid upon me by God, for the
maintenance of the Liberties of my people. I do acknowledge that I do ow the
ſame obligations to God and my people, to defend as much as in me lies the
ancient Laws of the Kingdome: therefore untill I be ſatisfied that it is not
againſt the fun­damental Laws of the Kingdome, I can put in no particulars to
the Charge. If you will give me time, I will ſhew you my Reaſons wherefore I
cannot do it; and Here being interrupted, he ſaid. By your favour you ought
not to interrupt me. How I came here I do not know. There is no law to make
your King your priſoners, I was in a [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=20) Treaty upon the
publick faith of the King­dome, that was the known—two Houſes of Parliament,
that was the Repre­ſentative of the Kingdome; and when I had almoſt made an
end of the Treaties; I was hurried away, and brought thither; and therefore I
would—

Preſident.

Sir, you muſt know the pleaſure of the Court.

King,

By your favour Sir,—

Preſident.

Nay Sir, by your favour you may not be permitted to run into theſe diſcourſes,
you appear here as a Delinquent, you have not acknow­ledged the Authority of
the Court, the Court once more doth command you to give your poſitive Anſwer?

M▪ Broughton Do your Duty.

King Duty Sir.

M. Broughton reads, Charls Stuart, King of England, you are accuſed in the
behalfe of the Commons of England of di­vers high Crimes and Treaſons, which
Charge hath been read unto you; The Court now requires you to give your
poſitive and finall anſwer either by way of confeſſion or by deniall of the
Charge.

King.

Sir, I ſay againe unto you, If [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=21) thereby I may
give ſatisfaction to the people of England of the uprightnes of my
pro­ceedings, not by way of anſwer, but to ſa­tisfie them that I have done
nothing againſt that truſt, that hath been committed to me: I would do it; but
to acknowledge a new Court, againſt their priviledges, to alter the
Fundamentall Laws of the Kingdome, you muſt excuſe me, if I ſhall refuſe to do
it.

Preſident

Sir, This is the third time, that you have publiquely diſ­owned this Court,
and put an af­front upon it. How far you have pre­ſerved the priviledges of
the People, your actions have ſpoke: And truly Sir, If mens intentions can be
known by their actions, you have written your intentions in bloody Characters
throughout the whole Kingdome: But Sir, you are to un­derſtand the pleaſure of
the Court —Clerk Record the default—. And Gentlemen, you that are a guard to
the priſoner, take him back again.

King.

I will onely adde this one word, If it were onely my own particular, I would
[[Page 27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=21) not ſay
any more, nor interrupt you at all.

Preſident.

Sir, you have heard the pleaſure of the Court, and notwith­ſtanding you will
not underſtand it, you are to finde that you are before a Court of Juſtice

The King going forth, Proclamation was made, that all perſons, who then
appeared; and had further to doe with the Court, might depart into the Painted
Chamber, to which place the Court adjourned, being reſolved to meet again in
Weſtminſter-hall by ten of the Clock the next morning.

Wedneſday January 24.

The Court being this day imployed upon Examinations of witneſſes, and other
things, in order to their next proceedings, did appoint one of their Ʋſhers to
give no­tice to the people there aſſembled to appear on further ſummons.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=22)

#### 1.5. The laſt proceedings againſt the King, wherein they pro­nounc'd
Sentence up­on him, on Saturday January 27. 1648.

SIlence being commanded by the Crier, the Court was called, and Serjeant
Bradſhaw the Lord Pre­ſident, was that day in a ſcarlet Gown. There were
preſent that day, ſixty and eight Members of the Court.

The King turning to the Lord Preſident ſaid; I ſhall deſire to be heard ſome
few words, and I ſhall give no occaſion of in­terruption.

Preſident.

You may anſwer in due time, heare the Court firſt.

King.

If it pleaſe you Sir, I deſire to be heard; and I ſhall not give any occaſion
of interruption, and it is only in a word. A [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=22) ſudden
Judgement—

Preſident

Sir you ſhall be heard (as I have told you) in due time, but you muſt hear the
Court firſt.

King.

Sir, What I am to ſpeake will be in order, as I conceive, to what I be­lieve
the Court will ſay, and therefore Sir, I deſire to be heard, A haſty judgement
is not ſo ſoon recalled.

Preſident.

Sir, you ſhall be heard before judgement be given, and in the mean time, you
ought to for­bear.

King.

Well Sir I ſhall be heard before the judgement be given.

Preſident.

Gentlemen, it is well known to all or the greateſt part of you here preſent,
that the priſoner at the Bar hath been ſeveral times con­vented, and brought
before this Court, to make anſwer to a charge of Treaſon, and other high
Crimes, exhibited againſt him in the Name of the people of England, to which
charge being oftentimes commanded to an­ſwer; he hath been ſo far from
ſub­miting to the Court, as he hath un­der tooke to object againſt, & diſpute
[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=23) the
Authority of this Court, & of the High Court of Parliament, who con­ſtituted
this Court to try and judge him; but being over-ruled in that, and commanded
to make anſwer; he was ſtill pleaſed to perſevere in his contumacie and
refuſed to ſubmit to anſwer; whereupon the Court, that they may not be wanting
to them­ſelves, and to the truſt repoſed in them; nor that any mans wilfulneſs
ſhall prevent the courſe of Juſtice; have conſidered of the contempt, and of
that conſequence which in Law doth ariſe on that contempt. They have likewiſe
conſidered of the noto­riouſneſs of the Fact charged upon the priſoner, and
upon the whole matter are reſolved, and have agreed upon a Sentence to be now
pronoun­ced againſt him, but in regard he hath deſired to be heard before
Sentence he read and pronounced, the Court is reſolved to heare him: yet Sir,
thus much I muſt tell you before hand, of which alſo you have been mind­ed at
the other Courts, that if what you are to propoſe ſhall tend to diſ­pute
[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=23) the
Juriſdiction of the Court, you are not to be heard therein: you have offerd it
formerly, and you have indeed ſtruck at the root, which is the power and
Supream Authority of the Commons of England, of which this Court will admit no
debate; and indeed it would be an unreaſonable thing in them ſo to do, being a
Court which doth act upon that Authority which they have received from them;
they will not preſume to judge upon their Superiours, from whom there is no
appeal. But Sir, If you have any thing to ſay in defence of your ſelfe,
concerning the matter with which you are charged; the Court hath given me
command to let you know, they will hear you.

King.

Since I perceive, you will not hear any thing of Debate concerning that which
I confeſs I thought moſt material for the peace of the Kingdom, and the
Liberty of the Subject; I ſhall wave it, and speake nothing of it, only I muſt
tell you, that theſe many daies all things have been taken from me, but that I
call more dear unto me than my life, which is my conſcience and my Honour;
[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=24) and if I
had reſpect to my life more than to the peace of the Kingdom, and the Liberty
of the Subject; I ſhould certainly have made a particular defence for my ſelf,
for by that at leaſt I might have deferred an ugly ſen­tence which I expect to
paſs upon me. There­fore undoubtedly; Sir, as a man that hath ſome
underſtanding, ſome knowledge of the world if that my true zeal to my
Countrey, had not over-born the care of my own pre­ſervation, I ſhould have
gone another way to work than now I have done. Now Sir, I conceive that a
haſty ſentence once paſſed may ſooner be repented then revocked; and truly the
ſame fervent deſire I have for the peace of the Kingdom, & the Liberty of the
Subject, more than my own particulars, doth make me now at laſt move that,
having ſomething to ſay concerning both, I may be heard before my Sentence be
pronounced, be­fore the Lords and Commons in the Painted Chamber. This delay
cannot be prejudi­cial to you whatſoever I ſhall utter. If I ſpeake not
reaſon▪ thoſe that heare me muſt be my Judges, but if it be Reaſon, and really
for the welfare of the Kingdome; and the Libertie of the ſubject; I am ſure of
it; it will be well worth the bearing. Therefore [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=24) I conjure you as
you love that which you pretend (I hope it is real) the Libertie of the
Subject, and the peace of the Kingdom, that you will grant me the hearing
before ſen­tence be paſt. I onely deſire this, that you will take this into
your conſideration. It may be you have not heard of it before hand, If you
thinke well of it; I will retire, and you may thinke of it; but if I cannot
get this Libertie; I do here proteſt, that ſo fair ſhews of Libertie and peace
are but pure ſhews and no otherwiſe, if in this you will not hear your King?

Preſident.

Sir, you have now ſpoken.

King.

Yes, Sir.

Preſident.

And this which you have ſpoken, is but a further declining of the Juriſdiction
of this Court, which is the thing wherein you were limited before.

King.

Pray excuſe me, Sir, for my in­terruption, becauſe you do miſtake me. It is
not a declining of it, you do judge me before you heare me ſpeake; I ſay I
will not, I do not decline it; although I cannot acknowledge the Juriſdiction
of it in this, give me leave to ſay, that though [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=25) I would not,
though I did not acknowledge it in this; yet I proteſt, this is not to
de­cline it, ſince I ſay, If that which I ſhall propound be not for the peace
of the King­dome, and the Liberty of the ſubject, then the ſhame is mine: Now
I deſire that you will take this into your conſideration; if you will, I will
withdraw.

Preſident.

Sir; This is not altoge­ther new, that you have offered unto us, I ſay, it is
not altogether new unto us, although it be the firſt time that in perſon you
have offered it to the Court Sir, you ſay you do not decline the Juriſdiction
of the Court.

King.

Not in this that I have ſaid.

Preſident.

I underſtand you well enough Sir, Nevertheleſs that which you have propounded
ſeems to be contrary to that which you have ſaid, for the Court are ready to
proceed to ſentence: It is not (as you ſay) that they will not hear their
King: For they have been ready to hear you, they have patiently waited your
pleaſure for three Court daies toge­ther, to hear what you would anſwer to the
peoples charge againſt you, to [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=25) which you have
not vouchſafed to give any anſwer at all. Sir, this doth tend to a further
delay, and truly Sir, Such delays as theſe, neither may the Kingdom nor
Juſtice admit: You have had the advantage of three ſeveral dayes to have
offered in this kind, what you were pleaſed to have propounded to the Lords
and Commons. This Court is founded upon the Authority of the Commons of
England, in whom reſteth the Su­pream Juriſdiction: That which you now tender
to the Court, is to be tried by another Juriſdiction, a co-ordinate
Juriſdiction, I know very well, how you have expreſſed your ſelf, and that
notwithſtanding, what you would propound to the Lords and Commons, yet
nevertheſeſs, you would proceed on here; I did hear you ſay ſo, but Sir, That
which you would offer there, whatſoever it be, muſt needs be in delay of
Juſtice here, ſo as if this Court be reſolved and prepared for the ſentence,
they are bound in Juſtice not to grant that which you ſo much deſire; but,
Sir, [[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=26)
according to your deſire, and becauſe you ſhall know the full pleaſure of the
Court upon that, which you have moved, the Court ſhall withdraw for a time.

King

Shall I withdraw?

Preſident.

Sir, you ſhall know the the pleaſure of the Court preſent­ly.

The Court withdraws for half an hour into the Court of Wards, Serjeant at
Arms, the Court gives you command that the pri­ſoner withdraw, and that about
half an hour hence the priſoner be returned again.

The time being expired, the Court re­turned, and the Lord Preſident com­manded
the Serjeant at Arms to ſend for his priſoner.

The King being come attended with his Guard, The Lord Preſident ſaid unto him,
Sir, you were pleaſed to make a motion here to the Court, concerning the
deſire you had to propound ſomething to the Lord [...] and Commons in the
Painted Cham­ber for the peace of the Kingdome Sir, you did in effect receive
an An­ſwer before the Court adjourned [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=26) Truely Sir,
their adjournment and withdrawing was pro formâ tantum, for it did not ſeem to
them, that there was any difficulty in the thing; they have conſidered of what
you moved, and have conſidered of their own Authority, which is grounded, as
it hath been often, ſaid, upon the Su­pream Authority of the Commons of
England, Aſſembled in Parliament. The Court doth act according to their
Commiſſion. Sir, I have recei­ved an expreſs Order from the Court, to acquaint
you, that they have been too much delayed by you already, and that this which
you have now offered, hath occaſioned ſome little further delay; they are
Judges ap­pointed by the higheſt Judges, and Judges are no more to delay than
they are to deny Juſtice; they are good words in the old Charter of England,
Nulli negabimus, nulli vende­mus, nulli deferremus juſtitiam; There muſt be no
delay, but Sir, the Truth is, and ſo every man here obſerves it, that you have
much delayed them by your contempt and default; for [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=27) which long ſince
they might have proceeded to judgement againſt you; therefore notwithſtanding,
what you have offered, they are reſolved to proceed to puniſhment and to
judgement; and this is their unani­mous reſolution.

King.

Sir, I ſee it is in vain for me to diſpute, I am no Sceptick to doubt, or to
deny the power that you have: I do know that you have power enough. Sir, I
confeſs, I do believe it would have been advantagious to the peace of the
Kingdom, if you would have been pleaſed to take the pains to ſhew the
lawfulneſs of your power. As for this delay, which I have deſired, I do
confeſſe it is a delay, but it is a delay that is important for the peace of
the King­dom: It is not my perſon that I look on alone; It is the welfare of
the Kingdom, the peace of the Kingdome. It is an old ſaying, that we ſhould
think on long, but perform great matters ſuddenly. Therefore, Sir, I do ſay
again, I do put at your doors, all the in­conveniences of a haſty ſentence. I
have been here now a full week, this day eight dayes, was the day in which I
made in this place, my firſt appearance; The ſhort reſpite but [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=27) of a day, or two
longer, may give peace unto the Nation; whereas an haſty jugde­ment may bring
ſuch a perpetual trouble and inconvenience upon it, that is, the Child unborn
may repent it. And there­fore once more out of the duty I owe to God, and to
my Country, I do deſire that I may be heard by the Lords and Commons in the
painted Chamber, or any other place that you will appoint me.

Preſident.

Sir, you have been already anſwered to what you have moved, it being the ſame
motion which you made before, for which you have had the reſolution and the
judgement of the Court in it; and the Court would now be ſatisfied from you,
whether you have any more to ſay for your ſelfe then you have yet ſaid, before
they proceed to ſentence.

King.

I ſay this, Sir, that if you will but hear me, and give me this delay, I doubt
not, but I ſhall give ſome ſatisfaction to all that are preſent, and to my
people that are abſent; and therefore I require you, as you will anſwer it at
the dreadfull day of Judgement, that you will once again take it into your
conſideration.

Preſident.

[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=28)

Sir, I have received in­ſtructions from the Court.

King.

Well Sir,

Preſident.

If this muſt be reinfor­ced, or any thing of this nature, your anſwer muſt be
the ſame, as it was before, and they will proceed to ſen­tence, if you have no
more to ſay?

King.

Sir, I have nothing more to ſay, onely I deſire that this may be entred what I
have ſaid.

Preſident.

The Court Sir, then hath ſomething elſe to ſay to you, which although I know
will be very unwelcom; yet notwithſtanding, they are reſolved to diſcharge
their duty.

Sir, you have ſpoken very well of a precious thing, that you call a peace; and
it were much to be wiſhed, that God had put it into your heart, that you had
as effectually endea­voured, and ſtudied the peace of the Kingdome, as in
words you ſeem to pretend; but as the other day, it was repreſented to you,
that actions muſt expound intentions: Your actions have been clean contrary,
and truly, Sir, it doth appear very plainly to [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=28) the Court, that
you have gone upon very erroneous principles. This Kingdom hath felt it to
their ſmart, and it will be no comfort to you, to think of it; for Sir, you
have been heard to let fall ſuch language, as if you had not been ſubject to
the Law, or that the Law had not been your Superiour. The Court is very
ſen­ſible of it, I hope, ſo are all the under­ſtanding people of England, That
the Law is your Superiour: you ought to have ruled according to the law, you
ought to have done ſo, and your pretence hath been, that you have done ſo: But
Sir, the queſtion is who ſhall be the expoſitors of the Law, whether you and
your party out of the Courts of Juſtice ſhall take upon you to expound the
Law? Or whether the Courts of Juſtice, ſhall be the expounders themſelves?
Nay, this Sovereign and high Court of Juſtice, the Parliament of England, who
may well be obliged to be the higheſt expounders of the Law, ſince they are
the Sole makers of it: Sir, for you to ſet your ſelfe with your [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=29) ſingle
judgement, or for thoſe who adhere unto you, to ſet themſelves againſt the
higheſt Court of Juſtice, there is no Law for it. Sir, as the Law is your
ſuperior, ſo truly, there is ſomething that is Superiour to the Law, which is
the Parent, or Author of the Law, and that is the people of England: For as
they are thoſe who at firſt (as other Countries have done) did chuſe unto
themſelves this form of Government, that Juſtice might be adminiſtred and the
peace pre­ſerved: ſo they gave Laws unto their Governors, according to which
they were to govern; and if thoſe Laws ſhould have proved inconveni­ent, or
prejudicial to the publick, they had power in them reſerved to themſelves to
alter, as they ſhould finde cauſe.

It is very true, what ſome of your ſide have alleadged; Rex non habet parem in
regno This Court will affirm the ſame in ſome ſenſe, that whileſt King, you
have not your Peer; for you are major ſingulis, but they will aver again, that
you are minor univer­ſis; [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=29) and the ſame
Author tels you, that in exhibitione juris, you have no power, but they are
quaſi minimus

This we know to be Law, Rex haebt ſuperiorem Deum & legem, etiam & Curi­am,
and ſo ſayes the ſame Author; and he makes bold to proceed further Debent ei
fraenum ponere, they ought to bridle him. We know very well the ſtories of
old: we cannot be ignorant of thoſe Wars that were called the Barons Wars,
when the Noblity of the Land did ſtand out for the Liber­ty and the property
of the Subject, and would not ſuffer the Kings that did invade their Liberties
to play the Tryants, but did call them to an ac­count for it, and did fraenum
ponere But Sir, If the Nobility of the Land do forbear to do their duty now,
and are not ſo mindfull of their own Honour and the Kingdomes good, as the
Barons of England of old have been; certainly, the Commons of England will not
be unmindefull of what is requiſite for their preſerva­tion and their ſafety.
Juſtitiae fruendi cauſa Reges conſtituti ſunt. By this we [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=30) learn, that the
end of having Kings, or Governours, is for their enjoying of Juſtice, that is
the end. Now Sir, If the King will go contrary to that end, or if any
Governour will go contrary to the end of his govern­ment, he muſt underſtand,
that he is but an Officer in truſt, and that he ought to diſcharge that truſt,
and order is to be taken for the animad­verſion and puniſhment of ſuch an
offending Governour.

Sir, This is not a Law of yeſter­day (ſince the time of the diviſion betwixt
you and the Parliament) but it is a Law of old; And we know very well both the
Authors and the Authorities that acquaint us what the Law was in that point,
on the election of Kings, when they took their Oath to be true unto the
peo­ple; and if they did not obſerve it, there were thoſe remedies in­ſtituted
which are called Parlia­ments. The Parliaments were they that were to adjudge
(the very words of the Authors) the plainneſs and wrongs done by the King and
Queen, or by their Children; ſuch wrongs e­eſpecially, [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=30) when the people
could have no where elſe a remedy. Sir, this is the Caſe of the people of
Eug­land, they could not have their re­medy elſe where but in Parliament.

Sir, Parliaments were inſtituted for that intent, it was their main end, that
the grievances of the people might be redreſſed, and truly, if the Kings of
England had been rightly mindefull of themſelves, they were never more in
Majeſtie or State, than in the time of the Parliament: but how forgetfull ſome
have been, Hiſtories have informed us; and we our ſelves have a miſerable, a
lamen­table, and a ſad experence of it.

Sir, by the old Laws of England (I ſpeake theſe things the rather to you,
becauſe you were pleaſed to affirme the other day, that you had as much
knowledge in the Law as moſt Gentlemen of England. It is very well Sir, and
truly Sir, it is very ſit for the Gentlemen of England to un­derſtand the Laws
under which they muſt live, and by which they muſt be governed; And then Sir,
the Scri­pture ſayes, they that know their Ma-Masters [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=31) will and do it
not; you know what follows, the Law is your Ma­ſter, the acts of Parliament)
the Par­liaments were anciently to be kept twice in the year, as we find in
our old Author, that the Subject upon any occaſion might have a remedie and a
redreſs for his grievance. After­wards by ſeverall Acts of Parliament in the
dayes of your predeceſſor Ed­ward the third; they were to be but once a year.
What the Intermiſſion of Parliaments in your times hath produced, is very well
known, and the ſad conſequences of it; as alſo what in the interim inſtead of
Parlia­ments, there hath been by you, by a high and arbitrary hand intro­duced
upon the people. But when God by his Providence had ſo far brought it about,
that you could no longer decline the calling of a Par­liament▪ a Parliament
was called; where it may appear, what your ends were againſt your ancient and
Native Kingdom of Scotl but this Parliament of Engl. not ſerving your turn
againſt them, you were pleaſed to diſſolve [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=31) it. Not long
after, another great ne­ceſſitie occaſioned the calling of this Parliament,
and what your deſignes and indeavours all along have been for the cruſhing and
confounding of it, hath been moſt notorious to the whole Kingdom. And truly
Sir, in that you did ſtrike at all, it had been a ſure way to have brought
about that which this Charge doth lay upon you; your intention to ſubvert the
fundemental Laws of the Land, for the great Bulwarks of the peoples Li­berty,
is the Parliament of England, and to ſubvert and root up that, which your aim
hath been to do, would certainly at one blow, have confounded the Liberties
and the properties of England.

Truly Sir, It makes me call to minde (I cannot forbeare to expreſs it) for
Sir, we muſt deal plainly with you according to the merits of your Cauſe, for
ſo is our commiſſion, It makes me, I ſay, to call to minde, what I have read
of a great Romane Em­peror, a great Roman tyrant, may I call him, Caligula by
name, who wiſhed [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=32) that the people
of Rome had but one Neck, that at one blow he might cut it off: Your
proceedings have been ſomething like to this, the people of England have been
& are no where elſe to be repreſented but in Parliament; and could you have
but confounded that, you had at one blow cut off the neck of England But God
hath reſerved better things for us and hath been pleaſed to breake your Forces
and to over­throw your deſignes, and to bring your perſon in to cuſtody, that
you might be anſwerable unto Juſtice.

Sir, we know very well that it is a queſtion which hath been much preſſed by
your ſide, By what Pre­ſidents we ſhall proceed, Truly Sir, for Preſidents, I
ſhall not at this pre­ſent make any long diſcourſe on that ſubject; howſoever,
I ſhall ac­quaint them, that it is no new thing to cite Preſidents almoſt out
of all Nations, where the people (when power hath been in their hands) have
not ſticked to call their Kings to an account, and where a change [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=32) of Government
hath enſued upon the occaſion of the Tyranny and miſgovernment of thoſe that
have been placed over the people. I will not waſte time to mention France, or
Spain, or the Empire of Ger­many, or any other Countrey; Vo­lumnes may be
written of it: But truey Sir, that Preſident of the Kingdom of Arragon hath by
ſome of us been thought upon. The Ju­ſtice of Arragon, is as a man tan­quam in
medio poſitus, it is placed between the people of that Coun­trey and the King
of Spain; ſo that if wrong be done by the King of Arragon, the Juſtice of
Arragon hath power to reform that wrong, and he is acknowledged the Kings
Superiour; and bring the grand priſoner of the Priviledges, and Li­berties of
the people; he hath pro­ſecuted againſt the Kings for their miſgovernment.

Sir, What the Tribunes were heretofore to Rome, and what the Ephori were to
the State of Lace­demon, we ſufficiently know, they [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=33) were as the
Parliament of England to the Engliſh State: and though Rome ſeemed to have
loſt her Li­berty when once the Emperours were conſtituted; yet you ſhall find
ſome exemplary Acts of Juſtice even done by the Senate of Rome, on the great
Tyrant of his time, Ne­ro, who was by them condemned and adjudged unto death.
But why Sir, ſhould I make mention of theſe Forreign Hiſtories and Ex­amples
unto you. If we ſhall look but over the Tweed, we ſhall finde Examples enough
in your Native Kingdom of Scotland. If we look on your firſt King Forguſius,
he was an elective King, he died and left two Sons, both in their minority:
The elder brother afterwards giving ſmall hopes to the people, that he would
govern them well; ſo becauſe he endeavoured to have ſupplanted his Uncle, who
was cho­ſen by the people to govern them in his minority; he was rejected by
the people for it, and the younger Brother was choſen, &c.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=33) Sir, I
will not take upon me to expreſs what your Hiſtories do at large declare; you
know very well that you are the hundred and nineth King of Scotland; to
men­tion all the Kings, which the peo­ple of that Kingdome, according to their
power and Priviledge, have made bold to deal withall, either to baniſh,
impriſon, or put to death, would be too long a ſtory for this time and place.
Reges (ſay your own Authors) we created Kings, at firſt, Leges, &c. we impoſed
Laws upon them, and as they were choſen by the ſuffrages of the peo­ple at the
firſt, ſo upon the ſame oc­caſion, by the ſame ſuffrages they may be taken
down again; and of this, I may be bold to ſay, that no Kingdom in the World,
hath yielded a more plentifull experi­ence, than your Native Kingdom of
Scotland, on the depoſition and the puniſhment of their tranſ­greſſing Kings.

I need not go far for an Ex­ample, your Grand-mother was [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=34) ſet aſide, and
your Father an In­fant Crown'd. This State hath done the like in England. The
Par­liament and people of England, have made bold to call their King to an
account therein, frequent Examples of it in the Saxons time, the time before
the Conqueſt, and ſince the Conqueſt, there have not wanted ſome Preſidents:
King Ed­ward the ſecond, King Richard the ſecond, were ſo dealt with by the
Parliament, and were both depo­ſed, and deprived, and truly Sir, whoſoever
ſhall look into their ſtories, ſhall not finde the Articles that are charged
upon them to come near to the height, and the Capitalneſſe of the crimes, that
are laid to your charge, nothing near.

Sir, you were pleaſed the other day to alledge your deſcent, and I did not
contradict it, but take all together, if you go higher than the Conqueſt, you
ſhall find that for almoſt a thouſand years theſe thinge have been, and if you
come [[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=34) down
ſince the Conqueſt, you are the four and twentieth King from William called
the Conquerour, and you ſhall find one half of them to come meerly from the
State, and not meerly upon the point of Deſcent. This were ea­ſie to be
inſtanced. The time muſt not be loſt that way. I ſhall only repreſent what a
grave and learned Judge ſaid in his time, who was well known unto you, the
words are ſince printed for poſteri­ty: That although there were ſuch a thing
as a Deſcent many times, yet the Kings of England ever held the greateſt
aſſurance of their Titles, when it was declared by Parliament. And Sir, your
Oath, and the manner of your Coronation, doth plainly ſhew, that the Kings of
England, although it's true by the Law, the next per­ſon in bloud is deſigned,
yet if there were a juſt cauſe to refuſe him, the people of England might do
it. For there is a Contract and a bar­gain made betwixt the King and [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=35) his people, and
your Oath is taken, and certainly Sir, the Bond is re­ciprocall, for as you
are Leige Lord, ſo are they Leige Subjects, and we know very well that
Legantis eſt du­plex, the one is a Bond of perfecti­on, that is due from the
Soveraign, the other is a Bond of Subjection which is due from the Subject,
for if this Bond be once broken, fare­well Soveraignty,  [...]ubjectio trahit,
&c.

Theſe things may not be deny­ed, for I ſpeak it the rather (and I pray God it
may work upon your heart) that you may be ſenſible of your miſcarriages, for
whether you have been as you ought to be, a Protector of England, or a
de­ſtroyer of England, let all Eng­land judge, or all the world that hath
beheld it; and though Sir, you have it by inheritance, in the way that is
ſpoken of, yet it cannot be denyed, but your Office is an Of­fice of Truſt,
and indeed an Office of the higheſt Truſt that can be lodged in any ſingle
perſon. For as you were the grand Adminiſtra­tor [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=35) of Juſtice, and
others were but as your Delegates, to ſee it execu­ted through your Dominions.
If your great Office were to do Juſtice, and preſerve your people from wrong,
if inſtead of execu­ting Juſtice, you will be the grand and publick diſturber
of the peace, ſurely this is contrary to your Of­fice and your Truſt. Now Sir,
if it be an Office of Inheritance (as you ſpeak of your Title by de­ſcent) let
all men underſtand, that great Offices are ſeizable, and for­feitable, as if
you had it but for a year, or for your life. It will therefore much concern
you to take into your ſerious conſidera­tion, your great miſcarriages in this
nature.

Truly Sir, I ſhall not in this place undertake to give you the particulars of
the many miſcarri­ages of your Reign, whatſoever they have been, they are
notori­ouſly known. It had been happy for the Kingdome, and for your ſelf
alſo, if they had not been ſo [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=36) much known, and
ſo much felt, as they are every where complained on, and reported.

Sir, that we are now upon by the command of the higheſt Court, hath been and
is to bring you to your Triall, and to judge you for theſe great offences of
yours: Sir, the Charge hath called you Ty­rant, a Traytor, a Murtherer, and a
publike Enemy to the Common-wealth. Sir, it had been well, if theſe terms
might rightly and juſt­ly have been omitted; nay, if any one of them all.

King,

Ha!

Preſident,

Truly, we have been told, Rex eſt, qui bene regit, Tyran­nus qui populum
opprimit, and if that be the definition of a Tyrant, then ſee if you come
ſhort of it in your Actions, and whether not the higheſt Tyrant by that way of
ar­bitrary Government, which you ſought to introduce, and were put­ting upon
the people. Examine with your ſelf, if that were not as high an act of
Tyranny, as any of [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=36) your
predeceſſours were guilty of, yea, many degrees beyond it.

Sir, the Term Traytor cannot be ſpared, we ſhall eaſily conclude that it doth
enforce and denote a breach of Truſt, and it muſt be ſup­poſed to be done by a
ſuperior, and therefore as the people of England might have incurred that
term, if they had been truly guilty of it, as to the definition of the Law; ſo
on the other ſide, when you did break you Truſt to the Kingdom, you did break
your Truſt to your ſuperior; For the Kingdom is that for which you were
truſted; And therefore when you are called to an account for this breach of
truſt, you are called to account by your ſuperior. Minimus Majorem in
judi­cium vocat: And Sir, the people of England cannot be ſo wanting to
themſelves, (whom God hath dealt miraculouſly and gloriouſly for) they having
both power and their great enemy in their hand, but they muſt proceed to
Juſtice to themſelves and to you; For Sir, [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=37) the Court could
heartily deſire that you would lay your hand up­on your heart, and conſider,
what you have done amiſs, and that you would endeavour to make your peace with
God. Truly Sir, Theſe are two high Crimes, Tyranny and Treaſon. There is a
third, if thoſe had not been, and that is Murder, which is laid to your charge
alſo. All the bloody murders that have been committed ſince the Diviſion twixt
you and your people, muſt be laid to your charge. Sir, It is a hainous and a
crying ſin, and truly Sir, If any man will ask us what puniſhment is due unto
a murtherer, let Gods Law, let mans Law ſpeak. I will preſume you are ſo well
read in the holy Scripture, as that you know God himſelf hath ſaid concerning
the ſhedding of mans blood, Gen. 9. and Numb. 35. will tell you what the
puniſhment is, and this Court in the behalf of the Kingdome are ſenſible of
that innocent blood, that hath been ſhed, and the Land indeed ſtands [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=37) ſtill defiled
with that blood, and as the Text hath it It can no way be cleanſed, but by the
ſhedding of the blood of him who ſhed that blood. Sir, We know no diſpenſation
from this blood in the Commandment, Thou ſhalt do no Murther, we do not know
but that it extends to Kings as well as to the meaneſt peaſants, the meaneſt
of the people, the Command is univerſal. Sir, Gods Law forbids it, mans Law
forbids it; nor do we know that there is any manner of exception, not even in
mans Laws, for the puniſhment of Murther in you. Tis true, that in the Caſe of
Kings, every private hand is not to put forth its ſelf to this work, for their
reformation or puniſhment; but the people repreſented having power in their
hands (were there but one willfull Act of murder by you committed) have power
to convent you, and to puniſh you for it.

The weight, Sir, then lying upon you in all theſe reſpects, that have [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=38) been ſpoken, for
your Tyranny, Treaſon, Breach of truſt, and the murders that have been
commit­ted, ſurely it would drive you into a ſad conſideration concerning your
eternall eſtate: I know it can­not be acceptable to you, to heare any ſuch
things as theſe mention­ed from this Court, for ſo, do we call our ſelves and
juſtifie our ſelves to be a Court, and a High Court of Juſtice, authorized by
the higheſt and ſolemneſt Court of the King­dome, as hath been often already
ſaid. And although you have in­deavoured, what lay in you to diſ­court us; yet
we do take knowledge of our ſelves to be ſuch a Court, as can adminiſter
juſtice to you, as wee are bound in duty to it.

Sir, all I ſhall ſay, before the reading of the Sentence, is but this. The
Court doth heartily de­ſire, that you will ſeriouſly conſ­ider of thoſe
Evills, that you ſtand guilty of. You ſaid well the other day, you wiſhed us
to have God before our eyes. Truly Sir, I [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=38) hope all of us
have ſo, that God whom we acknowledge to be King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
that God with whom there is no reſpect of perſons; that God who is the avenger
of Innocent blood; that God have we before our eyes, that God who beſtowes a
Curſe up­on them, who is in the caſe of guilty malefactors that deſerve death,
do withhold their hands from ſhed­ding of blood: Sir, that God we have before
our eyes, and were it not that the Conſcience of our duty hath! called us into
this place, and this imployment, you ſhould have had no appearance of a Court
here. But Sir, we muſt preferre our reſpect unto God and to the Kingdom, above
any reſpects what­ſoever; and although at this pre­ſent, many of us, if not
all of us, are ſeverely threatned by ſome of your party, what they intend to
do; yet wee do here declare, that we ſhall not decline or forbear the doing of
our duty in the ad­miniſtration of Juſtice, even to [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=39) your ſelfe; and
that according to the merit of your offence; although God ſhould permit thoſe
men to effect all their bloody deſigns in in hand againſt us. Sir, we will
ſay, and will declare it as thoſe Children in the fiery furnace, who refuſed
to worſhip the Golden Image, that Nabuchadonazer had ſet up, That their God
was able to deliver them from the danger they were neer unto; but if he did
not deliver them, yet they would not fall down and worſhip the golden Image.
We ſhall make this application of it. That though we ſhould not be delivered
from▪ thoſe bloody hands & hearts, who conſpire the overthrow of the Kingdom
in generall, and of our ſelves in particular, for being actors in this great
work of Juſtice; though I ſay, we ſhould periſh in the work; yet by the grace
& in the ſtrength of God, we are reſolved to go on with it. And thoſe are the
intire reſolutions of us all.

Sir, I ſay, for your ſelfe that we [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=39) do heartily wiſh
and deſire that God would be pleaſed to give you a ſenſe of your ſins, that
you may ſee wherein you have done amiſſe, and that you may cry unto him, that
God would deliver you from bloody-guiltineſſe. A good King, David by Name, was
once guilty of that particular guilt; he was otherwiſe upright, ſaving in the
matter of Ʋriath. Truly Sir, the Hiſtory doth repreſent unto us, that he was a
repentant King, and he had died for his ſinne, but that God was pleaſed to be
indul­gent to him, and to grant him his pardon, Thou ſhalt not die (ſaith the
prophet) but the child ſhall die, Thou haſt given cauſe to the Enemies of God
to blaſpheme.

King.

I would onely deſire to be heard but one word, before you give ſentence, and
it is that (to ſatisfie the world when I am dead) you would but heare me
concerning thoſe great Imputations which you have laid unto my charge.

Preſident.

Sir, you muſt now give me leave to proceed, for I am not [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=40) far from your
Sentence, and your time is now paſt.

King.

I ſhall deſire you, that you will take theſe few words into your
con­ſideration; For what ſoever ſentence you ſhall pronounce againſt me in
reſpect of thoſe heavy imputations, which I finde you have laid to my charge;
yet Sir, It is moſt true that—

Preſident.

Sir, I muſt put you in minde, I muſt Sir, although at this time, eſpecially, I
would not wil­lingly interrupt you in any thing you have to ſay, which is
proper for us to admit; but Sir, you have not owned us as a Court, and you
looke upon us, as a ſort of people huddled together, and we know not what
uncivill language we re­ceive from your party.

King.

I know nothing of that.

Preſident.

You diſavow us as a Court, and therefore for you to addreſſe your ſelfe to us,
whom you do not acknowledge to be a Court, for us (I ſay) to judge what you
ſhall ſpeake is not to be permitted; and the truth is all along from the
[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=40) to
diſavow and diſown us; The Court needed not to have heard you one word; for
unleſs they be acknowledged a Court and in­gaged, it is not proper for you to
ſpeak.

Sir, We have given you too large an indulgence of time already, and admitted
ſo much delay, that we may not admit of any more. If it were proper for us, we
ſhould heare you very freely, not decline to hear the moſt that you▪ could
ſpeake to the greateſt ad­vantage for your ſelf, whether it were totall, or
but in part, excu­ſing thoſe great and hainous char­ges which are laid upon
you. But I ſhall trouble you no longer, your ſins are of ſo large a demenſion,
that if you do but ſeriouſly think of them, they will drive you into a ſad
conſideration; and we wiſh that they may improve in you a ſad and ſerious
repentance. And it is the deſire of the Court, that you may be ſo penitent for
what you have done amiſſe, that God [[Page
66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=41) may at leaſt,
have mercy on your better part. As for the other, it is our part and duties to
doe that which the law preſcribeth, we are not now here jus dare, but jus
dicere; we cannot be unmindfull of what the word of God tels us, To ac­quit
the guilty, is of an equall abomination, as to condemn the Innocent; we may
not acquit the guilty: What ſentence the law pro­nounceth to a traytor, a
tyrant, a murtherer, and a publike enemy to the Country, that ſentence you are
now to hear read unto you, and that is the Sentence of the Court.

Hereupon the Lord Preſident commanded the Sentence to be read; whereupon M.
King, who was Cryer of the Court, having commanded ſilence by his Oyes, the
Clerke read the ſentence, which was drawn up in Parchment, and did run in
theſe words.

Whereas the Commons of England in Parliament had appointed them an High Court
of Juſtice for the tryall of [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=41) Charls Stuart
King of England, be­fore whom he had been three times con­vented, and at the
firſt time, a Charge of High Treaſon and other Crimes and Miſdemeanors was
read in the be halfe of the Kingdome of England; which Charge followeth in
theſe words.

This Charge being read (ſaid the Clerk) Charls Stuard was re­quired to give
his anſwer, which he refuſed to do, but expreſſed theſe paſſages and many more
ſuch as theſe are, in refuſing to an­ſwer.

The Clerk (having repeated many paſſages, during the time of his triall, in
which the King ſhewed an averſeneſſe to acknowledge the Court) did proceed to
read the Sentence, which was in theſe words

For all which Treaſons and Crimes, this Court doth adjudge that the ſaid
Charls Stuart as a Tyrant, Traytor, Murtherer, and a publike Enemy, ſhall be
put to death by ſevering his Head from his Body.

The Sentence being read, the [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=42) Lord Preſident
ſaid; This Sentence now read and publiſhed is the Act, Sentence, Judgement,
and reſo­lution of the whole Court.

Hereupon, the Court ſtood up, as aſſenting to what the Preſident ſaid.

King.

Will you hear me one word Sir!

Preſident.

Sir, you are not to be heard after the Sentence.

King.

No Sir!

Preſident.

No Sir, by your fa­vour Sir,—Guard withdraw your Priſoner.

King.

I may ſpeak after the ſen­tence —By your favour Sir, I may ſpeak after
Sentence ever. The Guard drawing to him, he ſaid unto them; by your favour
hold: and turning to the Pre­ſident, he ſaid; the Sentence Sir,— I ſay Sir I
do—but being not permitted to proceed, he ſaid I am not ſuffered to ſpeak,
expect what Juſtice other people will have.

Cryer.

All manner of perſons, that have any thing elſe to do, are to depart at this
time, and to give [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=42) their attendance
in the Painted Chamber, to which place this Court doth forthwith adjourn it
ſelf.

Then the Court aroſe, and the Kings guard did bring him to Sir Rohert Cottons
houſe, and he was afterwards conducted to Saint Jameſes.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=43)

#### 1.6. The ſeverall Depoſi­tions of the pre­tended Witneſſes, as it is in
their Book printed in French.

##### 1.6.1. William Cuthbert of Patrington in Holdernes Gentleman,

HAth depoſed upon Oath, that be­ing at Hull-bridge nigh Bever­ly, he
diſcovered in July 1642. that there were levied about three hundred footmen
under the command of Robert Strickland, for the Kings guard; and [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=43) that about the
ſecond of the ſaid Month, which was Sunday, he ſaw about four or five of the
clock in the evening, a Troop of Horſe called the Princes Troop, enter
Beverly, at which time James Nelthorp was Mayor of the Town; and that he ſaw
the ſame day this Troop march from Beverly to Holdernes, where he ſaw
ammunition diſtributed to them, which were brought for them from about Humber.
Moreover the ſame, upon depoſition, ſaid, that the ſame Sunday night there
arrived at the gate of his houſe, called the Bridge of Hull nigh Berverly,
about three hundred footmen, that ſaid they were the Regi­ment of Sir Robert
Strickland, un­der the command of Lieutenant Col. Duncomb, and were called the
Kings guard, who forced open his door, and took poſſeſſion of his houſe, and
that the ſame night my Lord Newport and my Lord Carnarvan came to theſe
ſouldi­ers, with divers others, at which time the Deponent was informed that
Sir Tho­mas Gower Sheriff of that County, was preſent at this rendezvous and
had left order and expreſse command to ſtop [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=44) all Proviſions
from thoſe quarters, and that none ſhould be carried to Sir J. Ho­tham
Governour of Hull for the Par­liament, which Order was put into the hands of
the Deponent, being then Con­ſtable of that Pariſh, for the ſaid Lieu­tenant
Colonel Duncombe. The ſaid William Cutbert has depoſed in pro­ceſſe, that he
was driven out of his houſe by the ſoldiers, and was forced to retire to
Beverly with his Family: and that afterward, to wit, Thurſday next, as much as
he can remember, he ſaw the King come to Beverly, and go into my Lady Gees
houſes in which he ſaw him ſeverall times with Prince Charls, and the Duke of
York: and that the Mi­litia was raiſed in Holdernes, in the name and by the
command of the King, and he publiſhed himſelf every where. He hath farther
depoſed, that the night fol­lowing, theſe ſoldiers that had ſeized upon his
houſe, as was ſaid, which was the firſt act of hoſtility that was committed in
thoſe parts, they plundred alſo the Houſe of Colonel Ledgeers; and that after
this regiment of Colonel Strick­land was gone from the Bridge of Hull, [[Page
73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=44) where it had
quartered ten days, Colonel Wynewell ſeized upon it alſo with ſeven huudred
foot, that lodg'd there. Item he depoſed, that the Order which he ſhewed the
Court, is the originall of which we have ſpoken. As alſo that my Lord Lindſey
was made Generall of thoſe Forces, and of thoſe that were then levied, and
that he was brought before him upon report that he held in­telligence with Sir
J. Hotham Gover­nour of Hull, and that notice being given to the ſaid General,
that the De­ponent had proviſions of corn to ſend in­to Ireland, he was
prohibited to have them tranſported, or carried to any other place without the
Kings command or the ſaid Generals.

##### 1.6.2. John Bennet in the County of York, Glover.

HAving born arms on the Kings ſide, from the firſt day that he erected his
Standard at Nottingham, ſix years ſince, being examined upon [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=45) Oath, hath
depoſed, that working at his own Trade at Nottingham, he had ſeen the King two
or three times after his great Standard of War was erected, and at the ſame
time that it was diſplayd from the higheſt Tower of the Caſtle; and alſo that
he heard that the King was preſent the firſt day and the firſt time it was
erected: He ſaid far­ther that he then received his livery, and that Sir
William Pennyman gave cloth at that time to the Regiment of which he was, and
the ſaid Knight was Colonel of it, and that cloth was alſo given to the
Regiment of my Lord Lind­ſey, who was alſo then proclaimed then General of the
Army at the head of every Regiment; where the King alſo cauſed to be
publiſhed, that thoſe forces ſhould fight againſt all thoſe that ſhould
fol­low his party, particularly againſt the Earl of Eſſex, Generall of the
Par­liaments Army, againſt my Lord Brooks, and divers other Officers of that
party; all who were declared Traitors by printed proclamations, which were
diſperſed at the ſame time through all Regiments by their Officers. To [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=45) which he alſo
added, that he had often ſeen the King in Nottingham at the time that his
forces quarter'd there, which was about a Moneth, that the Drum was beaten
over all the Country to raiſe men for the King, and that ma­ny were liſted,
partly willing and partly forced▪ for fear of being plundred, as among the
reſt was the Deponent, the ſaid Sir William  [...]enniman cryng out aloud,
that it would be well done to ſet the Town on fire, the Citizens ſhewing
themſelves ſo backward to take up arms for their Kings ſervice. He did
far­ther depoſe, that about the Month of October,  [...]642. he ſaw the King
on horſeback at Edge-hill in Warwick-ſhire, looking on his Army in battail,
and heard him command all the Colo­nells and Officers, that paſſed before him
to encourage their ſoldiers, exhort and animate them to fight againſt my Lord
of Eſſex, my Lord Brooks, Sir William Waller, and Sir William Belford, and
that after this firſt fight, he ſaw in the field a great number of dead
bodies, of which, he ſaw a liſt brought after­ward to the King at Oxford,
which [[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=46)
they ſaid came to the number of 6559. The Deponent hath alſo teſti­fied that
about the Moneth of Novem­ber following, he ſaw the King at the head of his
Army upon Hownſlo-heath in the County of Middleſex, with Prince Robert by him,
and heard him encourage divers Regiments of th [...]ſe that were levied in
Wales, which had been at the battail of Edge-Hill, ſaying to them, he hoped
they would re­gain at Brainford the honour they loſt at Edge-Hill.

##### 1.6.3. William Brayne Gentleman of Wixe­hall in the County of Salop.

HAth depoſed upon Oath, that in Auguſt 1642. he ſaw the King in Nottingham at
the time when his Royal Standard was there erected and diſplaid, and that
about that time he marched with the Army in which the King was, from thence to
Darby, and that being ſuſpected in September for a ſpy he was examined [[Page
77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=46) before Sir
Robert Heath, and divers other Commiſſioners at Shrewsbury, where the King was
in perſon.

##### 1.6.4. Henry Hartford of Stafford upon A­von in Warwick-ſhire.

HAs alſo given in upon Oath, that in the year 1642. he ſaw the King at the
Caſtle of Nottingham, when his great Standard was planted and diſplay­ed upon
a Tower of the Caſtle, and more­over that about November, he ſaw the King at
Brainford being a horſe-backe with great number of War-Officers on a Sunday
morning, immediately after that Satturday night, in which great num­ber of the
Parliaments people had been killed thereabout.

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=47)

##### 1.6.5. Robert Large, Painter of the Town and County of Nottingham.

HAs depoſed upon Oath, that in the ſummer of 1642. he painted, by command of
my Lord  [...]e [...]mant, the great Standard of War, that was plan­ted upon
the high Tower of the Caſtle of Nottingham, and that he often ſaw the King
thereabout, at the ſame time that his Standard was erected and diſplayed.

##### 1.6.6. Edward Robert of Biſhops Caſtle, in the County of Salop.

BEing alſo examined upon his Oath, has depoſed that he ſaw the King in
Nottingham whileſt his great ſtandard was planted and diſplayed upon a Tower
of the Caſtle, and that he ſaw the King march at the head of his Army from
Shrewsbury to Edge-hill, being in the Reer-gard upon the Field, where the
[[Page 79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=47) battle
was fought, and that alſo he ſaw him on Sunday at Brainford after the combat
of Saturday-night precedent.

##### 1.6.7. John Penninger of Hayner in Dar­by-ſhire.

BEing examined upon Oath, hath te­ſtified, that about Auguſt 1642. he ſaw the
great ſtandard of War diſ­played upon one of the Towers of Not­tingham Caſtle,
that the ſame day he alſo ſaw the King in Thurland-houſe, belonging to the
Earle of Clare at Not­tingham, with Prince Robert, Sir Kelam Digby, and divers
other Lords, and people of other condition, and that the King had then Canons
in the Town, that was full of Souldiers.

[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=48)

##### 1.6.8. Samuel Lawſon Brewer of Notting­ham.

HAs depoſed upon Oath, that about Auguſt 1642. he ſaw the great ſtan­dard of
War, brought down from the Caſtle of Nottingham by divers perſons of quality
to the next Hill, a Herald at Arms marching before them, that the ſaid
ſtandard was planted upon that hill with great cryes and acclamations, with
the ſound of the Trumpet and Drums, that alſo, preſently after, there was
pub­liſhed a Command from the King, who was there in perſon to ſee his
ſtandard Erected, adding moreover that the town was full of ſouldiers; And
that when the King left the town with the ſouldiers, the Inhabitants were
forced to pay a great ſumme of money to his Army, that threatned them plunder,
if they refuſed it.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=48)

##### 1.6.9. Thomas Whittington, Shoomaker of Nottingham, hath depoſed upon
Oath.

THat he ſaw the King in the ſaid Town the ſame day, that his great ſtandard of
War was raiſed on the Caſtle about the beginning of Auguſt 1642. and that the
King tooke his journey from Thurland-houſe towards the ſaid Ca­ſtle, and that
he ſaw him ſeverall times in Nottingham, which was full of ſoul­diers, who
ſaid they were of the Kings army, the great ſtandard being then diſplayed upon
the old tower of the Ca­ſtle.

##### 1.6.10. Robert Loads of Cottam in Nottingham­ſhire, affirmed upon Oath.

THat about October 1642. he ſaw the King in the reere-guard of his Army at
Kinton field on a Sunday, a­bout which place, he ſaw divers dead bo­dies
[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=49) on both
ſides. That moreover he ſaw the King in his Army in Cornwall nigh my Lord
Moon's houſe, in the year, 1644.

##### 1.6.11. Samuel Morgan Haberdaſher of Wel­lington, in the County of
Salop, de­poſed upon Oath.

THat he ſaw the King on Sunday mor­ning in the field at Kinton upon the
higheſt point of Edgehill, at the head of his Army about two hours before the
bat­tail began, which was after Michelmas 1642. And that afterward he ſaw at
the ſame place a very great number of dead bodies on both ſides; and farther
that in 1644. he ſaw the King in his army, neere Cropredy bridge, put his own
men in battaile array.

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=49)

##### 1.6.12. James Williams Shoomaker of Roſſe in Herefordſhire, depoſed upon
Oath.

THat about October, 1642 he ſaw the King in Kinton-field upon the Hill, having
his ſword drawn in his hand, when and where a great battel was fought, and
many kill'd on both ſides. Moreover that he ſaw the King at Brainfor [...] ▪
on a Sunday before mid day in November the ſame year, whilſt his army was all
in and about the town.

##### 1.6.13. Arthur Young Chyrurgion and Bur­geſs of London, being examined
upon Oath teſtified.

THat being in the Battel of Edge-hill that was faught between the Army of the
King, and that of the Par­liament, in October, 1642. he ſaw the great Standard
brought and diſplayed [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=50) in the Kings
Army, which being taken in the fight, it was regained by one Mid­dleton, whom
the King preſently made Colonel.

##### 1.6.14. John Thomas Labourer in Langellen in the County of Denbigh,
depoſed upon Oath.

THat he ſaw the King at Brainford in the County of Middleſex, on a Saturday a
little after the battle of Edge-hill, being followed by a good num­ber of
horſe and foot, and being himſelf armed a horſeback, and heard him ſay to his
people, paſſing through the towne, Gentlemen, you loſt your honour at Edge-
hill, I hope you will recover it here, and before the King had ended his
ſpeech the two Parties began to ſkirmiſh and en­gaged ſo far that many were
killd on both ſides.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=50)

##### 1.6.15. Richard Blomefield Merchant, Draper and Citizen of London,
depoſed upon Oath.

THat he was preſent at the rout of the Earle of Eſſex his Army in Corn­wall
about the end of Auguſt or at the beginning of September, 1644. where he ſaw
the King on horſeback at the head of his army, and that he ſaw divers
ſoul­diers of the Parliaments, many plundred and diſmantled hard by the Kings
perſon againſt the conditions and Articles agre­ed upon.

[[Page 86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=51)

##### 1.6.16. William Jones Laborour of Ʋſke in Monmouth-ſhire affirmed upon
Oath.

THat he ſaw the King coming from Wards Harbrough, and march­ing at the end of
his Army towards Naſe­by where the battle was fought a little after, and that
the King being advan­ced towards the Regiment of Co­lonel t. George, he asked
of the Offi­cers and ſouldiers, if they were not reſol­ved to fight for him,
and that upon it, they cryed out with great acclamations, that they were ready
to fight. Moreover, the Deponent ſaid, that he ſaw the King with his forces in
Leiceſter, the ſame day that it was taken by the Parliament. As likewiſe that
he ſaw him in his Army at the ſiege of Gloceſter.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=51)

##### 1.6.17. Humphrey Brown of Witſunday in Rutlandſhire.

HAs depoſed that wh [...]n Leiceſter was taken by the Kings, Army, about June
[...]645. the Fort of Newark be­ing rendred upon Compoſition and con­dition,
that thoſe that went forth ſhould carry their bagage with freedom, without any
violence to be offered, as ſoon as the place was rendred, notwithſtanding this
capitulation and againſt the Articles, the Kings ſouldiers fell upon them,
plun­dered them, and beat and wounded ma­ny of them: And that one of their
Officers taxing them with their ill uſage of theſe poore people againſt the
law of Arms, the deponent heard the King reply (who was there in perſon with
his ſword drawn at the head of his Army) that he would ſee they ſhould uſe
them worſe, being his ene­mies.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=52)

##### 1.6.18. David Evans Marſhall of Aburgeny in Monmouthſhire, teſtified:

THat about half an houre before Naſeby fight, which was at Mid­ſummer June
1645. he ſaw the King marching himſelf in battaile at the head of his Army,
half a mile from the place of the fight.

##### 1.6.19. Diogenes Edwards Butcher of Car­ſton in the County of Salop.

AFfirmed that at the ſame time, he ſaw the King a mile and a half from the
Camp, marching in battaile aray, at the head of his Army, about an houre and
half before the ſaid battaile was fought, and that the ſame day, he ſaw
afterwards many bodies dead upon the place.

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=52)

##### 1.6.20. Giles Grice of Wellington in Shrop­ſhire, Gentleman.

DId depoſe, that he ſaw the King at the head of his Army at Cropre­die Bridge
with his ſword drawn in his hand, the ſame day that there was a bat­tail
fought againſt Sr. William Waller's Army, which was on a Friday, 1644. about
July, as much as he could call to minde. That he ſaw him alſo at the head of
his Army the ſame ſummer nigh Lietchfield at the ſame time that the Earle of
Eſſex was there with his Army. Alſo that he ſaw the King at the head of his
men in the ſecond fight at Newbery. And that he ſaw him Arm'd back and breſt,
at the head of his Army at Naſeby. The ſame did teſtifie, that he ſaw him at
the head of his Army, at the taking of Leiceſter, at the ſame time that an
aſ­ſault was given, and after enter'd the place on horſeback after it was
taken, and that he ſaw many men kill'd on both ſides, and many houſes were
pillaged in the ſaid Town.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=53)

##### 1.6.21. John Vinſon of Damorham in Wilt­ſhire Gentleman, affirmed.

THat he ſaw the King at the head of his Army, at the firſt Newbery battaile
about September 1643. and many people dead on both ſides,

The ſame hath alſo depoſed, that he ſaw the King at the head of his Army,
armed Capape with his ſword drawn in his hand in the ſecond fight at Newberry,
about Octob. 1644. at what time he ſaw him draw up the Regiment of Horſe, of
Colonel Tho. Howard to a Charge, and that he heard him make a ſpeech to that
Regiment, ſaying, that they were to make good to him that day, that his Crown
was at the point of his Sword, and if he loſt that Battail, he loſt his honour
and his Crown for ever, and that after he ſaw great number of dead men killd
in that fight on both ſides.

The ſame alſo teſtified, that he ſaw the King in the battail at Naſeby in
Northamptonſhire, about June, [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=53) 1645\. being
armed, with his Head­piece on, his word drawn in his hand, where perceiving
his people in flight, he himſelf made the horſe to rally and ſtaid them, at
what time he alſo ſaw many dead bodies on both ſides.

##### 1.6.22. George Seeley of London, Shoomaker, depoſed,

THat he ſaw the King at the ſiege of Gloceſter, at the head of a Bri­gade of
horſe, and that he ſaw him at the firſt fight of Newberry, about September,
1643, being at the head of a Regiment of horſe, and that many were killed on
both ſides in this fight. To which he added, that he alſo ſaw the King in the
midſt of his Army in the ſe­cond Newberry fight about Novem­ber, 1644.

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=54)

##### 1.6.23. John Moor of Cork in Ireland, Gentle­man, did depoſe,

THat in the Battel at Newberry ſe­cond fight, in the ſame month, he ſaw the
King in the middle of his horſe, with his ſword drawn, that afterwards he ſaw
many killed on both ſides in this fight, and that he ſaw him enter on horſe-
back in the head of a Brigade of horſe into Leiceſter, the ſame day that it
was taken by his men, about June, 1645. he alſo added, that he ſaw the King in
the midſt of a Regiment of horſe at Copredibridge before Lei­ceſter fight, and
ſaw the fields covered with dead men, killed in that fight, where the King was
in perſon, that he ſaw him alſo at the head of a Regiment of horſe in Naſeby
fight, about June 1645. and that there was alſo many killed and wounded.

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=54)

##### 1.6.24. Thomas Grees of Boyſet in Northamp­tonſhire, Labourer, did
teſtifie,

THat he ſaw the King at the firſt Newbury fight in Bark-ſhire, September,
1643, and that he there ſaw many dead bodies, having himſelf received orders
amongſt others, to ſtop the Parliaments forces till their dead men were taken
away; that he alſo ſaw the King marching with his Army towards Naſeby field,
immediatly before the fight about June, 1645. and that his Army being routed,
he ſaw him make a retreat with a Brigado of horſe, and that a great number
were killed on both ſides in this fight.

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=55)

##### 1.6.25. Thomas Rollins of Hanſlop, in Euek­ingham-ſhire Gentleman, did
depoſe,

THat he ſaw the King nigh Foy in Cornwall, about July 1644. at the head of a
brigade of horſe, and that he ſaw ſome Parliament-ſouldiers pilledged nigh the
Kings perſon, con­trary to the Articles agreed upon on both ſides.

##### 1.6.26. Thomas Read of Maidſtone in Kent, Gentleman,

AFfirmed upon Oath, that preſently after the Parliaments Army had rendred it
ſelf in Cornwall upon com­poſition, he ſaw the King at the head of a guard of
horſe, between Leſtithiel and Foy, about the end of Auguſt, or the beginning
of September 1644.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=55)

##### 1.6.27. James Grosby of Dublin in Ireland, did depoſe,

THat at the firſt Newbury fight about harveſt time, 16 [...]3 he ſaw the King
coming on horſeback from Newbury, accompanied with abun­dance of great Lords
and Noble men, and going towards the place where his forces were engaged to
the Parliaments Army;

##### 1.6.28. Samuel Burden of Lyneham in Wilt­ſhire, Gentleman, teſtified,

THat he was at Nottingham, about Auguſt 1642. at what time he ſaw the great
Standard diſplayd upon one of the Towers of the Caſtle, and that the next day
he ſaw the King, whilſt his Standard, as they call it, was diſplayd, moreover
that he ſaw the King at the head of his Army near Copredy-bridge [[Page
96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=56) in a ſtubble
field, being in pur­ſuit of Sir William Wallers forces, who was routed about
July 1644. and that be ſaw at that time great numbers of dead men in the
field; he teſtified far­ther, that towards November follow­ing, he ſaw the
King in the laſt New­berry fight, galloping up and down from Regiment to
Regiment, whilſt his Army was engaged with that of the Parliament, and that he
ſaw afterwards great numbers of men killed, fighting on both ſides.

##### 1.6.29. Michael Potts of Sharpeton in Nor­thamberland, Vintner, depoſed,

THat he ſaw the King at the head of of his Army, in a field about a mile and
an half diſtant from Newberry, upon a plain, the day before the fight, which
was about harveſt time, 1643. and that he ſaw the King in the field, nigh a
peice of great Canon during the fight, that he alſo ſaw him at the head of his
Army in the ſecond Newberry fight [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=56) about
Michaelmaſs, 1644. after which he ſaw great number of men kild on both ſides.
Adding moreover, that he did alſo ſee him at the head of his Forces, nigh
Copredy bridge; and afterwards the ſame year towards harveſt nigh Leſti­thiel
in Cornwall, at what time the Earle of Eſſex was there with his Ar­my.

#### 1.7.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=57)

The NAMES of the ſaid Pre­tended JUDGES who gave Sentence againſt the Late
KING Jan. 27. 1648.

  * JOhn Bradſhaw Lord Preſident
  * Oliver Cromwell
  * Henry Ireton.
  * Sir Hardreſs Waller.
  * Valentine Walton.
  * Thomas Hariſon.
  * Edward Whaley.
  * Thomas Pride.
  * Iſaac Ewer.
  * Lord Grey of Grooby.
  * William Lord Mounſon.
  * Sir John Danvers.
  * Sir Thomas Maleverer.
  * Sir John Bourcher.
  * Iſaac Pennington.
  * Henry Martin.
  * William Purifoye.
  * John Barkſtead,
  * Gilbert Millington.
  * Thomas Chaloner.
  * Matthew Tomlinſon.
  * John Blakeſton.
  * [[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=57) Sir William Conſtable.
  * Edmund Ludlow,
  * John Hutchiſon.
  * Sir. Michael Leveſey.
  * Robert Titchburne.
  * Owen Roe.
  * Robert Lilburne.
  * Adrian Scroop.
  * Richard Dean.
  * John Okey.
  * John Harriſon.
  * John Hewſon.
  * William Goffe.
  * Cornelius Holland.
  * John Carew.
  * John Jones.
  * Thomas Liſter.
  * Peregrine Pelham.
  * Thomas Wogan.
  * Frances Allen.
  * Daniel Blagrave.
  * John Moor.
  * William Say.
  * Francis Laſcels.
  * John Chaloner.
  * Gregory Clement.
  * Sir Gregory Norton.
  * John Venn.
  * [[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=58) Thomas Andrews.
  * Anthony Stapley.
  * Thomas Horton.
  * John Liſle.
  * John Brown.
  * John Dixwell.
  * Miles Corbet
  * Simon Menyne.
  * John Alured.
  * Henry Smith.
  * Humphrey Edwards
  * John Frye.
  * Edmund Harvey.
  * Thomas Scot.
  * William Cawley.
  * John Downes
  * Thomas Hammond.
  * Vincent Potter.
  * Auguſtine Garland.
  * Charles Fleetwood.
  * John Temple.
  * Thomas Wayte.

Counſellours aſſiſtant to this Court, and to draw up the Charge a­gainſt the
KING, were

  * Doctor Doriſlaus.
  * Mr. Aske.
  * [[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=58)Mr. John Cooke. Solicitor.
  * Serjeant Denby, Serjeant at Armes.
  * M Broughton.
  * M. Phelpes.
  * Clerks to the Court.
  * Colonel Humfrey, Sword bearer.

Meſſengers, Door-keepers, and Cry­ers were theſe;

  * Mr. Walford.
  * Mr. Radley.
  * Mr. Paine:
  * Mr. Powell.
  * Mr. Hull.
  * Mr. King.

#### 1.8. The SENTENCE against the ſaid KING January the 27th 1648. which was
read by Mr. Broughton aforeſaid Clerk.

WHereas the Commons of England in Parliament, have appointed them an [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=59) High Court of
Juſtice for the Try­all of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom he had
been Three times Convented, and at the firſt time a Charge of High Treaſon and
other Crimes and Miſdemeanours was read in the behalf of the King­dome of
England, &c. as in the Charge which was read through­out.

To which Charge, he the ſaid Charles Stuart was required to give his Anſwer,
but he refuſed ſo to do; and ſo expreſt ſeverall paſſages at his Tryall, in
refuſing to anſwer.

For all which Treaſons and Crims, this Court doth adjudge, that the ſaid
Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traytor, Murtherer, and Pub­lick enemy, ſhall be
put to death, by fevering his head from his body.

This Sentence (ſayes the Preſident) now read and publiſhed is the act,
Sen­tence, Judgement and Reſolution of the whole Court. To which the Mem­bers
of the Court ſtood up and aſ­ſented to what he ſaid by holding up their hands.

[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=59) The King
offered to ſpeake, but he was inſtantly commanded to be taken away and the
Court broke up.

#### 1.9. The true manner of proceeding to take off the Kings Head according
to the Sentence given as a foreſaid.

Sir Hardreſs Waller Collonel Harri­ſon, Commiſſary General Ireton, Co­lonel
Dean and Colonel Okey, were appointed to conſider of the Time and Place for
the Exceution of the King, according to his Sentence, given by the (pretended)
High Court of Juſtice.

##### 1.9.1. Painted Chamber, Monday January the 29th 1648.

VPon Report made from the Committee for conſidering of the Time and place of
the Execut­ing of the Judgement againſt the King, that the ſaid Committee have
Reſolved, That the open ſtreet before [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=60) White-hal is a
fit place: And the ſaid Committee conceive it fit, That the King be there
executed the morrow, the King having already notice there­of.

The Court approved thereof, and ordered a Warrant to be drawn to that purpoſe,
which Warrant was accordingly drawn and agreed to, and Ordred to be ingroſſed,
which was done and ſigned and ſealed ac­cording, as followeth.

###### 1.9.1.1. At the High Court of Juſtice for the Trying and Judging of
King CHARLES the I. of England January 29. 1648.

VVHereas Charles Stuart King of England, is, and ſtand­eth Convicted,
Attainted and Condemned of High Treaſon, and other Crimes, and Sentence, on
Saturday laſt, was pronounced a­gainſt him by this Court, to be put to Death,
by ſevering his head from his body, of which Sentence Ex­ecution yet remaineth
to be done. [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=60) Theſe are
therefore to will an re­quire you, to ſee the ſaid Sentence Executed in the
open ſtreet before Whitehall upon the morrow, being the 30. day of this
inſtant Moneth of January, between the hours of Ten in the morning, and Five
in the afternoon of the ſame day, with full effect; and for ſo doing, This
ſhall be your ſufficient Warrant: and theſe are to require all Officers and
Soldiers and other the good people of this Nation of England, to be aſſiſtant
unto you in this ſervice.

To Colonel Francis Hacker, Colonel Huncks and Lievtenant Colonel Phray, and to
every of them.

Given under our hands and Seals.

Sealed and Subſcribed by,

  * John Bradſhaw Preſident.
  * Thomas Gray.
  * Oliver Cromwell.
  * Edward Whaley.
  * John Okey.
  * [[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=61) John Danvers.
  * Mich. Lieveſey.
  * John Bourcher.
  * Hen Ireton.
  * Tho Maleverer.
  * Jo Blackeſton.
  * Jo Hutchiſon.
  * William Goffe.
  * Tho. Pride.
  * Henry Smith.
  * Vincent Potter.
  * William Conſtable.
  * Rich Ingoldsby.
  * Will. Cawley.
  * John Barkſtead.
  * Iſaac Ewer.
  * Val. Walton.
  * Peter Temple.
  * Tho. Harriſon.
  * John Hewſon.
  * Per. Pelham.
  * Richard Dean.
  * Rob. Tichburn.
  * Hump Edwards.
  * Dan. Blagrave.
  * Owen Roe.
  * Will. Purifoye.
  * Adrin Scroop.
  * [[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=61) James Templer.
  * Aug. Garland.
  * Edmu. Ludlow.
  * Hen. Martia.
  * Jo. Allewred.
  * Rob. Lilburu.
  * Will. Say.
  * Anthony Stapley.
  * Gregory Norton.
  * Tho.  [...]haloner.
  * Tho. Wogan
  * Simon. Meyne.
  * Tho Horton.
  * John Jones.
  * Jo. Moore.
  * Hardreſs Waller.
  * Gilbert Millington.
  * Charls Fleetwood.
  * Jo. Venn.
  * Greg. Clement.
  * Jo. Downes.
  * Tho. Waite
  * Tho. Scot.
  * John Carew.
  * Miles Corbet.

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=62) Ordered,
That the Scaffold on which the King is to be executed, be covered with Black.
The Warrant for execut­ing the King being accordingly de­livered to thoſe
parties to whom the ſame was directed Execution was done upon him according to
the Tenour thereof about Two a clock in the afternoon, of the ſaid 30. of
January. 1648.

##### 1.9.2. The Fatall day of the ſaid Execu­tion, being Tueſday, January the
30. 1648.

HIS Majeſty continued in Pray­er all the morning, and re­ceives the Sacrament
Juſt at Ten a Clock before noon, he was convey­ed on foot, from St. James's
Palace to Witehall, guarded by a Regiment of Foot Soldiers, part before, part
behind, with Colours flying, and Drums beating, his private guard of Patirzans
about him, and Dr. Juxon Biſhop of London, next to him on one ſide, and
Colonel Tomlinſon on the other; being come to White­hall, [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=62) he  [...] his
Cabinet Chamber at his divotions, refuſing to dine, onely about 12 a clock he
eat a bit of bread, and dranke a glaſſe of Claret wine; from thence he was
conveyed into the Banquet­ing houſe, and the great window inlarged, out of
which he aſcends the Scaffold, the rails being hung round, and the floor
covered with black, His Executioners diſguiſed with Viſards, yet was his
Maje­ſty not affrighted: He ſhewed more care of the people living, then of
himſelfe dying: for looking round upon the people, whom the thick Guards of
Soldiers kept a great di­ſtance of, and ſeeing he could not be heard by them,
omitting (pro­bably) what he purpoſed to have ſpoken to them, therefore
turn­ing to the Officers and Actors, by him, he delivered him ſelf in a ſhort
(but excellent) Speech, which be­ing ended, he meekly went to Pray­ers, and
after ſome heavenly diſ­courſe between him and the Biſhop, having prepared
himſelfe, he lifted [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=63) up his eyes to
heaven, mildely pray­ing to himſelf; he ſtooped down to the block as to a
prayer-deske, and moſt humbly bowed his generious Neck to Go, to be cut off by
the Vizarded Executioner, which was ſudainly done at one blow. Thus fell King
Charles, the I. and thus all Britan with him.

[[Page 111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=63)

#### 1.10. His Majeſties Rea­ſons, againſt the pretended Juriſ­diction of the
High Court of Juſtice, which he hath in tended to have given there on Mun­day
Jan. 26. 1649.  
Faithfully tranſcribed from the original coppy of the King.

SInce I have already made my Proteſtation, not onely againſt the illegality of
this pretended Court, but that no power on earth can juſtly call me (who am
your King) into queſtion as a De­linquent, I would no longer have opened my
mouth on this Argu­ment, but have referred my ſelf to thoſe things which I
then ſpoke, if this onely concerned my own particular; But the du­ty which I
ow to God, to preſerve the true liberty of my people; doth not permit me at
this time, I ſhould be ſilent; for how can any [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=64) free born
Subject of England call his life or any thing he doth poſ­ſeſs his own, if
power without law can daily make new, and abrogate the old and Fundamentall
Laws of this Land, which I judge to be the preſent caſe? Wherefore when I was
brought hither, I expected that you would have ſtudied to ſatisfie me in thoſe
Fundamentals, which do hinder me from puting in my Anſwer, to the pretended
charge; but ſince I do obſerve, that nothing which I can alledge can perſwade
you to it (although negatives are not ſo naturally proved as affirmatives) yet
I have thought good to declear unto you the Reaſons for which I am confident,
you are not in a capa­city to judge me, nor the vileſt man in England, for
without ſhowing my Reaſons, I will not (as you) be ſo unreaſonable
im­portunate, as to exact either be­lief or obedience from my Sub­jects.

Here was I reſtrained, and not [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=64) ſuffered to
ſpeak any more of Rea­ſons, there is no juſt Proceſſe a­gainſt any man, which
deriveth not its authority, either from the Law of God, or from the
muni­cipall Laws of the Land.

Now I am moſt ſure, that the Proceſſe at this day made againſt me, cannot be
confirmed by the law of God; for on the contrary, the neceſſity of obedience
is cleere­ly confirmed, and ſtreightly com­manded in the old and new
Teſta­ment; which if it be denyed, I am prepared preſently to prove it; and as
for the queſtion now in agita­tion, it is ſaid there, Where the word of a King
is, there is power, and who can ſay unto him, what doeſt thou? Ec­cleſ: 8. v.
4. Then as to the Laws of the land, I am as confident that no learned Lawyer
will affirm, that any charge can be brought againſt the King, ſince they all
go forth un­der his name, and it is one of their axioms, that the King cannot
do any injury, Moreover the law on which you do ground your pro­ceſſe, [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=65) is either old
or new, if it be old, ſhew that law unto me, if it be new, tell me what
Autho­rity eſtabliſhed by the Funda­mentall laws of this land did give it
birth and when? but how the Houſe of Commons can erect a Tribunall of Juſtice,
which was never one it ſelf (as all Lawyers will confeſſe with me) I leave it
to God and to the world to judge; and it will ſeeme moſt ſtrange to any, who
ever have heard of the laws of England, how they can pre­tend to make laws
without either the King, or the Houſe of Peers.

Nevertheleſſe it be admited, but not granted, that a Commiſſi­on from the
people of England, is able to confirm your pretended power, yet I ſee nothing
that you can ſhow for it, for I am confident that you never asked that
queſtion of the 10th. man in the Kingdome; in this method you do a moſt
ap­parent injury, even to the pooreſt ploughman; if you ask not his conſent,
neither can you pretend [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=65) any coluor to
this your pretended Commiſſion, if you have not the concurring voyces of at
leaſt the greateſt part of this Nation, of every degree and quality, which you
are ſo far from obtaining, that I am confident you never ſo much as ſought it,

You ſee then, that I do not onely ſpeake for my own Right, as I am your King,
but alſo for the true liberty of all my ſubjects, which confiſteth not in
dividing the power of Government, but in living under ſuch laws, and ſuch a
Government, as may grant them the beſt ſecurity of their lives, and the
propriety of their goods In this, I ought not to be forget­full, neither do I
forget the pri­viledges of both Houſes of Par­liament, which theſe
proceed­ings do not onely violate, but give an occaſion of the greateſt
breaking of the publick faith; and ſuch (I believe) as the like was ne­ver
heard of before, with which I will not at all, charge both Hou­ſes, [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=66) for the
pretended crime which they impoſe upon me, are far before the Treaty at
Newport; in which when I aſſented to, and did conclude as much as poſſibly lay
in my power, and did juſtly expect the aſſent of both Houſes, I was ſuddenly
taken from thence, and carried a way as a priſoner, and againſt my will, I was
hurried hither, and ſince I came to this Court, I cannot with all my
In­deavours, defend the ancient laws and liberties of this King­dome, together
with my juſt pri­viledges, and as much as I can poſ­ſiblely diſcern the upper
Houſe, which is the Houſe of Lords, is to­tally excluded.

And as for the Houſe of Com­mons, it is to much known, that the greater part
of them are either impriſoned, or affrighted from fitting, ſo that if I had no
other Cauſe, this was ſufficient enough to make me Proteſt againſt the
au­thority of your pretended Tribun­all. Beſides all theſe things, the [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=66) peace of the
Kingdome, is not the leaſt part of my cares, and what hope can there be of
eſta­bliſhing it, as long as power reign­eth without the Rule of the law,
changing the whole frame of the Government under which this Kingdome hath
flouriſhed theſe many ages; neither will I ſpeak what is likely to follow, if
theſe unlawfull proceedings ſhall yet continue againſt me; for I believe, the
Commons of England will give you no thankes for this change, eſpecially, when
they ſhall call into their mindes, how happily they heretofore have li­ved in
the Reigns of Queen Eliza­beth, and of the King my Father, and in my own Reign
before the beginnings of theſe unhappy tu­mults, and they will have a juſt
cauſe to doubt, if they ſhall be ſo happy in any new Government.

In that time it will moſt evi­dently appeare that I onely took up Armes to
defend the Funda­mentall Lawes of this kingdome [[Page
118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=67) againſt thoſe
who oppoſed my pow­er, and totally would have ſubver­ted the antient
Government.

Having ſo briefly declared my Reaſons to you, for which I could nor ſubmit to
your pretended Au­thority, without violation of the Truſt which God hath
committed to me for the ſafety, and liberty of my people, I expect from you
either clear Reaſons to convince my Judg­ment by demonſtrating to me that I am
in an Error, (and then ſurely, I ſhal be ready to give you an anſwer) or elſe,
that you ſuſpend your pre­ſent proceedings.

This I had determined to have ſpoken in Weſtminſter Hall on munday the two and
twentieth of January, but againſt Reaſon, I was prohibited to pronounce my
Reaſons.

In the year 1648. Engliſh ſtyle. 1649. Vulgar ſtile.

[[Page 119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=67)

#### 1.11. The Speech of King Charls upon the Scaffold at the gate of White
Hall, immediate­ly before the exe­cution. Ianuary the thirtieth.  
[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=69)The Kings
Majeſties moſt Excellent Speech.

ABout ten in the morning, the King was brought from Saint Jameſes Court, he
did walk on foot through the Park, with a Regi­ment [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=68) of Foot, one
half before him, and the other behinde him, their Colours flying, and their
Drums beating, his private guard of Parti­ſan with ſome of his Gentlemen did
go immediately bare headed before him, and ſome part of them behind him; but
thoſe who were next of all unto him behinde, were Dr. Juxon and Colonel
Thomlinſon, to the laſt of whom the care and charge of his Perſon was
committed, theſe two being barehead did talk with him all along the Park, and
as you go up the ſtairs into the Gallery, and ſo into the Cabanet chamber,
where he uſed to lye, in which place, he continued at his Devotion, and
re­fuſed to dine, becauſe he that morn­ing had taken the Sacrament, only about
one hour before he came forth he drank one glaſſe of Claret wine, and did eat
a cruſt of bread about twelve of the clock at Noone.

From thence he was accompani­ed by Doctor Juxon, Col. Thomlin­ſon, and other
Officers formerly ap­pointed to be his guard, and with [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=68) the private
Guard of Partizans, with muſquitiers on either ſide, through the banquetting
houſe, at the farther end, on the out ſide whereof, the Scaffold was erected,
neer unto the Gate of White hall. The Scaffold was hung round with black, and
the floore was covered with black, and the Ax, and the Block laid on the
middle of the Scaffold. There were ſeverall Companies of Foot, and Troops of
Horſe placed on the one ſide of the Scaffold, and the other, and multi­tudes
of people that thronged to ſee ſo rare a ſpectacle were very great.

The King was no ſooner come upon the Scaffold, but he looked very earneſtly on
the Block, and asked Col. Hacker, if there were no higher, and then ſpake
thus, direct­ing his ſpeech chiefly to Colonel Thomlinſon.

I Shall be very little heard by any of the people, I ſhall therefore ſpeak a
word or two to you who are here. Indeed I could hold my peace very well, if I
did not think that my ſilence would make ſome men think, that I did ſubmit to
the guilt, as well as to the puniſhment; but I conceive it is my duty, Firſt
unto God, and afterwards to my Countrey, to vindi­cate my ſelf, as an honeſt
man, a good King, and a good Chriſtian.

I ſhall begin firſt with my Innocency; Introth, I think it not very needfull
for me to inſiſt long upon this, for all the world knows, that I never did
begin Warre with the two Houſes of Parlia­ment, and I call God to witneſſe, to
whom I muſt ſhortly make my account, that I never did intend to incroach upon
their priviledges: they began with me, It was the Militia they began upon,
they confeſſed that the Militia was mine, but [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=69) they thought it
fit to have it from me, and to be ſhort, if any man will look to the Dates of
Commiſſions, of their Commiſ­ſions or mine; and likewiſe to the Decla­rations,
will find clearly, that they began thoſe unhappy troubles, not I, ſo that as
for the guilt of theſe enormous crimes which are laid upon me, I hope in God,
that God will clear me of them.

I am in charity, I will not, and God forbid I ſhould lay it upon the two
Hou­ſes of Parliament, there is no neceſſity of either. I hope they are free
from the Guilt, for I do believe, that evill inſtruments be­tween them and me,
have been the chief cauſe of all this bloodſhed, ſo that by way of ſpeaking,
as I finde my ſelf clear of this I hope, and I pray God, that they may too;
yet for all this, God forbid, that I ſhould be ſo ill a Chriſtian, as not to
ſay that Gods judgements are juſt upon me. Ma­ny times he does inflict juſtice
by an un­juſt Sentence; this is ordinary; I will onely ſay, that an unjuſt
Sentence,Meaning the Earle of Strafford. That I ſuffered to take effect, is
puniſhed now by an unjuſt Sentence upon my ſelf. This is to ſhew you, (as I
have ſaid) how far I am an innocent man.

[[Page 124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=70) Now for
to ſhow you, that I am a good Chriſtian, I hope there is a good man, Point­ing
at Do­ctor Juxon. who will bear witneſſe with me, that I have forgiven all the
world, and even thoſe in particular, who have been the chief cauſers of my
Death; who they are God knows. I do not deſire to know, I pray God forgive
them: But this is not all, my charity muſt go further, I wiſh that they may
repent; for indeed, they have committed a great ſin in that particular; I pray
God with Saint Stephen that this be not laid to their charge; nay, not one­ly
ſo, but that they may take the right way to the peace of the Kingdome; for my
charity commands me not onely to for­give particular men, but my charity
commands me to indeavour to the laſt gaſp, the peace of the Kingdome. This
Sirs, I do wiſh with all my Soul, and I do hope, (there are ſomeTurning to
ſome Gentlemen who took his Speech in ſhort writing. who will car­ry it
further) that they may indeavour the peace of the Kingdome.

Now Sirs, I muſt ſhow you, both how you are out of the way, and I will put you
into a way: Firſt, you are out of the way; for certainly, all the way in which
as yet you have gone, as I could ever find out by any thing, is in the way of
conqueſt; [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=70) certainly this
is an ill way, for conqueſt, Sirs, in my opinion, is never juſt, except there
be a good, juſt cauſe, either for mat­ter of wrong, or to defend a juſt Title,
and if in the proſecution of the quarrell, you ſhall go beyond this, it will
make that unjuſt at the end, which was juſt at the beginning. But if it be
onely matter of conqueſt, therein it is a great robbery, as a pirate ſaid to
Alexander, that he was a great robber, and that he himſelf was but a petty
robber: and thus Sirs, I do think that the way you are in, is much out of the
way; Now Sirs, for to put you in the way, believe it, you will never do right,
nor will God ever proſper you, un­till you give God his due, and the King his
due, that is, in their courſe of time, my Succeſſors, and untill you give the
people their due; I am as much for them as any of you are. You muſt give God
his due, by regulating a right his Church according to his Scripture; your
Church is now out of order, for to ſet you parti­cularly in a way now, I
cannot, but only by a Synod of the whole Nation, who be­ing freely called, and
freely debating a­mongſt themſelves, may by Gods bleſſing ſettle the Church,
when every opinion is freely and clearly diſcuſſed.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=71) For the
King indeed, I will not much inſiſt—Then turning to a gentle­man whoſe cloak
he obſerved to touch the edge of the Ax, he ſaid unto him, Hurt not the Ax,
meaning by blunting the edge thereof, for that he ſaid might hurt him. Having
made this ſhort digreſſion, he pro­ceeded; For the King, the laws of the land
will clearly inſtruct you, what you have to do; but becauſe it concerns my own
particular, I onely do give you but a touch of it.

As for the People, truly I deſire their liberty and freedome, as much as any
whoſoever; but I muſt tell you, that their liberty and freedom conſiſts in
having of government by thoſe laws, by which their lives, and their goods may
be moſt their own. It is not for them to have a ſhare in Government, that is
nothing Sirs, ap­pertaining unto them▪ A  [...]ubject and a Sovereign are
clean different things; and therefore untill that be done, I mean, untill the
people be put into that liberty, which I ſpeak of: certainly they will ne­ver
enjoy themſelves.

Sirs, It was for this, that now I am [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=71) come here; If I
would have given way to an arbitrary power to have all laws changed according
to the power of the ſword; I needed not to have come hither, and therefore I
tell you, and I Pray God it be not laid to your charge, that I am the martyr
of the people.

In troth Sirs, I ſhall not hold you much longer, I ſhall onely ſay this unto
you, that in truth, I could have deſired ſome little longer time, becauſe I
had a deſire to put this, that I have ſaid into a little better order, and to
have a little better dige­ſted it than I have now done; and there­fore, I hope
you will excuſe me

I have delivered my conſcience, I pray God that you do take thoſe courſes,
that are moſt for the good of the Kingdome, and your own ſalvations.

Doct. Juxon.

Will your Majeſty al­though the affection of your Maje­ſty to religion is very
well known; yet to ſatisfie expectation, be plea­ſed to ſpeak ſomething for
the ſatis­faction of the world.

King.

I thank you very heartily (my Lord) becauſe I had almoſt forgotten it. In
troth Sirs, my conſcience in Religion, [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=72) I think is
already very well known to all the world; and therefore I declare before you
all, that I die a Chriſtian, according to the profeſſion of the Church of
England as I found it left by my father; and this honeſt man Point­ing at Dr.
Juxon. I think will witneſſe it. Then turning to the Officers he ſaid, Sirs
excuſe me for this ſame, I have a good cauſe, and I have a gratious God, I
will ſay no more. Then turning to Colo­nel Hacker, he ſaid. Take care they do
not put me to pain, and Sir this if it pleaſe you; but then a gentle­man, one
Mr. Clerk, comming neer the Ax, the King ſaid, take heed of the Ax: Then the
King turning to the Executioner, ſaid, I ſhall ſay but very ſhort prayers, and
when I ſtretch forth my hands—Then the King called to Doctor Juxon for the
Nightcap, and having put it on, he ſaid to the Executioner: will my hair
trouble you? who deſired him to put it all under his Cap, which the King did
accordingly by the aſ­ſiſtance of the Executioner and the Biſhop; the King
then turning to Doctor Juxon ſaid, I have a good [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=72) Cauſe and a
Gratious God on my ſide. Doctor Juxon, There is but one ſtage more, This ſtage
is turbulent indeed and troubleſome, but very ſhort, and which in an inſtant
will lead you a moſt long way from earth to Heaven, where you ſhall finde
great Joy and Solace.

King,

I go from a corruptible to an incorruptable Crown, where can be no trouble,
none at all.

Doctor Juxon,

You ſhall exchange a temporall Crown for an eternall one, it is a good change.

The King then ſaid unto the exe­cutioner, Is my haire as it ſhould be? He then
did put off his cloak, and his George, which he gave to Doctor Juxon, ſaying,
Remember Pointi [...] at Dr. Ju [...]on.. He im­mediately afterwards, did put
off his Doublet, and did put on his cloak again, and looking on the block, he
ſaid unto the Executioner, you ſhould make it to be ſteddie.

Execut.

It is ſo.

King.

It might have been ſomething higher.

Execut.

It cannot be made higher now.

King.

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=73)

When I ſhall ſtretch forth my hands in this manner, then—

After that, when ſtanding, he had ſpoke two or three words unto himſelf, with
his hands, and eyes lifted up towards Heaven, immedi­ately ſtooped down, he
laid his neck upon the Block, and when the Executioner had again put all his
hair under his cap. The King ſaid Stay till I give the ſigne.

Execut.

So I do, if it pleaſe your Majeſty; and after a very little re­ſpite, the King
did ſtretch forth his hands, and immediately the Exe­cutioner at one blow did
ſever his head from his Body.

Sic tranſit gloria Mundi.

# 2\.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=73)

THE Illegall proceedings a­gainſt the honourable Colonell John Penruddock of
Comp­pton in Wiltſhire, and his Speech;

Which he delivered the day before he was beheaded in the Ca­ſtle of Exon,
being the 16 day of May 1655, to a Gentleman whom he deſired to publiſh them
after his death.

Together with his prayer upon the Scaffold and the laſt Letter he received
from his verteous Lady, with his anſwer to the ſame.

Alſo the ſpeech of that Piouſly reſolved Gentlemen, Hugh Grove of Chiſenbury
in the pariſh of Enford, and County of Wilts, Eſquire, beheaded there the ſame
day.

Printed by order of the Gent. intruſted, 1660.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=74)

[[Page 133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=74)

### 1\. Col. Penruddock being writ to by a friend for an account of his
triall, writ as followeth.

SIR,

THough I received your deſires ſome­thing too late, it being but two days
before notice given me from the Sheriff of the day of my expiration, for I
cannot call this an execution, it being for ſuch a cauſe; yet in order to your
ſatisfaction, I have borrowed ſo much time from my more ſerious Meditations,
as to give you this ſhort account of my Triall, wherein you muſt excuſe, both
the brevity and imperfections, it being but the iſſues of a bad memory.

UPon Thurſday the 19\. April 1655. the Commiſſioners of Oyer and Terminer,
be­ing ſate in the Caſtle of Exon, ſummoned before them my ſelf, Mr. Huge
Grove, Mr. Richard Reeves, Mr. Robert Duke, Mr. George Duke, Mr. Thomas Fitz-
James, Mr. Francis Jones, Mr. Edward Davis, Mr. Thomas Poulton, and Mr.
Francis Ben­net [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=75) Being all
called to the Barre, we were commanded to hold up our hands, and an Indictment
of high treaſon was read againſt us: and be­ing asked whether we would plead
guilty or not guilty to the Indict­ment; in the behalf of my ſelf and of the
Gentlemen therein charged, I ſpake as followeth.

Col. Penruddock,

My Lords, though my education hath been ſuch as not to give me thoſe
advantages which the knowledge of the Laws would aſſiſted me with, for the
de­fending my ſelf: yet upon hearing this very indictment, my reaſon tells me,
that it is illegall: and there­fore I do demand Councell that may diſpute the
illegality there­of.

Serjeant Glyn.

Sir, you deſire that which cannot be granted, therefore give your anſwer
whether you are guilty or not guilty of the Treaſon of which you ſtand
charged.

Col. Pen.

Sir by your favour, it is that which hath been granted to my inferiors, (viz)
to Mr. Lilburn [[Page
135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=75) and to one Rolf
a Shoemaker, and I have as great a right to the Lawes as any perſon that ſits
here as my Judge; I do therefore challenge it as my right. Judge Nicholas whom
I there ſee, will tell you he himſelf was councell for this Rolf: and it is a
hard caſe, if a free-born Gentle­man of England cannot have the ſame
priviledge that his inferiors have had before him.

Attorney Generall

Sir, there is a great difference between Treaſon acting and acted; the later
is your caſe: therefore flatter not yourſelf, and do not think your being mute
ſhal ſave your eſtate in caſe of trea­ſon; for if you plead not to the
in­dictment, ſentence will be pronoun­ced againſt you, as if you had been
found guilty of the fact you are char­ged with.

Col. Pen.

Sir, I obſerve your di­ſtinction: but all the Logick you have, ſhall not make
me nor any Rationall man acknowledge, that this was either acting or acted,
be­fore it be proved Sir, it is but a [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=76) bare ſuſpicion,
and I hope you will not condemne me before I am con­victed: I ſay the
Indictment is il­legall, and I do demand Coun­cell.

At. Gen.

Sir, the Court muſt not be dallied withall: I do peremtori­ly demand of you,
are you guilty or not guilty? If you plead, you may have favour, otherwiſe we
ſhall pro­ceed to ſentence.

Col. Pen

Sir, put caſe I do plead, ſhall I then have Councell allowed me?

At. Gen.

Sir, the Court makes no bargains, refer your ſelf to us.

Hereupon my fellow-priſoners perſwaded me to plead not guilty: which being
done, I demanded Councell, as being partly promiſed it. Mr. Attorney told me:
I could have none. Then I replyed?

Col. Pen.

Sir, Durus eſt hic ſermo, it is no more then Jexpected fromy you; but rather
then I will be taken off unheard, I will make my own de­fence as well as I
can. The Jurors being then called, I challenged a­bout [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=76) 24 of the 35. I
might have challenged. The reſt of the Gentle­men were ſent from the bar; I
was left alone upon my triall; and the Jurors were ſo pact, that had I known
them, the iſſue had been the ſame that it was. The Jurors be­ing ſworn, and
the Indictment a­gain read, Mr. Atturney demanded what exception I could make
to it.

Col. Pen.

Sir, I except againſt e­very part thereof: For I take it to be illegall in
toto Compoſito.

Recorder Steel.

Sir, It is not uſual for any Court to admit of generall exceptions, therefore
we expect that you ſhould make it to ſome parti­cular.

Col. Pen.

Sir▪ I deſire a Copy of my Indictment, and time untill tomorrow to make my
defence.

At. Gen.

Sir, You cannot have it; the Court expects you ſhould do it now.

Col. Penruddock,

Then if I cannot have time, if my Generall exception might have been admitted,
it would have told you, that there can be no high Treaſon in this nation, but
it [[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=77) muſt
be grounded upon the Com­mon, or the Statute law: But this is neither ground
upon the Com­mon Law or the Statute ergo no Treaſon (againſt a Protector who
hath no power according to Law:) neither is there any ſuch thing in Law as a
Protector, for all Trea­ſons, and ſuch pleas are Propria Cau­ſa Regis.

Ser. Glyn.

Sir, You are peremp­tory, you ſtrike at the Govern­ment; you will fare never a
whit the better for this ſpeech: ſpeak as to any particular exception you have
to the Indictment.

Col. Penruddock,

Sir, If I ſpeak any thing which grates upon the pre­ſent Government, I may
confident­ly expect your pardon: my life is as deare to me, as this Government
can be to any of you The holy Prophet David when he was in dan­ger of his
life, feigned himſelf mad, & the ſpittle hung upon his beard; you may eaſily
therefore excuſe my imperfections. And ſince I am now forced to give you my
particular [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=77) exception (more
plainly) to the Indictment, I am bold to tell you, I obſerve in the latter
part of the Indictment, you ſay I am guilty of High Treaſon by vertue of a
ſtatute in that caſe made and provided. If there be any ſuch Statute, pray let
it be read; I know none ſuch. My Actions were for the King; and I well
remember what Bract▪ ſaith, Rex non habet ſuperiorem niſi Deum; ſatis habet ad
poenam, quod Deum expectat ultorem. And in another place he ſaith, Rex habet
poteſtatem & juriſdictionem ſuper omnes qui in regno ſuo ſunt: ea quae ſunt
juriſdictionis & pacis, ad nullum perti­nent, niſi ad regiam dignitatem: habet
etiam coertionem, ut delinquentes puniat & coerceat: Again he ſaith, Omnes ſub
Rege, & ipſe nullo niſi tantum Deo; non eſt inferior ſibi ſubjectis; non parem
habet in regno ſuo. This ſhewes us where the true power is. You ſhall finde
alſo.

That whoſoever ſhall refuſe to aid the King when war is levied a­gainſt him,
or any that keep the [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=78) King from his
juſt Rights; offends the law, and is thereby guilty of Treaſon. Again,

All men that adhere to the King in perſonall ſervice are freed from Treaſon by
Law: and yet you tell me of a Statute, which makes my adhering to the King
according to Law, to be high Treaſon. Pray let it be read.

At. Gen.

You have not behaved your ſelf ſo as to have ſuch a fa­vour from the Court.

Col. Pen.

Sir, I require it not as a favour, but as my Right.

At. Gen.

Sir, you cannot have it.

Col. Pen.

If I cannot have it, theſe Gentlemen that are the Jurors have not offended
you: their verdict reaches to their ſouls, as to my life: pray let not them go
blindfold, but let that Statute be their guide.

At. Gen.

Sir, The Jury ought to be ſatisfied with what hath been al­ready ſaid, and ſo
might you too.

Col. Pen.

Sir, I thank you: you [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=78) now tell me
what I muſt truſt to.

Mr Atturny then made a large ſpeech in the face of the Court, wherein he
aggravated the offence with divers circumſtances; as ſaying I had been four
years in France, and held a coreſpondency with the King my Maſter, of whom I
had learned the Popiſh Religion; That I endea­voured to bring in a debauched
lewd young man, and to engage this Nation in another bloody war; and that if I
had not been timely prevented, I had deſtroyed them (meaning the Jurors) and
their whole families. I interrupted him, and ſaid.

Col. Pen.

Mr▪ Atturny, you have been heretofore of Councel for me, you then made my caſe
better then indeed it was; I ſee you have the faculty to make men believe
falſehoods to be truth too.

At. Gen.

Sir, You interrupt me, you ſaid but now, you were a gen­tleman.

Col. Pen.

Sir, I have been thought [[Page
142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=79) worthy
heretofore to ſit on the bench, though now I am at the bar Mr. Attorny then
proceeded in his ſpeech and called the wit­neſſes. Then I ſaid,

Sir, You have put me in a bears skin, and now you will bait me with a
witneſſe. But I ſee the face of a gentleman here in the Court, (I mean Captain
Crook) whoſe con­ſcience can tell him, that I had ar­ticles from him, which
ought to have kept me from hence. Captain Crook hereupon ſtood up, and his
guilty conſcience (I ſuppoſed) ad­viſed him to ſit down again, after he had
made this ſpeech, (that is to ſay) he opened his lips and ſpake nothing. The
ſeverall witneſſes now come in, Mr Dove the Sheriff of Wilts, and others; my
charity forbids me to tell you what many of them ſwore: I ſhall therefore
o­mit that, and onely tell you, that one of our own party (and indeed I think
an honeſt man) being forced to give his evidence, I ſaid My Lords, it is a
hard caſe, that when you [[Page
143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=79) find you cannot
otherwiſe cleave me in pieces, that you muſt look after wedges made of my own
tim­ber. The vertuous Cryor of Bland­ford being asked what were the words I
uſed in proclaiming King Charles at the market, he ſaid, I declared for
Charles the Second, and ſetling the true Proteſtant Re­ligion, for the liberty
of the Sub­ject, and Priviledge of Parliaments.

Then I ſaid unto the Attorny Generall and the whole Court, you ſaid even now,
that I had lear­ned of the King my Maſter the Po­piſh religion, and
endeavoured to bring him in: your own witneſs tells you what, and whom I would
bring in, and it was the true Proteſtant, and not the Popiſh Religion, his
Majeſtie is of, and intends to ſettle. I urged divers caſes to make the
buſineſſe but a Riot (as my Lord of Northumberlands) pretending it was for the
taking of Taxes, and that the power was not declared to be where they ſay it
is. I required the Judges to be of Councell for me, [[Page
144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=80) & told them it
was their duty. Com­miſſioner Liſle told me I ſhould have no wrong, (but he
meant Right) but Judge Rolls and Nicholas con­feſſed themſelves parties,
therefore would ſay nothing. Then I told the Court, if I had ſeen a Crown upon
the head of any perſon, I had known what had been Treaſon, the Law of England
would have taken hold of me out of the reſpects it has to Monarchy: There was
no ſuch land-marks before me; therefore I conceive, I cannot be guilty of what
I am charged with. And my Lord and Mr. Atturney, you here indict me for a
Treaſon committed at Southmoulton in Devonſhire; and gen­tlemen ye ſwear
witneſſes againſt me for facts done in other Counties. Sarum, Blanford, and
Southmoulton are not in a pariſh. You puzzle the Jurors with theſe
circumſtances, pray go to the kernell; and you Gent of the Jury, ſave your
labour of taking thoſe notes. Mr. Attur­ney then addreſſed himſelf to the
Jury, and to be ſhort, after the [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=80) ſpace of halfe
an houre long, gave them directions to bring me in guilty: this being done, I
craved the favour from the Court, that I might ſpeak to the Jury; which be­ing
allowed, I ſaid to them as fol­loweth, or to the ſame effect.

Gent. You are called a Jury of life and death; and happy will it be for your
ſouls, if you prove to be a Jury of life. You have heard what hath been ſaid
to make my actions Treaſon, and with what vigor many untruths have been urged
to you. I have made appear to you, that there can be no Trea­ſon but againſt
the King; that the Law knowes no ſuch perſon as a Protector. Mr. Atturney
pretends a Statute for it, but refuſeth the reading thereof, either to me or
you; vilifies me at pleaſure, and tells you I am a Papiſt, and would bring in
the Popiſh Religon: and that if I had not been timely pre­vented, I had
deſtroyed you, I hope you are al ſo ſatisfied of the con­trary, from the mouth
of one of [[Page
146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=81) the beſt
witneſſes. You are now judges between me and theſe judges. Let not the majeſty
of their looks, or the glory of their habits betray you to a ſinne, which is
of a deeper dye then their ſcarlet; I meane that ſinne, bloud, which calls to
heaven for vengence. Gent. you doe not ſee a hair of my head but is numbred,
neither can you make any one of them; much leſs can you put breath into my
noſtrils when it is taken out: a ſparrow doth not fall to the ground without
the providence of God, much leſſe ſhall man, to whom he hath given do­minion
and rule over all the crea­tures of the earth. Gent. look up­on me, I am the
Image of my crea­tour, and that ſtamp of his which is in my vizage, is not to
be de­faced without an account given, wherefore it was, I have here
chal­lenged, as I am a Gentleman and free-born man of England, the right which
the law allowes me; I de­manded a copy of my Indict­ment, and Councell, but it
is de­nied me. The Law which I would [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=81) have been tried
by, is the known Law of the land, which was drawn by the wiſe conſultation of
our Princes, and by the ready pens of our Progenitours. The Law which I am now
tried by is no Law, but what is cut of by the poynt of a rebellious ſword; and
the ſheets in which they are recorded, being varniſhed with the moiſture of an
eloquent tongue, if you look not well to it, may chance to ſerve for ſome of
your Shrouds. If the fear of diſpleaſing others ſhall betray you to find me
guilty of any thing, you can at the moſt, but make a riot of this. Pray by the
way take notice, that the laſt Parliament would not allow the Legiſlative
power to be out of themſelves; ſeventeen of twenty in this very County were of
that opinion, and deſerted the houſe: they were your Repreſen­tative: if you
finde me guilty, you bring them in danger, and in them your ſelves. Have a
care of being drawn into a ſnare. Gent. your bloud may run in the ſame channel
with mine. If what I have ſaid, do [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=82) have been tried
by, is the known not ſatisfie you, ſo as to aquint me, if you bring me in a
ſpeciall verdict, you do in ſome meaſure acquit your ſelves, and throw the
bloud that will be ſpilt upon the Judges; Conſider of it, and the Lord di­rect
you for the beſt.

The Jury after a quarter of an houres retirement, brought me in guilty: the
Lord forgive them, for they knew not what they did.

Upon Monday the 23 of April we were again called to the bar, being then in
number twenty ſix. Ser­jeant Glyn asked of me firſt, what I could ſay for my
ſelf, that I ſhould not have ſentence according to the Law? Then I ſaid,

My Lords & Gentlemen you aske [...] what I can ſay for my ſelfe, that I ſhould
not have ſentence paſſe upon me. The Jury found me guilty; if I ſhould go
about to make a defence now, it would ſignifie no more then as if my friends
ſhould petition for my pardon after I am excuted▪ could have offered you
articles here but I thought them inconſiſten [...] [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=82) with this
Court. When I look up­on my offence (as to the Protect­our) I conclude myſelf
a dead man; but when I reflect upon the favour he hath ſhewed to others of my
con­dition, and the hopes I have of your interceſſion, me thinks I feel my
ſpirits renewed again. My Lords, death is a debt due from Nature; has now the
keeping the bond and has put it in ſuit by his Attorny: if he pleaſe to
forbear the ſerving me with an execution, and let me keep it a little longer,
I will pay him the intereſt of thanks for it, as as long as I live, and engage
my po­ſterity and a numerous allyance to be bound for me. So the Lord di­rect
you all for the beſt. If I have found favour I ſhall thank you; if not, I
ſhall forgive you.

This being done, Serjeant Glyn af­ter a moſt bitter and nonſenſicall ſpeech,
gave ſentence againſt us; (viz) to be drawn hanged and quartred. A prety
exchange for unworthy Crooks Articles for life, liberty and eſtate; which I
can [[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=83)
prove, and will die upon. My triall held at leaſt five hours. This is as much
as at preſent I can remember of it; excuſe the errours.

One of the Jury being asked by a Gent. why he found me guilty, anſwered, He
was reſolved to hang me before he did ſee me.

I obſerve treaſon in this age to be an individuum vagum, like the wind in the
Goſpel, which bloweth where it liſteth; for that ſhall be treaſon in me to
day, which ſhall be none in another to morrow, as it pleaſeth Mr Attorny.

TheWitneſſe one Benner and Stroud who in open Court con­feſſed to be guilty of
all they proved againſt me yet Mr▪ At­torney gave the Jury di­rections to find
them not guilty▪ Judges are ſworn to do juſtice according to the Laws of the
Land, and therefore have miſer­ably perjured themſelves in con­demning me
contrary to Law: And (not ſo contented) muſt cauſe the Jury (ſo wiſe they
were) (through their falſe and unjuſt directions to deſtroy their own rights
and pro­perties, and ſet up a new Arbi­trary and Tyrannicall govern­ment.

The Judges would not give me [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=83) their advice in
point of Law, (as was their duty) becauſe they ſaid they were parties; yet
could ſit ſtill on the Bench in their Robes, to countenance (and approve of)
my Sentence.

No man can be a Judge where he is a Party in the ſame cauſe;Hobart folio 120.
Dact. Bo­names caſe 8 part of Cooks re­ports. there­fore my tryall was
contrary to Law.

The Judges being parties, ought not to ſit upon the bench (but ſtand by:)
therefore my triall was illegall: the reſt being no Judges but the Protectours
immediate ſer­vants, ſo could not be my Judges in caſe of High Treaſon; for
none but the ſworn Judges of the Land are capable of it by Law.

One thing of Colonel Dove the reverend Sheriff of Wilts, who that the Jury
might be ſufficiently in­cenſed, complaining of the many incivilities (he
pretended) were offered him by our party, being upon his Oath, ſaid that one
of our men did run him through the ſide with a Carbine, Surely it was a very
ſmall one, for the wound was not diſcernable.

[[Page 152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=84) A great
deal of paines every man in his place took for the carrying on their Maſters
work.

Be mercifull unto me O Lord, be mercifull unto me; under the ſhadow of they
wings will I hide my ſelfe till this Tyranny be over­paſt.

Glory be to God on High, in earth peace good will to­wards men; and ſo have
mercy on me, O Lord.

JOHNN PENRƲDDOCK

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=84)

### 2\. Mrs. Penruddock's laſt letter to her honourable and dear Husband.

My dear heart,

MY ſad parting was ſo far from making me forget you, that I ſcarce thought on
my ſelf ſince, but wholy upon you. Thoſe dear embraces which I yet feel, and
ſhall never looſe being the faithfull teſtimonies of an in­dulgent husband,
have charmed my ſoul to ſuch a reverence of your remembrance, that were it
poſſible, I would with my own blood cement your dead limbs to [[Page
154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=85) life again, and
(with reverence) think it no ſin to rob heaven a little while longer of a
Martyr. Oh my dear! you muſt now pardon my paſſion, this being my laſt (oh
fatall word!) that ever you will receive from me. And know that untill the
laſt minuit that I can imagine you ſhall live, I will ſacrifice the prayers of
a Chriſti­an, and the grones of an afflicted wife: And when you are not,
(which ſure by ſympathie I ſhall know) I ſhall wiſh my own diſſolution with
you, that ſo we may go hand in hand to heaven: Tis to late to tell you what I
have (or rather have not) done for you; how turned out of doores, becauſe I
came to beg mercy: the Lord lay not your blood to their charge. I would fain
diſcourſe longer with you, but Paſſion begins to drawn my Reaſon, and will rob
me of my devoire, which is all I have left to ſerve you. Adieu therefore, ten
thouſand times my deareſt dear; and ſince I muſt never ſee you more, take this
prayer; May your Faith be ſo ſtrengthened, that your Conſtancy may continue;
and then I know that heaven will receive you, whether grief [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=85) and love will
in a ſhort time (I hope) tranſlate.

May the 3. at 11 at clock at night My dear,

Your ſad, but conſtant wife even to love your aſhes when dead, Arundel
Penruddock.

> Your children beg your bleſſing, and preſent their duties to you.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=86)

### 3\. The laſt letter from the honourable Colonel Pen­ruddock, in anſwer to
his vertuous Lady.

MY DEAREST HEART,

I Even now received thy farewell letter: each word whereof repre­ſents unto me
a moſt lively Em­bleme of your affection, drawn with thy own hand in water
colours, to the figure of a deaths head. My dear, I imbrace it, as coming
firſt from God, and then from Man: for what is there done in this City that
the Lord hath not permitted? I look up­on every line of thine, as ſo many
threads twiſted together in to that of my life, which being now woven, my
meditations tells me, will make a fit remnant for my winding ſheet. Upon the
reading thereof, I may ſay with the Prophet, I ſhould have utterly fainted,
but that I believe verily too ſee the goodneſſe of the Lord in the land of the
living. As this is mine, [[Page
157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=86) my dear, ſo let
it be thy conſolati­on. When I think what a wife and what children I go from,
and look no further, I begin to cry, O wretch­ed man that I am! But when my
thoughts ſoar higher, and fix them ſelves upon thoſe things which are above,
where I ſhall find, God my Creatour to my Father, and his Son my Redeemer to
my Brother, (for ſo they have vouchſafed to term themſelves;) then I lay aſide
thoſe relations, and do of all love my dear deſire thee, not to look to­wards
my grave where my Body lies, but toward the heaven, where I hope my Soul ſhall
gain a Manſion in my Fathers houſe. I do ſtedfaſtly believe, that God hath
heard the prayers of my friends, and thine, and mine: and how knoweſt thou O
woman, whether thou haſt not ſaved thy husband? Let thoſe conſi­derations
raiſe thy ſpirit, I beſeech thee; and that for Gods ſake and mine. Though I ly
among the chil­dren of men, which are ſet on fire againſt me; yet under the
ſhadow [[Page 158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=87)
of the Almighties wings, I will hide my ſelfe till this tyranny be over­paſt.
The greateſt conflict I have had in this extremitie, was my part­ing with
thee: the next encounter is to be with Death; and my Savi­our hath ſo pulled
out the ſting thereof, that I hope to aſſault it without fear. Though the
Armes of men have been too hard for me, yet I am now liſting my ſelfe under
the conducct of my Soveraign, and an Army of Martyrs, that the gates of hell
cannot prevaile againſt. My dear, I have now another ſubject to think on,
therefore you muſt excuſe the imperfections you finde here. I have formerly
given you directions concerning my children, to which I ſhall refer you. May
the bleſſing of Almighty God be upon thee and them, and may there not want a
man of my name to be ready to be a ſacrifice in this cauſe of God, and his
Church, ſo long as the Sun and Moon ſhall endure. I ſhall now cloſe up all,
with deſiring you to give a teſtimony for me to the world, that [[Page
159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=87) I die with ſo
much Charity, as to forgive all my enemies▪ I will joyn them in my laſt
prayers, for my friends: Amongſt which, you and my children are for my ſake
obli­ged to pay a perpetuall acknow­ledgment to Mr Rolles and his Lady, and my
couſinNota be­ne Mr Se­baſtine Iſack al­though he ſeemed very ſollicitous for
Colonel Penruddock in his life, ſince his death hath been very unworthy to his
memory (contrary to his promiſe, to the ſaid Colonel, in his life) and hath
done contrary to the will of the dead, the truſt repoſed in him, the principle
of honour and much unbecoming a Gent. Mr Sebaſtine Iſack, for their great
ſollicitations on my behalf If▪ I ſhould forget this City of Exeter for their
civilities to my own ſelfe in particular, and indeed to all of us, I ſhould
leave a reproach behind me. I will give them thanke at my death; and I hope
you and yours will do it when I am dead. My dear heart, I once more bid the
adieu, and with as much love and [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=88) ſincerity as
can be imagined, ſub­ſcribe my ſelfe.

Thy dying and loving Husband John Penruddock.

Exon May 7

and the Note, when this letter was writ, Colonel Penruddock did not know other
then that he was to die the ſame day.

laſt year and day of my date being the year of my Saviour 1655.

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=88)

### 4\. The ſpeech of the Honourable Colo­nell Penruddock, the greateſt part
whereof he delivered upon the Scaffold in Exon Caſtle the 16. day of May,
1655. the whole he left with a Gent. and friend of his, written with his own
hand; which is as followeth.  
Together with the manner of his being beheaded.

As he was aſcending the Scaffold, baring his knees, and humbly bowing him
himſelfe, he uſed theſe words; This I hope will prove to be like Jacobs
ladder; though the feet of it reſt on earth, yet I doubt not, but the top of
it reach­eth to Heaven.

When he came upon the Scaf­fold, he ſaid.

O wreteched man that I am, who ſhall deliver me from this body of death? I
thank God who hath given me victory though our Lord Jeſus Chriſt.

Then with a bundance of Chri­ſtian chearfullneſſe he ſpake to the people as
followeth.

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=89)

GENTLEMEN,

IT hath ever been the cuſtome of all per­ſons whatſoever when they come to
die, to give ſome ſatisfaction to the world, whether they be guilty of the
fact of which they ſtand charged. The crime for which I am now to die, is
Loyalty, (but) in this age called high Treaſon. I cannot deny, but that I was
at South-moulton in this County: but whether my being there, or my action
there, amount to ſo high a crime as high Treaſon; I leave to the world and the
Law to judge. Truly, if I were conſcious to my ſelf of any baſe ends that I
had in this under taking, I would not be ſo jurious to my own ſoul, or
diſingenuous to you, as to make a publick acknowledgement thereof. I ſuppoſe
that divers perſons, according as they are by their ſeverall intreſts &
relation biaſſed, give their opinions to the world concern­ing us, I conceive
it impoſſible therefore ſo to expreſs my ſelf in this particular, as not to
expoſe both my judgement and reputation to the cenſure of many which I ſhall
leave behind me. Becauſe I will not put others (therefore) upon a breach
[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=89) of
charity concerning me or my actions, I have thought fit to decline all
diſcourſes which may give them a capacity either to injure themſelves or me.
My Tryall was publick and my ſeverall examina­tions (I believe) will be
produced when I am in my grave. I will refer you there­fore to the firſt,
which I am ſure ſome of you heard, and to the later, which many of you (in
good time) may ſee Had Captain Crook done himſelf and us that right which a
Gentleman and a Souldier ought to have done, I had not now been here. The man
I forgive with all my heart: but truly Gent his pro­teſting againſt thoſe
Articles he himſelf with ſo many proteſtations and importu­nities put upon us,
hath drawn ſo much diſhonour and blood upon his own head, that I fear ſome
heavy judgement will purſue him. Though he hath been falſe to us, I pray God
that I doe not prove a true prophet to him.

Nay, I muſt ſay more, that coming on the road to Exon, he the ſaid Captain
Crook told me, Sir Joſeph Wagſtaffe was a gallent Gentleman, and that he was
ſorry that he was not taken with us; [[Page
164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=90) that then he
might have had the benefit of our Articles: but now (ſaid he) I have beſet all
the Country for him, ſo that he cannot eſcape, but muſt be hanged

He alſo queſtioned me, as I paſſed through Salisbury from London, whether he
had given me conditions. Which I endeavoring to make appear to Major Butler:
he interrupted me, and unwillingly confeſſed it, ſaying, I profered him four
hundred pounds to performe his Articles: which had been a ſtrange pro­fer of
mine, had I not really conditioned with him. And I told him then (having found
him unworthy) I would have given him five hundred pounds, believing him to be
mercenary. To make it further ap­pear, I injure him not by ſtyling him
unworthy, after theſe Articles were given he profered to piſtol me, if I did
not per­ſwade another houſe to yield, which then were boldly reſiſting. To
which my ſer­vent Iohn Biby (now a priſoner) re­plyed, I hope you will not be
ſo unworthy, as to break the Law of Arms.

Thus much I am obliged to ſay to the honour of the Souldery, that they have
been ſo far from breaking any Articles [[Page
165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=90) given to
others, that they have rather bettered them then otherwiſe.

It is now our misfortune to be made preſidents and examples together, but I
will not do the Protectour ſo much injury as to load him with this diſhonour;
ſince I have been informed, that he would have made our conditions good, if
Crook that gave them had not abjur'd them.

This is not a time for me to inlarge upon any ſubject, ſince I am now become
the Subject of death: But ſince the Arti­cles were drawn by my hand, I thought
my ſelfe obliged to a particular Juſtifi­cation of them.

I could tell you of ſome ſouldiers which are turned out of his troup for
defending thoſe conditions of ours: but let that paſs; and hence forward
inſtead of life, liberty and eſtate (which were the Articles a­greed upon) let
drawing, hanging and quartring bear the Denomination of Captain Crooks
Articles.

However I thank the Protectour for granting me this honourable Death.

I ſhould now give you an accompt of my Faith. But truly gentlemen, this poor
Na­tion is rent into ſo many ſeveral opinions, [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=91) that it is
impoſſible for me to give you mine without diſpleaſing ſome of you. However,
if any be ſo criticall as to in­quire of what Faith I die, I ſhall refer him
to the Apoſtles, Athanaſius, and the Nicene Creed, and to the teſtimo­ny of
this Reverend gentleman Dr. Short, to whom I have unboſomed my ſelf: and if
this do not ſatisfie, look in the thirty nine Articles of the Catholick Church
of England; to them I have ſubſcribed and do own them as authen­tick.

Having now given you an account concerning my ſelf; I hold my ſelfe ob­liged
in duty to ſome of my friends, to take off a ſuſpicion which lyes upon them: I
mean as to ſome perſons of Honour, which upon my examination I was char­ged to
have held correſpondency with. The Marqueſſe of Hartford, the Mar­queſſe of
Wincheſter, and my Lord of Pembrook were the perſons nomi­nated to me. I did
then acquit them, and do now ſecond it with this proteſtation, That I never
held any correſpondence with either or any of them, in relation to this
particular buſineſſe, or indeed to [[Page
167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=91) any thing which
concerned the Protect­our or his Government. As for the Mar­queſſe of
Wincheſter, I ſaw him ſome twelve years ſince, and not later; and if I ſhould
ſee him here preſent, I believe I ſhould not know him. And for the Earle of
Pembrook, he was not a man likely to whom I ſhould diſcover my thoughts,
becauſe he is a man of a contrary judg­ment.

I was examined likwiſe concerning my Brother Freke, my Couſin Haſtings, Mr
Dorrington and others. It is pro­bable their eſtates may make them lyable to
this my condition: but I do here ſo far acquit them, as to give the world this
farther proteſtation; that I am confident they are as innocent in this
buſineſſe as the youngeſt child here.

I have no more to ſay to you now, but to let you know, that I am in charity
with all men; I thank God: I both can and do forgive my greateſt perſecutors,
and all that ever had any hand in my death.

I have offered the Protectour as good ſecurity for my future demeanour as I
ſuppoſe he could have expected if he had [[Page
168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=92) thought fit to
have given me my life; certainly I ſhould not have been ſo un­gratefull as to
have imployed it againſt him. I do humbely ſubmit to Gods plea­ſure, knowing
that the iſſues of life and death are in his hand. My bloud is but a ſmall
ſacrifice, if it had been ſaved, I am ſo much a Gentleman as to have given
thanks to him that had preſerved it; and ſo much a Chriſtian▪ as to forgive
them which take it But ſeeing God by his providence hath called me to lay it
down, I willingly ſubmit to it, though terrible to nature; but bleſſed be my
Saviour, who hath taking out the ſting; ſo that I look upon it without
ter­rour. Death is a debt, and a due debt; and it hath pleaſed God to make me
ſo good a Huſband, that I am come to pay it before it is due. I am not a
ſhamed of the cauſe for which I die, but rather re­joyce that I am thought
worthy to ſuffer in the defence & cauſe of Gods true Church, my lawfull King,
the liberty of the ſub­ject, and Priviliege of Parliaments: Therefore I hope
none of mine alliance & friends will be aſhamed of it, it is ſo far from
pulling down my Family, that I look [[Page
169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=92) upon it as the
raiſing it one ſtory higher. Neither was I ſo prodigall of nature as to throw
away my life, but have uſed (though none but honourable and ho­neſt) means to
preſerve it.

Theſe unhappy times indeed have been very fatall to my family: two of my
Bro­thers already ſlain, and my ſelf going to the ſlaughter: it is Gods will,
and I hum­bly ſubmit to that providence.

I muſt render an acknowledgment of the great civilities that I have received
from this City of Exon, and ſome per­ſons of quality, and for their plentiful
proviſion made for the priſoners. I thank Mr. Sheriff for his favour towards
us, in particular to my ſelf; and I deſire him to preſent my due reſpects to
the Protect­our, and though he had no mercy for my ſelf, yet that he would
have reſpect to my family.

I am now ſtriping off my cloaths to fight a duell with death, (I conceive no
other duell lawfull) but my Saviour hath puld out the ſting of this mine
ene­my, by making himſelf a ſacrifice for me: And truly I do not think that
man deſerving one drop of his bloud, that [[Page
170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=93) will not ſpend
all for him in ſo good a cauſe.

The truth is, Gentlemen, in this age, Treaſon is an Individuum vagum, like the
wind in the Goſpell, it bloweth where it liſteth: So now treaſon is what they
pleaſe, and lighteth upon whom they will. Indeed no man, except he will be a
Trai­tour, can avoid this Cenſure of Treaſon: I know not to what end it may
come, but I pray God my own, and my brothers bloud that is now to die with me,
may be the laſt upon this ſcore.

Now Gentlemen, you may ſee what a condition you are in without a King: you
have no law to protect you, no rule to walk by; when you performe your duty to
God, your King and Countrey, you diſ­pleaſe the Arbitrary power now ſet up: (I
cannot call it government.) I ſhall leave you to peruſe my triall, and there
you ſhall ſee, what a condition this poor Nation is brought into; and (no
queſtion) will be utterly deſtroyed, if not reſtored (by Loyal Subjects) to
its old and glori­ous Government. I Pray God he lay not his Judgement upon
England for their ſluggiſhneſſe in doing their duty, and rea­dineſs [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=93) to put their
hands in their bo­ſomes, or rather taking part with the Enemy of Truth. The
Lord open their eyes, that they may be no longer lead, or drawn into ſuch
ſnares: elſe the Child unborn will curſe the day of their Pa­rents birth.

God Almighty preſerve my lawful King Charles the ſecond, from the hands of his
Enemies, and breake down the wall of Pride and Rebellion, which ſo long hath
kept him from his juſt Rights. God perſerve his Royal Mother, and all his
Majeſties Royall Brethren, and incline their hearts to ſeek after him. God
in­cline the hearts of all true Engliſh men, to ſtand up as one Man to bring
in the King; and Redeem themſelves and this poor Kingdome, out of its more
then E­gyptian ſlavery.

As I have now put off theſe garments of cloth, ſo I hope I have put off my
gar­ments of ſin, and have put on the Robes of Chriſts Righteouſneſſe here,
which will bring me to the enjoyment of his glo­rious Robes anon.

Then he kneeled down and kiſſed the block, and ſaid thus: I commit my ſoul
[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=94) to God
my Creatour and Redeemer. Look on me, O Lord at my laſt gaſping. Here my
prayer, and the prayers of all good people. I thank thee, O God for all thy
diſpenſation towards me.

Then kneeling down, he prayed moſt de­voutly, as followeth.

O Eternal, Almighty, and moſt mer­cifull God, the Righteous Judge of all the
world, look down in mercy on me a miſerable ſinner. O bleſſed Jeſus Redee­mer
of Mankind, which takeſt away the ſinnes of the world, let thy perfect manner
of obedience be preſented to thy Heaven­ly Father for me. Let thy precious
death and bloud be the Ranſome and ſatisfa­ction of my many and hainous
tranſgreſ­ſions. Thou that ſitteſt at the right hand of God, make interceſſion
for me. O ho­ly and bleſſed Spirit, which art the com­forter, fill my heart
with thy conſolati­on, O holy, bleſſed, and glorious Trini­ty, be mercifull to
me, confirm my faith, in the promiſes of the Goſpel, revive and quicken my
hope and expectation of joyes, prepared for true and faithfull ſer­vants. Let
the infinite Love of God my Saviour make my love to him ſtedfaſt, [[Page
173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=94) ſincere, and
conſtant.

O Lord conſider my condition, accept my tears, aſſwage my grief, give me
comfort and confidence in thee: impute not unto me my former ſinnes, but moſt
mercifull Father receive me into thy fa­vour for the merits of Chriſt Jeſus.
Many and grievous are my ſinnes, for I have ſinned many times againſt the
light of knowledge againſt remorſe of conſcience, againſt the motions and
opportunities of grace. But accept I beſeech thee, the ſacrifice of a broken
and contrite heart, in and for the perfect ſacrifice, oblation, and
ſatisfaction of thy Son Jeſus Chriſt. O Lord receive my ſoul after it is
deli­vered from the burthen of the fleſh into perfect joy in the ſight and
fruition of thee. And at the generall reſurrection grant that my body may be
endowed with immortality, and received with my ſoul into glory.

I praiſe thee O God, I acknowledge thee to be the Lord. O Lamb of God, that
takeſt away the ſins of the world, have mercy on me. Thou that ſitteſt at the
right hand of God, hear my prayer. O Lord Jeſus Chriſt, God and Man,
Me­diatour [[Page
174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=95) betwixt God and
Man, I have ſinned as a Man; be thou mercifull to me as a God, O holy and
bleſſed Spirit, help my infirmities, with thoſe ſighs and groans which I
cannot expreſſe.

Then he deſired to ſee the Axe, and kiſſed it, ſaying, I am like to have a
ſharp paſſage of it, but my Saviour hath ſweet­ned it unto me.

Then he ſaid, if I would have been ſo unworthy as others have been, I ſuppoſe,
I might by a lie have ſaved my life which I ſcorn to purchaſe at ſuch a rate.
I defie ſuch temptations, and them that gave them me.

Glory be to God on high: On Earth peace: Good will towards Men. And the Lord
have mercy upon my poor ſoul. A­men.

So laying his Neck upon the block, af­ter ſome private Ejaculations, he gave
the Heads-man a ſign with his hand, who at one blow, ſevered his head from his
body.

[[Page 175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=95)

### 5\. The Speech of that piouſly reſolved Hugh Grove of Chiſenbury in the
pariſh of Enford and County of Wilts Eſquire, beheaded the 16 day of May.
1655. in the Caſtle at Exon

Good people.

I Never was guilty of much Rhe­torick, nor ever loved long Speeches in all my
life, and there­fore you cannot expect either of them from me now at my death.
All that I ſhall deſire of you, beſides your hearty prayers for my ſoul, is;
That you will bear me witneſs, I die a true ſonne of the Church of England, as
it was eſtabliſhed by King Edward the ſixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and
King Charles the firſt of ever bleſſed memory: That I die a Loy­all. [[Page
176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=96) Subject to King
Charles the ſecond, my undoubted Soveraigne and a lover of the good old Laws
of the Land, the juſt Privi­ledges of Parliaments, and Rights and Liberties of
the People; for the re-eſtabliſhing of all which I doe under take this
engagement, and for which I am ready to lay down my life. God forgive the
bloudy minded Jury, and thoſe that pro­cured them: God forgive Captain Crook
for denying his Articles ſo unworthily: God forgive Mr. Dove, and all other
perſons ſwearing ſo maliciouſly and falſely againſt me: God forgive all my
enemies; I hear­tily forgive them. God bleſſe the King and all that love him,
turn the hearts of all that hate him; God bleſſe you all, and be mercifull to
you and to my ſoul, Amen.

And ſo meekly laying his neck to the block, and giving a ſigne, his head at
one blow, and a draw of the axe, was ſevered from his bodie.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=45653&page=96)

[Home](/)

Date: 1660  

