---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Naps upon Parnassus. A sleepy muse nipt and pincht, though not awakened such
voluntary and jovial copies of verses, as were lately receiv'd from some of
the wits of the universities, in a frolick, dedicated to Gondibert's mistress
by Captain Jones and others. Whereunto is added from demonstration of the
authors prosaick excellency's, his epistle to one of the universities, with
the answer; together with two satyrical characters of his own, of a
temporizer, and an antiquary, with marginal notes by a friend to the reader.
Vide Jones his legend, drink sack and gunpowder, and so fall to't.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=1)

NAPS UPON PARNASSUS.

A ſleepy Muſe nipt and pincht, though not awakened Such Voluntary and Jovial
Copies of Verſes, as were lately receiv'd from ſome of the WITS of the
Univerſities, in a Frolick, dedicated to Gon­dibert's Miſtreſs by Captain
Jones and others.

Whereunto is added for Demonſtration of the Au­thors proſaick Excellency's,
his Epiſtle to one of the Univerſities, with the Anſwer; together with two
Satyrical Characters of his Own, of a Tempo­rizer, and an Antiquary, with
Marginal Notes by a Friend to the Reader.

Vide Jones his Legend, Drink Sack and Gun­powder, and ſo fall to't.

‘ [...], Hom. Iliad. α.’

‘Aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus.’

London, Printed by expreſs Order from the WITS, for N. Brook, at the Angel in
Cornhill, 1658.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=2)

## An Advertiſement to the READER.

Courteous Reader,

THough I willingly confeſs, that a Ti­tle Page without the Authours Name
prefixt in Capitall Letters, ſhews like a Man in the Pillory without a Pa­per
(to ſpecifie his Crime) on his Forehead: nevertheleſs, thou art deſired not to
take is amiſs, that theſe preſent Poems are defective in that particular; for
there are divers, and ſundry motives, which induced this imperfe­ction. As
(1.) their Modeſty; which commands them to ſtand Bare-headed (that is, without
the Authours Name) in reſpect, and reverence to every Reader; although they
cannot be uncovered (as I queſtion not you will quickly finde.) (2.) The
Authours Ingenui­ty prompted Him to this Stratagem of con­cealing his Name, to
the end, that one and the ſame groſs Obſcurity. ſhould equally triumph over
his Name, as Poems: And now Reader,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=3) if neither
of theſe two Reaſons will ſatisfie thee, know in the third place, that I
indeed do not know, neither can learn his Name. I found theſe Poems in a dark,
blind Ale-houſe, where the Authour had with a cup too much, obnubula­ted his
Muſe, and ſo forgot, and left them be­hind. To ſpeak truly, being unwilling to
rob the world of ſo much Ingenuity, (I ſay) like the de­ſperate St. George,
redeem'd theſe Ethiopian Virgin-Poems, out of the Jaws of that fell Dragon,
(the furious gaping Oven) which, (even when I had firſt beſtridden thē
threſhold) yawn'd for them. Much adoe I had to recover Them out of the good
Womans hands, who left the bottoms of her Pies (that baking) in very great
jeopardy, for want of them: yet at laſt I did get them, as many as you ſee
there are of them. I am apt to believe there were more once, but the injury of
Fate ha's oblitera­ted the reſt. As many as could be found, haſt thou here
(Reader) carefully collected, by the ſe­dulity and expences of

Thy loving Friend Adoniram Banſtittle. alias Tinderbox.

Dated May 30. 1658. from the Apollo in Fleetſtreet.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=3)

## Naps upon Parnaſſus.

### Ʋpon the Infernal Shades of the Authors Poems: or, The hooded Hawk.

ROom, room now for a luſty Poet,

That writes as high as any I knew yet,

What's Homer but a ſpewing Dog,

Who writes a fight 'twixt Mouſe and Frog?

Of ſtout Achilles, and of Hector,

Which of them ſhould be the Victor?

And yet forſooth This Fellow muſt

(With all his Iliads too) be thruſt

Into a Nutſhel. A great knack!

Our Poet, and's Books, into a Sack

Can hardly crowded be, and yet

If you will look on's Senſe and Wit,

'Tis eaſie, and Ile make no bones

To put them in two Cherry-ſtones.

(1)

Then come along Boyes,

Valiant, and ſtrong Boyes,

For here's a Poet I tell ye

That Naps on Parnaſſus

And (ô Heavens bleſs us)

Takes Deep-ſleeps too out of Helicon.

(2)

Avaunt then poor Virgil,

Thou ne're drank'ſt a pure Gill

Of Sack, to refine thy ſconce:

Thou ſtol'ſt all from Homer,

And rod'ſt on a low Mare,

Inſtead of Pegaſus, for th'nonce.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=4)

3.

Let Martial be hang'd,

For Ile ſwear I'le be bang'd,

If he makes me ought elſe but ſleepy;

He's onely at laſt

For a brideling caſt,

And his Wit lies at th' end of his Epigrams.

4.

Then for Ovid,

Why? was not his Love hid

In's Book of Toyes, call'd Amorum:

Indeed there he wrote madly,

But in's Triſtium ſadly;

Our Poet's th' Apollo virorum.

5.

And then Flaccus Horace,

He was but a ſowr-aſs,

And good for nothing but Lyricks:

There's but One to be found

In all Engliſh ground

Writes as well; who is hight Robert Herick.

6.

Our Author's much better,

In every letter

Then Robin, and Horace Flaccus:

He is called Samuel,

Who ends well, and began well;

And if we'r not glad He can make us.

Come forth then great Poetique Imp,

Make not the Muſes all to pimp,

Whilſt thou with one of them do'ſt lie,

Making her 'creaſe and multiply,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=4)Hoping that
they too ſhall come after,

Thou mak'ſt the reſt their teeth to water.

And hope the like ſport that their Siſter

Enjoy'd by thee, when e'rſt thou kiſt her.

Thou'rt right my friend, and I've been told,

Thou alwayes hadſt a Muſe in hold:

And like Cock Hen thou wouldſt her tread,

Our Au­thors fan­cy was al­way couch­ant, for he made all his Verſes in Bed.

Making thy Verſes ſtill in Bed.

No wonder thou ſo 'obſcure doſt write,

Thou form'dſt thy Verſes all in th' Night.

Thou wer't up with th' Lamb, & down with th' Lark,

And onely lov'ſt Dealing in the Dark.

I love thee for it.—Whip Sir Davy.

I now have done.—I marry have I.

### Incerti Authoris.  
Ʋpon the Incomparable, and Inimitable Author, and his obſcure Poems.

I'm not o'th' race of Poets, nor e're made

A Verſe, without the help of Pump, or Spade.

And yet (ſo ſweet is Fame! and to be big

Of Glory!) that rather then dye; I'le dig,

And labour for a Verſe, (not You to praiſe,

Too great a task!) But mine own name to raiſe:

That my foul Beaſt may be kept in your Ark,

My Joan live with your Lady in the Dark.

Give me a proſpect where a towring Hill,

Soar's higher then ever did the Eagles Quill;

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=5)On whoſe
bald-pate ſtill undiſturbed ſit

Old Characters, that Adam's Grandſire writ;

So high, ſo wondrous high, that th' light o'th' Sun

N'ere top's it, till the Day is neer half done:

And then a Cave ſo deep, that who ſo dives

To the' bottom, e're he reach it ſpend nine lives.

Dark as Cimmerian Cells; horrid with Rocks,

Wreath'd into one another like Elſ's-locks:

A lovely ſight which more delight contains,

Then th' confus'd of the Plains:

All here are at a Gaze; none paſs it by

Regardleſs; it bids ſtand to every eye.

Here men go ſoftly, who (as if they'd fain

Be rid on't) ride a gallop o're the Plain.

Such is thy Book!—In it we plainly ſee

All the Dimenſions of Poetry.

Prometheus-like, ſometimes thou do'ſt aſpire,

And warm'ſt thy Mule; at the Celeſtiall Fire;

And then thou uſeſt (which let none deſpiſe)

Kitchin Similitudes on thy Mother's

See the Author on his Mo­ther's eyes

Eyes.

I know ſome Criticks ſay thou'rt Hard enough,

But 'tis a ſign of Laſting to be tough.

I read a Verſe of thine, then make an halt,

(For though I taſte it not, I'm ſure ther's Salt:)

And ſtudy for the meaning; and am vext;

I finde; cry  [...]: and read the next.

It is (let none for Recreation look)

A very ſtudy t'underſtand thy Book.

Plainneſs is Ruſſick, Thou art clear from that,

Who ſayes a Poets Plain, ſayes he is Flat.

W. P. A. M. W. C. Oxon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=5)

### To his Ingenuous Friend, the unknown Author of the following Poems.

COme forth at laſt, and enter on the ſtage,

Great Soul of Poeſie, that this purblind Age,

May have the film peel'd off their Eyes, and ſee

How Thou do'ſt riot in obſcurity:

In Thy abyſs they'l dive, and grope to finde,

How Thy ſtrong Wit, and Senſe is ſo combin'd;

And when they've grovell'd a long time in vain,

Will ſay (becauſe they'r blinde) Thou art not Plain.

Thus ignorant men will ſnarle at Thee; and why?

Becauſe they'r clogg'd with earth, & can't ſoar high;

Their Eyes are lin'd with dimneſs, can't behold,

How Thou in pretty turnings doſt infold

Thy ſelf and Verſe: How Thou doſt fancy ſcrew

Into each Line, and mak'ſt ev'n

The Au­thor hath borrowed ſeveral old Fancies out of Cleveland and others

Old ſeem new;

Wracking each word, and ſyllable for ſenſe,

And tortring both to make an Eloquence.

Thus the un-uſefull Grape, when cruſht and preſt,

Doth laviſh out a Liquor of the beſt:

And Camomil, until it bruiſed be

Blows not out any ſprightful fragrancy:

How many ſtroaks doth the rough marble bear,

Before it can be poliſht trim and fair?

What would men ſay if Poets onely ſhould

Be tyed to others's ſenſe of words? not mould

A meaning of their own; they muſt aſcend

Above the vulgar reach; their fancies blend

Into a wonder; make Confuſion ſeem

As if it were diſtinct: their Brains muſt teem

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=6)With darkeſt
iſſues, leſt with too much light,

They dazzle the poor Common people's ſight.

We moſt admire the Sun when he's bereav'd

Of luſtre, wrapt in an Eclipſe: Deceiv'd

Of all his Beams: when he recruits again

His former Rayes; we ſay, He's then too plain.

Ovid in his beſt Poem, let's his Muſe

Begin firſt with a Chaos, moſt confuſe.

The Gods when they deſcended from the Skies,

With Bodies vell'd their ſhining Deities.

The thundring voice of heaven (which ſpeaks ſo loud)

Is both begot, and ſpeaks too in a cloud.

The clear ſtill Streams diſcover to the eye,

What filth and dirt do in the Bottom lie;

When th' muddy boiſtrous Sea keeps from our view

More Treaſuries then mortals ever knew.

Homer the Prince of Poets was Dark 'cauſe blinde,

Our Author's like him, yet is more calcin'd.

We praiſe Propertius. Juvenal, Tibullus,

Horatius, Flaccus, Lucan, and Catullus,

Above all other petty Ballad-mongers,

Who are ſo lean, they'l ſcarce ſuffice our hungers:

But Ile forbear: who ſo ſhall read thy Book,

Will think a Sybil pen'd it, and will look

For ſome t'interpret it: thus then thou'lt puzzle

Thy Readers, 'cauſe thy Fancies thou do it muzzle.

I'le ſay but this: (Others have prais'd thee more, and better)

Thou writ'ſt in Characters, though with a common Letter.

S. T. A. M. W. C. Oxon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=6)

### To the Abſtruſe Authour on his Night-work Poems.

1

TO praiſe Thy Wit I cannot hope,

It is ſo dark, I ne're ſhall grope

It out, but by Ariadne's Rope.

2.

That I am covetous don't think,

For to illuminate Thy Ink

I'le ſix pence give to Boy with link

3.

In London ſure thou couldſt not ſcape,

On Ears, and Purſe hee'd ma [...]e a rape,

Who in Lord Majors name, doth gape

4

And cry, Your Lanthorn, and your Light.

Thy Verſes make it more then night,

Like Ghoſts Thy Fancies us afright.

5.

As when rich Wines within a Cellar's

Simile.

Dark vaulted womb are welcome dwellers,

Men ſtagger, though they are but ſmellers:

6.

Thy ſubtle Wit ſo cheats our eyes,

None can diſcover where it lies,

And yet our Brains it doth ſurprize.

7.

Let us have leave (Heroick Bard)

To ask Thee why Thou writ'ſt ſo hard?

None wear their Cloathes all welt and gard.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=7)

8.

Some one conceipt coſts us a week,

The eaſieſt asks of Dayes a Gleek:

Thou play'ſt with us at Hide and Seek.

9.

We are your friends, you can't do leſs

But ſend them quickly to the Preſs,

Their meaning then they will confeſs.

10.

And then (if Cookes do not beſpeak 'um)

When I am big with

Acertain drug, dif­fering in color from Album Graecum.

Flavum Graecum,

Thy Book ſhall be my Vade Mecum.

The two firſt letters of the two laſt words, are the Chriſten and the Surname
of him that made thoſe Verſes. Ʋ. M.

### On Mr. Somebody's Poeticall Naps upon Parnaſſus.

THe Indians with Mundungo fumigate

Their brains, and all their ſenſes opiate,

To comprehend their Gods: ſo muſt I make

My ſelf dead drunk with Helicon, and take

A Nap upon Parnaſſus, to admit

Thy Muſes, and dark Oracles of wit;

For thy obſcure, dark foggy, miſty ſtrains

Can't be receiv'd but in as cloudy brains.

For they who ſuch ſublimities diſpenſe,

Muſt finde out Souls free from the miſte of ſenſe,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=7)And cataract
of reaſon, which muſt be

(Like Him who put out's eyes that He might ſee.)

As dark as is Thy Book: for why i'th Night,

Owles (which are blinde by Day) have quickeſt ſight.

Old Homer, Virgil, Lucan, and Catullus,

Paſs for good Poet, as the Ancients tell us;

So Ovid, Claudian, Juvenal, and Martial,

Yet they compar'd with Thee'r not worth a fart all.

For they had One, and that no venial crime,

That they were underſtood by th'men o'th'time:

And what's more mean than That, which fault, if any,

Makes

Mat. Par­ker the Ballad­maker, Laureat of London.

Parker's Poems vend but for a Penny.

And Katharine Stubbs for three pence, when the women

Wo'nt grudge to pay a Crown for Jacob Behmen.

'Tis vulgar to be clear. 'Tis but a Quibble

To write a verſe that is intelligible.

But Thy judicious Muſe ſhun's this Offence,

And ſcorns the pedantry of writing Senſe.

Thine are true Heights, for Thine invention

Confounds the Readers reaſon, and Thine own,

Thou (like to Him that ſhews the famous Sight

Of Bell & the Dragon) e're thou ſhew'ſt mak'ſt night.

The Heav'ns, by men that they ſo long have been,

Ador'd, ow't to the Clouds that are between:

So 'tis Thy Soot, and Smoak, makes us admire

Th' internal Flame, of thy Poetick Fire.

As Nature's Secret parts do not excite

So much when all go naked; ſo Thy wit,

If naked, had not tempted half ſo hotly,

As now in Peticoat and waſtecoat Motly.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=8)Through
things tranſparent we diſpatch our ſight,

But gaze on thoſe which terminate our light:

And while we view dark Objects, we ne're care

To take accompt of the perſpicuous Air:

So had Thy Poetry tranſparent been,

We had in it no ſenſe, no phanſie ſeen;

But now 'tis ſo obſcure, that twon't tranſmit

Our Rayes, we may ſuſpect both Senſe and Wit.

G. C. M. A. SOAC. Oxon.

### Sonetto in Lode del Autore. Or in plain Engliſh, A Jews Letter in Ink to
commend our Negro.

DIro del Bianco pie che l'herb 'inflora?

O Della Bianca man che l'arboſcelli

Impera, inoſtra e'ndora?

O

A Scotch title for the Devil.

Del bel vis' humano, humile e piano?

O Delle Dolc' Angeliche Parole?

Queſti l'alba ne rec' e quell'il ſole;

Quelle l'eterno ciel, co'centi Tuoi;

Ma Quant' al Tuo Tacer, che non m'annoi.

Alexandro Amidei Fiorentino.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=8)

### Drollery.  
Upon the moſt Illuſtrious, (though moſt Ob­ſcure, Dark, Black, Miſty, Cloudy
Poems of the Authour: Or the Aquila in Nubibus.

EVery

A Maxime.

thing would live, Cuckows, and Owles,

Would fly abroad, as well as other Fowles;

And ſometimes whoop and ſcreetch, and tear their throats,

With their dire voice, and think them Angels notes.

A minore ad majus.

Riſe then, take wing (fledg'd Poet) let men know

If theſe Birds ſhew their heads, much more mayeſt Thou.

I cannot praiſe Thy Works not worth a fart.

What ſhall I ſpeak, what ſhall I ſay Thou art?

Such Metaphyſicks Thou writ'ſt as tranſcends

Our low, if not thine own Intelligence.

Yet, as they ſay the greater Prophets, when

Fully wrapt up with Revelations, then

Spake things they underſtood not, and yet are

Canonicall: Thou art ſtill good, and rare.

Give me a Poet wrapt in a thick Cloud,

Thunder without Lightning, one whoſe dark, loud

Voice diſdains Flaſhes, and 's enough to ſtartle

Our proudeſt Wits, from Head even to the

Well rhym'd Tutor, Brains and Stairs!

Ankle:

Thou imitat'ſt the World, whoſe firſt (we read)

Was a ſpiſs Chaos, and untempered. [...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=9)

Thou whor'ſt Obſcurity like Ixion

Cling'ſt to a Cloud, and gender'ſt thereupon.

A Race of Centaures, ſuch hard-headed Monſters,

As neither mine, nor thy brain but miſconſters.

A Scholars Gown ſhould be Dark and Divines

Put on black Caps; even ſo do all Thy Rimes.

Black Bags help Beauty, naked things ſhow Wiſt.

And Phoebus ſhews twice bigger through a Miſt.

The Sun we never gaze ſo much upon,

As when a black Eclipſe is thrown thereon.

Keep then thy Senſe. The Earth doth onely ſhow

Her Common Stones,

Where note ſhe conceals her. preci­ous ſtones, and the more mo­deſt ſhe.

which many times do throw

Us down: ſhe ſhows us trifling graſs, that's brave,

The twinkling of an eye; then findes a grave:

She hides her treaſure, and will ſooner feel

Her Bowels ripe, then ſhow her Gold and Steel.

The deepeſt Streams are dark, and glide along

With a ſmooth, gentle motion; while the throng

Of ſhallow waters brooking no ſuch ſtay,

Diſcloſe their bottoms, murmuring away.

In brief Thou art our Oracle, dark, and much

Reſerv'd, but do not ceaſe, That ſhould be Such.

Let others call for Sun-ſhine, and Day-light,

Our Reſt is from Thy Shadow, and Thy Night.

But I have done: onely I'le tell the Readers,

One line of Thine hath more then all thy Leaders,

Ovid, and Virgil, Homer, and the reſt,

Who ſpake but ſeldom Wit, and good at beſt:

Whoſe thrift of Brains was ſuch, they needs muſt know

What, and to whom, how much, nay when, and how▪

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=9)Thy Lines are
liberal, they have a Mine

Of

Lofty, becauſe high, and high be­cauſe no body can reach them

lofty Metaphors, elſe they'r not Thine.

Thy Muſe condenſe's Wit, which others beat,

And rarifie out into many a ſheet.

Thine's Gold in th' Ore, others but in a Leaf,

In theirs we Glean, from Thee each plucks a Sheaf.

Thou art no Ape of others: never rifleſt

Old thred-bare Poets: for thou never trifleſt.

Homer's ſpew makes Thee drunk:  [...]

Empties Thy Maw more then e're did Good Friday.

Thou ſcorn'ſt to imitate, or read; ſuch helps

May ſerve for ſquemiſh Brains, and ſtupid Whelps,

Whoſe theeving hands (yet not Mercuriall) pick

Here a line, and there a word; ſome one ſtick

Or two, out of a Neighbours Hedge, and then

Faggot them for next town, and are fine men.

But 'tis not ſo with Thee: O mighty Stock!

Thy Head hews all out of its own great Block,

Ʋnletter'd Scholar! that weav'ſt

An old Bodge.

all, and ſome

From Thy own fruitful Bowels, and vaſt womb.

Poets are born ſo, not made: and Thou art

Of Poets a Naturall, and not by Art.

G. I. M. A. W. C. Oxon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=10)

#### Carmen Proverbiale Exclamatorium in laudem Authoris. Pars prior

O Decus Anglorum! Vates famoſe tuorum,

Cujus pars nona facit Oxen-ford Helecona.

Saepe ego Te vidi, feciſti me quoque ride-

re, cum dixiſti certe nil, ſed tacuiſti:

At loqueris jam nunc, & rideo plus ego quam tunc.

Cùm videam Librum (qui non ſenſit modò cri­brum)

Et Carmen nigrum, ſed & ingenium neque pi­grum;

Non quòd ego ſperno Librum quem abs lumine cerno,

(Eſtque Liber clarus) eſt Author, & undique ra­rus)

Haec ratio non eſt quià rideo, my meaning's

No falſe poſition in Engliſh good Sir!

honeſt.

Carminis ô Fulchrum! ſpernit tua Muſa ſepul­chrum!

Naviget Aethiopas inter Tuus (ô Bone) linter,

Quiſ (que) ibi amat

For co­lorem, by a piece of an Aphaereſis, and a piece of Syncope

c'lorem libri, & monſtrabit amo­rem.

Tu bonus, & magnus, & candidus, ut niger agnus

Eſt pedibus fama tua fortior omni Dama!

O digne! O docte! O nigrior ipſâ nocte!

Omnibus ô Paſtime! O vates!

Sic exclamavit. T. F. nuper N. C. Oxon. Soc.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=10)

#### The ſecond Part in the Authours Language,  
Being a Verſe Panegyrick in Praiſe of the Author's tranſcendently delicious,
Poeticall dainties, in­cloſ'd in the You may read it▪ Wodden▪ Wicker-Basket of
his Critique Poems.

SIR.

IN that ſmall inch of time I ſtole, to look

On th'abſtruſe Depths of Your Myſterious Book;

Heav'ns bleſs mine eye-ſight! what ſtrains did I ſee?

What Steropegeretick Poetry!

What Hieroglyphick words? what Riddles? all

In Letters more then Cabaliſticall.

Perhaps our fingers may Your Verſes ſcan,

But all our Noddles underſtand them can

No more, then read that Dung-fork't Pot-hook's Hand,

Which in Queens Colledge Library doth ſtand.

The cutting Hanger of your Wit I can't ſee,

For that ſame Scabberd that conceals yours Fancy▪

Thus a black velvet Casket hides a Jewel,

And a dark Wood-houſe wholeſome winter fuel;

Thus John Tredeskin ſtarves our greedy eyes,

By boxing up his new found Rarities.

Thus were Philoſophers content to be

Renown'd, and famous in Obſcurity.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=11)We fear
Actaeons horns dare not look on,

When you do

But, when he does ſo, he verifies the Pro­verb, viz. Aethopem lavat.

ſcowr your skin in Helicon.

We cannot (Lynceus-like) ſee through the wall

Of your ſtrong mortred Poems, nor can all

The ſmall ſhot of our Brains make one hole in

The Bulwark of your Book, that Fort to win.

Open your meanings Door: ô do not lock it!

Undoe the Buttons of your ſmaller Pocket;

And charitably ſpend thoſe Angels there;

Let them enrich, and actuate our Sphere:

Take off our Bongraces, and ſhine upon us,

Though your reſplendent Beams ſhould chance to

O were your verſes ſtol'n, that ſo we might (tan us.)

Hope in good time to ſee them come to light!

But felt I not a ſtrange Poetick heat

Glowing therein (which reading makes me ſweat)

Vulcan ſhould take 'um, and I'de not exempt 'um,

Becauſe they be things.—Quibus lumen ademptum.

I thought to have commended ſomething there,

But all exceeds my commendations far:

I hope ſome Wit, when he your honour hears,

Will praiſe your Mothers Eyes Turpentine tears:

For my part, I can but ſtand ſtill, and ſtare,

And cry O wondrous! ſtrange! profound! and rare!

Vaſt wits muſt fathom you, better then thus;

You merit more then all they:—As for us,

The Beetles of our Rhymes ſhall drive full faſt in

The wedges of your worth to everlaſtin.

[g] Au­fertur in fine, per Apocopen

T F. lately F. N. C. Oxon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=11)

### A Son amice, l' Autheur de cette Liure ſur ſon Obſcuritie.

N'Import (grand Poete)

Si tes vers ſont obſcures;

C'eſt eſtre imperfecte,

Si ſerroient toutes pures.

L' eſtime ceſt à choſes

Qui ſont pluis difficiles;

L' eſpine fait les roſes

Non paroiſtre viles.

### Ʋpon the ſame.

WHat means thy Pegaſus to take this flight?

Thy Book is forth, but when wil't come to light

Are the nine Girles recluſe? and art thou he

Wilt turn Parnaſſus to a Nunnery?

'Twas alwayes Mountainous; but, by what ſpell

Haſt thou now made it inacceſſible?

Fountains are clear; but if Thou thus go on,

Thou'lt make a Puddle of thy Helicon.

Yet Darkneſs is thy vertue; were thy ſenſe

But legible to our intelligence;

We might prophane thy fancy, or deſpiſe;

Thus Perſians hide their King from vulgar eyes,

They that entail a game at Cheſs upon

Their families to time's ſucceſſion,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=12)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=12)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=13)Making each
Pawn out-live an Army; ſee

The Biſhops move but once a Jubilee;

And Check ne're comes without a Comet, they

Might take thy Book to task inſtead of play.

Were Archimedes living; ten to one,

He'd make each Verſe a Propoſition;

And pore as long upon't; but I dare ſay

Without all hopes of crying  [...]

Might none be Judges of thy Wit, but ſuch

As underſtand it, t'will abide the touch.

I me ſure we know it not: then who can blame us

To bring Thee in, onely our

A Law­term a Ju­ry brings in, when it can't de­termine of a Caſe.

Ignoramus.

H. L. W. C. C.

### Ʋpon the Gurmundizing Quagmires, and moſt Adiaphanous Bogs, of the
Author's obnubilated Roundelayes.

THou that dwarft'ſt mountains into molehill ſenſe

With Ell-broad Marrow-bones of Eloquence;

Cauſing thy Eel-skin'd Glaſſes ſeem to be

But North-wind Blaſts of Mahomet's Nunnery.

Breath forth great Argos maſt into my hand,

That I may bob for Whales upon dry land?

Send down the Meſenterick Huckle-bone

Of Creſt-faln Pancakes which do cry and grone,

That ovall millſtones are like tarbax't Stars,

Spher'd ſo on purpoſe by Saturn, and eke Mars.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=13)'Tis true
indeed Saturn did leave his Miter,

To be Sow-gelded by 's God-ſon Jupiter.

What then? ſhould Dunſmore's Bulls fall from the sky?

And Cart-ropes into Princes ſecrets pry?

No ſure: we mortals then may fall aſleep

On feather'd Dripping-pans, playing Bo-peep.

But that's a work onely befits the Gods,

To Weather-cock their Eyes with fiſhing-rods.

Sail then (great Poet!) thither, where the mode is

To wear Black-pudding-Points, at th' Antipodes:

Ruſh forth into that Stage; and then it may be

Thou'lt Crakanthorp thy Muſe with dull Farnaby.

Open our eyes with marble pick-tooths, then,

To ſee thy bed-rid Beetles turn to Men:

Grinde out thy Verſes into meal-mouth'd Rhimes,

With Camomil'd Horſe-plum-trees of the times.

Break out thy Muſe's teeth; but be no caitiff,

To nickname Lobſters with the caſe Ablative:

Then, we ſhall ſee great Whiting mops in ſhrouds,

And Planets bounce Canundrums in the Clouds:

Then ſhall we ſee thee paſs the Gallow Tyburn,

Creeping on Carret-tops, and bawl out, I burn,

I burn (great Jove)—with that, he ſtaid his pace,

And heard a Lady call out thus, with grace;

Dame Gargamel bids hye you home to ſupper,

For great

In Engliſh, a Grandvifier, a grand Stateſman in Turky.

Grangowſier's Mule ha's broke his crupper.

T. C. of Q. K. C.

### [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=14)To his
ingenuous Friend, the Author, on his imcomparable Poems. Carmen Jocoſerium.

WEr't not my friend, the world ſhould know

How I could praiſe thy Works [I trow]

Sounding hence to Conſtantinople,

Poetique ſtrains, I'le wage a

or 6s. 8d.

Noble;

But ſince 'tis ſo, (Oh! Oh, the pity!)

I muſt laud thee in Obſcurity;

Making thy Verſes this the Better,

Becauſe like thine in Word, and Letter.

Nor are they therefore to be blam'd,

They will be lighter if enflam'd:

Never till then, expect a Riddle

To be explain'd with

An Eng­liſh ſaw inver'ſt.

faddle fiddle.

Such Lines as theſe were none before,

Since the cruel fight of Sir Eglamore.

And in a word; that I may end all,

Better were never made by

A fa­mous Scoth Poet I think he was.

Kendall.

### Once again.

IF I may gueſs at Poets in our Land,

Thou beat'ſt them all above, and under hand;

Nay under leg too, for thy feet out-run 'um,

As far as is from Oxford unto Lon'on:

Nay, give them half in half, thou creepeſt faſter

Then Scottiſh Poſts, that in the greateſt haſte are;

Nor in thy Speed alone do lie thy Glories,

But thou 'rt ſo ſweet, that done, thou taſteſt Moriſh.

Who e're (I wiſs) did ſee one, like thee, handy?

And Rhymes deliciouſer then Sugar candy?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=14)To thee
compar'd, our Engliſh Poets all ſtop,

And vail their Bonnets, even Shakeſpear's

It ſhould have been Falſtaff, if the rhyme had per­mitted it.

Falſtop.

Chaucer the firſt of all was'nt worth a farthing,

Lidgate, and Huntingdon, with Gaffer Harding.

Non-ſenſe the Faëry Queen, and Michael Drayton,

Like Babel's Balm; or Rhymes of Edward Paiton,

Waller, and Turlingham, and brave George Sandys,

Beaumont, and Fletcher, Donne, Jeremy Candiſh,

Herbert, and Cleeveland, and all the train noble

Are Saints-bells unto thee, and thou great Bow-bell.

Ben Johnſon 'tis true ſhew'd us how he could hit

Each humour now; and then be out of it;

Nor could he alwayes keep his Muſe a gallop,

With curb, or whip, but ſometimes had but ſmall (hope.)

Cowly alack's too plain; his Davideis,

But fit for boyes to read, like Virgil's Enaeis;

And for his Miſtreſs, and his other Poems;

Anacreontique, and Pindarique Theams,

They have no Method in 'um, and are not worth

One pin to kindle fires, and ſet on hot broth;

None like to Thee, but the Writer of ƲRANIA,

Or Friar John the Poet of Normannia;

With Pagan Fiſher, who e'rſt made a ſpeech,

To ſhew that he could verſifie, and preach;

And put it in the News-books too, for all

To know, how he was jeer'd in Chriſts-Church Hall.

Thou bee'ſt a brave Boy, truſt me if thou be'nt,

The beſt that ever eat ſalt fiſh in Lent;

Which makes thy Verſes too to be ſo witty,

Becauſe Thou ſeaſoneſt ſo well each Ditty.

S. W. W. C. C. Oxon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=15)

### An Autoſchediaſtique  
To the Ingenuous Authour, on his Poems ſo Miſcellaneous.

CAll not theſe

Why? who calls 'um ſo but you?

Miſcellaneous Poems; why?

What ſhall we call them then? a Rhapſody.

So our Grammarians Homer's Iliads name;

And you your ſelf do verifie the ſame;

The difference onely ſtands in this, that He

A Grecian: Poet, You an Engliſh bee.

We ſtile Him Father: but when that is done,

We muſt acknowledge you to be his Son:

Him Plato (notwithſtanding all His Wit)

Into his Commonwealth would not admit:

We never deem our ſelves more happy then,

When we enjoy the writings of ſuch men.

If He were blinde (pardon me what I ſay)

You are ſo too; yet in another way:

So have I ſeen Dame Juſtice regent ſit

With Eyes blind-folded to diſcern what's fit.

Your Eyes were ſhut, when Verſes you did make:

(What would you've done if you had been awake?)

No wonder then that you are ſo abſtruſe,

That had to do in darkneſs with your Muſe.

What though our Poets ſometimes Liars are?

Each one in this hath not a common ſhare:

Nor doth the formal reaſon of Poetry

Conſiſt in this, that it muſt be a Lie.

What hinders but a man may laugh, and rhime,

And ſpeak the truth too at the ſelf ſame time?

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=15)Tears have
their Fallacies, but who e're knew

A man, a merry Poet, and not true?

Legends abundance have I read in Proſe,

In Verſe but onely one Metamorphoſe:

Beſides, all do not ſee the truths that lie

Couch't in the bowels of Mythology.

You truth have ſpoken; and withall ſo plain,

That one would think Luoilius come again;

And yet your ſtile is ſo myſterious,

As that of Juvenal, or Perſius.

Briefly, if any may be ſaid to be

An Hieroglyphick Poet, You are He.

True are your Eulogies; your Satyrs keen;

Sad are your Elogies; your Silvae green.

Others have ſpoken this before; for me,

I cannot praiſe (for wondring) what I ſee.

Philoſophers, and Poets beſt are new,

Your Work commends it ſelf, and ſo 't muſt You.

N. F. C. W. F. Oxon.

### Ʋpon the nebuligerous, tenebricoſiform'd Wit, of the Authour, abſconded in
the nigricated Womb of theſe Poems.

O! For the cutting knife now of Sow-gelder,

To rip thy Womb, and ſee thy Hans en Kelder.

Thy Wit as yet is wrapt in's Secundinae;

Which muſt be launc't, or elſe we ne're ſhal find ye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=16)D'ee think
we can ſee Boy wrapt up in Mantle?

For my part, how to do't ſurely I can't tell.

When I thy Verſes read, like in's ſhell Tortoiſe,

Thy Wits in them as Wine in quart is;

We can't ſee either of them until open'd,

Which if they be not, they'r not worth a Rope end.

Within thy Book I'de ha' thee put a Comment,

We may then underſtand peradventure ſome on't;

Elſe we ſhall ne're do't; for now as the caſe ſtands,

When we but read it, we are put to baſe ſtands;

And then we threſh, and beat, and keep a quar­ter;

Then reſt; then fall again on: juſt like Carter

Upon his Horſes poor, tugging, and plucking

To get his Wain out, that the Mire is ſtuck in.

VVe ſweat, and pull; but cùm omne venit ad omne,

The wit within thy Verſe we cannot come nigh.

VVe may as ſoon our brains knock out, as knock in

Thy myſtick ſenſe, 'cauſe thou writ'ſt ſtill a fog in.

Go on brave Son of Tartar, black as Pluto,

Take ſome work elſe in hand, and fall a new to

Some lofty ſtrain, that may even puzzle Jupiter

To underſtand: then ſurely thou wilt ſhut it o're

Our weaker mindes; and make the God of Wiſdom

To fret, and fume, becauſe it was not his doom,

To have thy Poets body, and to ſwallow

Such things as hee'l ne're do whil'ſt hee's Apollo.

O all you mighty Poets, whether Hebrew,

Greek, Latine, Perſian, Caldee, and all the Brewers

of Italian verſe, French, Engliſh, German,

If you'r compar'd to Him, you'r all but poor men.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=16)I'le ſay no
more but this, Thou art the man, Sir,

That better art then all our former Grandſiers.

Adoniram Bitefig of Utopia.

### To his highly eſteemed Friend the Authour: on his inſpired Poems.

CAſt down your Baies (fond Poets) girt his brow,

To whom Poetick Raptures homage owe;

Whoſe nobler ſoul is onely fit to be

The ſtandard to all kinde of Poetry.

Fancy lay breathleſs, and that ſacred fire

Rak'd up in its own aſhes did expire.

The Fount dri'd up; nor did the Jovial Crew

Of Siſters meet, as they were wont to do:

Apollo gone Shepheards obtain'd the Spring,

And Poets onely went a wool-gathring:

But You (my friend) from whoſe moiſt brain doth flow

A better Helicon then that we owe

(To th' Horſe's ſtamp) ſcorning ſo long to ſee

The God thus baffled by Obſcurity;

Regain'd the Fort, and by thy lofty ſtrains,

Recover'dſt mountain, ſpring, and neighbring plains.

H. W. W. C. C. Oxon.

### [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=17) Ʋpon
the light-footed, though dark Poems of the Au­thour, ſo nimble, that they skip
out of the Rea­ders ſight, though he haſtes never ſo faſt to overtake them.

COme blow the Trumpets, make 'um cry tarrara;

And from hence ſound as far as is

A Pro­vince in Italy.

Ferrara;

That they may hear the worth there of theſe Po­ems,

Which were begot in high, and not in low

A Scotch word for a Belly.

Wembs▪

The Authours brain; when once he did but knock it,

Verſe would pour out, as water out of Bucket.

But firſt I'le tell the way that he accuſtom'd

To generate his verſe▪ His head then was tomb'd

Within a Cap of linned, or of woollen,

And then within the Bed his feet would pull in.

And all day long in it He would lie naked,

As hot as though in Oven He were baked:

There would He have both cruel Pangs and Tor­tures,

As if He had been pounded in ten Mortars:

Juſt like the Pangs that Women have in travel,

When they cry out, Back, Belly, Bones, and Navel;

Till at the laſt He would be unto Bed brought

Of Verſes few: and all that while He fed not:

Soon as He was deliver'd, He would lick 'um

Over, and o're, as Bears do Cubs; and ſtick 'um

With pen, and ink on paper. What then? wot ye

That theſe were Verſes bad? They were not ſnotty.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=17)When He had
made 'um clean: no they were brave ones,

This Verſe is ſomewhat of the longeſt ſize.

There could not be ſuch made again, though writ with quils of Ravens.

Rare we muſt think them, that are made on bolſters,

(A kinde of Cuſhion that's ſold by Ʋpholſters.)

For all day long He did conſult on pillow,

Which made him write in Thunder, not in ſtile low.

If you ask why his Wit is dark. and can't ſee't,

Alwayes He hid himſelf, and writ i'th' ſheet.

But I have done, he that ſhall next come after,

May make you ſerious, we create you laughter.

Dón John Puntaeus.  [...].

### To the unknown Author.

I That ne're ſpoke in Verſe, am come

To adde my Farthing to Thy Sum;

What if I ſtrain a Line or ſo,

Thy Verſes Feet can make me go,

If Leg or Arm be broke: 'tis true

He is a Poet, right, true blue;

And whether or no I crack my brain,

True blue I'me ſure can never ſtain.

Nay, his incomparable Verſe,

Would raiſe me, were I in my Herſe:

His Line's ſo myſtique, ſo profound,

No Treaſure buried under ground

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=18)Were worth
ſo much at comming forth,

Wer's Verſes ſold to half their worth:

Some one perhaps may in a puff,

Say they are pittifull enough;

Or that they would be more meet,

To make his Grandam a Winding-ſheet?

Let ſuch with their Balladian Rhymes

Exhauſt their oyl, and ſpend their times

To ſeek for Arts not yet reveal'd;

But let His Verſes live conceal'd.

For I'le avouch't by Jove they'r good,

Had we more plenty of the Brood.

R. F.

### Ʋpon the Blackneſs of Darkneſs: the Authours Poems.

SOme ſay Mathematicks are hard to know;

Some ſay the School-men are difficult too:

One complains of Arabick, 'tis not eaſie;

Another of Coptique, it cannot pleaſe me.

One ſayes that Homer was a blinde Poet,

And ſo was Perſius, and Cleaveland: I know it.

Some ſay that Night is Dark, others agen

Will ſwear that dark Rooms are fit for mad men.

Let 'um ſay what they will: I'm ſure there's none

If thou bee'ſt but in place, deſerves the Throne;

The Kingdom of Darkneſs is all thine own.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=18) Euclide is
eaſie, and Scotus is plain,

If eithers compared with thy darker ſtrain,

Arabique too; and any other Tongue,

May ſooner be known then Thy plaineſt Song.

Cleaveland, and Homer, and Perſius to boot,

Are clear and ſmooth, if compar'd with thy foot:

Yea, the Night it ſelf, or the Grave (as ſome ſay)

I'th' midſt of thy Clouds would be a Milkie-way.

Therefore the Proverb lye's, if ever it tell,

Dark Rooms are for Mad-men; for in ſuch to dwell,

Thy Wit, and Thy Fancy, do hold it full well.

Timothy Tinderbox of Jamaica.

### Ʋpon the Author's incomparable Hogan Mogan Myſteries lockt up in the
duskie ſhady Cheſt of his Poems: or, Jack in a Box:

OH! that I had a quill that's ſnatcht from Eagle,

That I may write thy praiſe: or th' mouth of Beagle,

To throat thy worth out, for thy Verſes gallant,

(Of which within thy Book there is no ſmall want)

In which there Fancy lies up to the Elbows,

And Satyrs keen as are the Spaniſh Bilboes.

If thou wouldſt write (as we ſay) plain as Dunſtable;

We might then apprehend thee; but not Conſtable

Now can do't, nor to boot all his Watch-men,

Although it be their Calling to Attach men.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=19)Thou
ſcorn'ſt to write in ſtile that's call'd down-right

Becauſe (ſay'ſt thou) to this age 'twill not ſound right;

Therefore doſt ſwear thou muſt things above Moon write.

I'le bid defiance now to Po'et Boquendo,

Such Verſe as his ofttimes Ballad-Women do

Make; yes, and better too, his Turkiſh Turbat

Fits not our Engliſh heads; his Verſes are but

Such as may be made by your Jack or your Gill;

Our Poet makes as good as ev'r did Virgil.

His title tells us, that upon Parnaſſus

He nap't to make ſome Verſe, but as the caſe is,

Men ſcarce will credit; yet why not? f'r ought I know,

He took deep ſleeps ex fonte Caballino.

For he that reads his Book will ſwear he dream'd ſure,

Elſe never ſuch dark Poems had he teem▪d ſure.

Yet ought not men to think u'm ſad 'cauſe obſcure,

They'le give you mirth I warrant, and all ſobs cure.

At th' end of his Book in jerking Character,

Antiquity lies bruis'd, he hath ſo thwack't her.

Nor 'ſcapes from his Deſcription Temporizer,

Who when he ſees himſelf laſht ſo, will Miſerere

mei Domine cry.—But Readers haſte in

To view the Lines of Poet—

Read'um I pray, for I will ſwear th'are good ones,

And cannot mended be by a whole brood on's:

Becauſe, if ever we intend to do it,

We muſt drink Foggie Ale, and ſo fall to it.

W. G. C. W. C.

### [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=19) Ʋpon
the Author's Myſtery of Babylon.

MY infant tender Muſe can't praiſe thy tongue,

As well as others of the learned throng.

He's perfect man and wit, whoſe larger brain

Can comprehend, and praiſe thy loweſt ſtrain.

A Hue and cry

With ſwifteſt pace,

And nimbleſt race,

If it ſhould try

And ride to ſpy,

Would hardly trace

Thy ſenſe, and finde

Thy myſtick minde.

I cannot ſay thou writ'ſt inſtead of Ink

With juice of Lemons, that's too ſharp a drink,

And quick; but yet as that conceals what's writ,

Writes well enough, but then

Blots out as faſt agen;

And ſo by riddling play

Brings night in midſt of Day,

And none muſt hope to ſee

What's written, though there it be.

Juſt ſo thou juggleſt, ſpeak'ſt good ſenſe and wit,

Yet ſo obſcure in every part of it,

As that it diſappears

From all our eyes and ears,

And we muſt uſe implicit faith to ſee't.

Yet do not cry,

Nor be angry.

And thy friends fly,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=20)As if they
did abuſe thee

Thy body's opacous

But do'nt thou miſtake us,

Nor pluck thy Myſtachios,

If ever thou wouldſt uſe me:

Becauſe ev'ry Letter,

Is far much the better,

That wants

t. inſeri­tur per E­pentheſin.

Interpretter,

And much doth amuſe me.

I thought to have praiſed ſome of thy Coppies,

And ſhew'd how far th' excell'ſt other Puppies;

But thy meaning is deep,

And in it to peep,

I fear my head will turn giddy.

Thy Ale is ſo ſtrong,

And bottled ſo long,

And cloſe, that now 'tis ſo heady;

As that it's mouth

I would be loath

To open: 'tis ſo froppiſh

I know it will fly,

And ſmite my eye,

And make my brains quite ſottiſh.

J. D. W. C. C.

### [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=20) Ʋpon
the imcomparably-high-fancied Poems of the Author, ſo monſtrouſly Obſcure.

GIve me ſome ink fetcht from the Muſes ſtream,

Lull me aſleep in a Poetique Dream;

Inſpire me with a rapture, let my Breaſt

By ſacred Fury be poſſeſt.

Reach me a quill drawn from an Eagles wing,

Teach me the way to write i'th' Moon, and bring

All the world to read, and hear

What in thy praiſe I ſhall write there.

Hence you Poetique Dablers, hide your heads

In Clouds and Darkneſs, here's one better leads

Poor undeceived mortals, and diſplaies

To undiſcovered Lands of Poetry,

Which hitherto did unknown lie;

And will be ever ſo, far nearer wayes.

Let Homer vaniſh hence, leſt by the Pain

Of hearing him, he vomit once again.

Let Virgil feed on bread, leave him the Spring

From which the Poets their originall bring:

Let Ovid write more Triſtia's; break his quill,

He's baniſh'd once more from Parnaſſus Hill.

Hence ye poor Ants that on that Mountain ſit,

Hence, and give place to a more majeſtique wit.

He comes, fly off, leſt you his triumph meet,

Caſt down your Pens, and onely uſe your Feet.

Let's ſee your backs, h'as purchaſed all the Mount;

Here's no room left for men of your account:

Here's not one Turf under your Heads to lie,

After your death, unleſs you from Him buy.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=21)I ſaw the
Bargain, when the Muſes gave

To him all right, which in that place they have.

Thou haſt expoſed to the common ſight

Thy Poems, yet I can't ſay brought to light.

Thy modeſt Muſe puts on a mask between

Our ſight and it, ſees all, and is not ſeen.

Thy Verſes riſe above the vulgar flight,

And draw themſelves out of my wandring ſight;

Soar up to heaven to make a brighter day,

Unleſs they meet the fire by the way.

Prick up your ears Mortality, and hear

The higheſt Lines that ever Paper bear:

Bring your Five Senſes hither, all won't do

(I think) to read and underſtand him too.

Put on your Spectacles, and wipe your eyes,

And then you'l ſee where the deep Fancy lies:

Attend theſe ſacred Rimes; ſee, they begin

To knock at your Brains door, and can't come in.

Think you within the ſmall ſpace of your Brain

To conceive that which the world can't contain?

He's greater far then to be chain'd to Senſe;

Or held within that ſtrait Circumference.

Divinity ſcorns ſenſe, and Angels ne're

Can be confined to that Sphere.

Oracles ne're did deſcend to be

Eaſie and plain to each capacity;

But hover'd in a myſtick Cloud,

Seldom conceiv'd, yet ſounding loud.

The Gods when they came from above

To live with men, did chuſe a Grove:

A place in its own native darkneſs wrapt,

Where they the ſight of vulgar eyes eſcap't.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=21)The holieſt
place was wondred at, not ſeen:

The Prieſt himſelf might onely enter in:

God to prophaner eyes denied the view,

Leſt they contemned what they knew.

Poets ſhould have Elijah's mantles, till the day

They go to heaven, and then caſt them away.

The Suns bright beams, unleſs they look behinde

A cloud, there wondring lookers on do blind.

None that Divine, or Angels hand,

Which with a ſudden trembling did affright▪

The Babiloneſh Kings delight;

Unleſs interpreted could underſtand.

Should you religion ſhew to common eyes,

You from adoring teach them to deſpiſe:

The Temple had its vail, which checkt the light

Of Divine Myſteries from Prophaner ſight.

The Turkiſh moſques are darkned by their law,

To ſtrike Beholders with Majeſtick awe.

Curtains fit thoſe that on Parnaſſus Dream,

Or near the Bublings of the ſacred ſtream.

Poets a'nt pictured in tranſparent lawn,

But in a mantle caſt about them, drawn.

They that are crown'd with laurel boughs,

The leaves give ſhaddow to their Brows.

The true Poetick fire ſhould have its ſmoak;

Which might or blinde, or choak

Thoſe that approach too near; the ſun

Can Draw up miſts from Helicon.

Light things or top of waters are firſt ſpied;

Thoſe of more w [...]t down to the bottom ſlide.

We take to get moſt precious things more pains,

The beſt things are leaſt obvious and plain.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=22)The eye,
which in it ſelf's all light,

In various coats is wrapt up from our ſight.

The choiceſt Fruits which nature liketh beſt,

From injury in divers ſhells are dreſt.

The pureſt Earth which leaſt of mixture taſt's

Lies far removed near the center plac't.

Beſt things may be obſcure; thus was the Cloud

On th' one ſide light, on th' other in a ſhrowd.

Thus the North and Southern Pole

On which celeſtial Bodies rowl;

Which all the Earth doth come between,

Are never both together ſeen.

But if One gives the Saylours light,

The Other is hid from their ſight.

Thus mountains in the unthrift moon,

Without the help of glaſſes, can't be ſhewn.

Thou Hieroglyphick Poet! whoſe deep wit

Cannot be known without expounding it.

The Turks, as many Commentatours throw'd

As might at once two hundred Camels load,

Into the waves: ſhould all thoſe thee expound,

They'de leave thee juſt as deep as firſt they found.

The expoſitions on thy Myſteries

To ſuch a numerous off-ſpring ſhall ariſe,

As will put down the ignorant Rout

Of thoſe that blindely doat about

Aquinas Sums, and Lombard's cobweb ſtuffe;

Yet ſwear at laſt they han't explain'd enough:

Perſius may hang himſelf, for now he ha's loſt

The Darkneſs which he onely once ingroſt;

That clowdy Poet, if compared to thee,

By A B C Boyes underſtood may be.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=22)The Devil
(had Barbarus thy Verſes ſeen)

But by ſome Aenygmatick notion took

From the great abyſſe of thy Book.

Or ſome deep Fancies in thy Brain that ſwim,

Ile lay my life on't they'de have orappled him.

Poets (as Aeolus the windes in caves)

By loading words in Fetters make them ſlaves:

You yours in an eternal Dungeon keep,

(Darker far then that of Ink,)

Onely it wants the ſtink:

Through which not one ſmall Beam of light can creep.

Fetch me Auguſtus eyes, or Tamerlane's,

Whoſe ſight could give intelligence to their Brains

In thickeſt Darkneſs; or his that could ſpie

The enemies Fleet in Carthage Road to lie

Three hundred Leagues off; and it may be they

In this thy profound night will finde ſome day.

They that from new made Characters can finde,

And pick at laſt the myſtick minde

Of him that made them, would be more put to't,

To ſearch the meaning of thy fancy out.

Should we attempt to hunt thy wit,

As men do Hares by th' impreſs of it's feet:

Be ſure we never ſhould it take,

It doth ſo many ſubtle windings make.

Thy Book's a Labyrinth, which doth infold

It ſelf in many turnings, that do flie

The curious Diligence of the Readers eye;

And yet it doth no Monſters hold.

Like thoſe that writ in wax, thy wit

Is cloſed and ſealed, as ſoon as writ.

I've ſometimes ſeen thoſe that do bathe

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=23)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=23)

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=24)Themſelves
in our Suns waters, firſt to ſwathe

Their Bodies in ſome ſhrowds for fear

Leſt any misbecoming nakedneſs appear:

So thou when dipt in Helicon, comeſt out

Hid and clouded from the vulgar rout:

Yet thou by hiding of thy light,

Complieſt with the weakneſs of our ſight.

For ſhouldſt thou to our mortal eyes

With all thy Beams and luſter on, ariſe;

Th' exceeding brightneſs of that day

Would make us blinde and grope our way.

Go forth great ſpirit, let me ſee

What the next age will think of thee.

Dazle the world, ſhew that their ſight

Is not ſo piercing as it might.

Make Antiquaries work in the next age,

T'unty the Gordian knots of every page;

Let them admire the Ocean of thy wit,

Whilſt all their leaden heads can't fathom it.

Till the Phenix of the world,

Into its funeral flame is hurl'd;

To comprehend thy depth let none aſpire,

Till all our Bodley's there ſhall burn,

And th' aſhes be cloſed in one urn,

Till thy Book is enlightened by that fire.

T. S. W. C. F. Oxon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=24)

## The Epiſtle Dedicatory made by the Authour (upon ſome diſlike) and
preſented to his now adopted Mother, the Univerſity of Cambridge.

Deareſt Dam,

I Could now with ſorrow wiſh, that I had hang'd on the tawny Ʋdders of your
Charity inſtead of your Siſter Oxfords, that I might from thence have ſucked
the ſilver Milk of Education with the now leaden Lips of my Appre­henſion.
However, ſince it cannot now be, that I ſhould re-initiate my ſelf; yet be it
not preſumpti­on in me to preſent you the firſt Ears of that Corn which I
could be glad were of ſome ſtanding in your Fields, though I had hazzarded the
ploughing and harrowing of my Poſteriors for it. And indeed I muſt tell you,
that as for the Poems I here give you, for ought I know, you need not reject
them: I am ſure they are good; and yet (thus ever Envy ſneaks after
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=25) Vertue's
heels) I have overheard them undervalued: yet ſuch is my patience, that I can
with much facili­ty ſlight unmeritted aſperſions, onely deſirous, that they
who will not commend them, would come and mend them. I am not ignorant alſo,
that ſome ſhallow, ditch-brain'd fellows ſcruple much at my Ocean-like
profundity; little knowing what Lam­prils of Wit, and Grigs of Fancy are
oftentimes inveloped in the mud of obſcure Sentences; Grigs, which ſcorn to
bite at any hook, but what is baited with the Vermilion Worm of a moſt
perſpicacious, and inquiſitive Brain. Mother, I hope it will be no inceſt to
rely upon you, in hopes to beget a gallant come-off with my Poetry: if that
deſign fail, I fear me, my Poetick vein will look blew, and come off ſo too. A
little of your Candour, (like a Beggars bo­dy-louſe) will go a great way. Dear
Mother, verifie this unto me, and let your Approbation accompany my
Endeavours, even as a venerable Budget doth a travailing Tinker; and when at
any time you ſhall have occaſion to peruſe this my little Book, deny not your
loving Son theſe two favours. Firſt, to ſit Croſs-leggd while you read. And
ſecondly, to tie up the Dog of your Cenſures with the halter of Diſcre­tion at
the Dining-room door of your Affection. Nor would I have you at all wonder,
that ſo many of my Friends are pleaſed to empty the Quivers of their Ingenuity
againſt the Buts of my Poems, to Deſcant on me, and Paraphraſe on my Text with
their ſe­veral harmleſs Gloſſes; for we all know, 'tis the fa­mous Don
Quixot's higheſt honour to have Gayton's Feſtivous Notes written on Him: Thus
the ſur­rounding
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=25) Ivy
infinitely commends its ſolitary Inha­bitant, whoſe Majeſtick Lonelineſs is
abundantly pleaſ'd to ſee th'exuberant mirth which the merri­ly-diſpos'd Birds
create to themſelves, at the ſight of his ſullen gravity. Let the Enammel of
their praiſes, and Encomiums who (here honour me) ſet off the Medal of my
Muſe; and the Aggat handle of their Applauſe, commend the keen Blade of my
ſharp­edg'd Verſes. Truly, think the world what it liſt, I think my ſelf much
indebted to them that have ſo nobly commended me in their Poetry before my
Book: And I ſcorn ever to be conſcious of ſo great puſelanimity, as to refuſe
to perſecute my ſubject to the uttermoſt, where ſuch gallant Captains have
lead me the way. Believe me I am in earneſt, and reſtleſs to reſt

Your Dutiful Son K. Q.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=26)

## The Anſwer to that Epiſtle which I ſent runs thus.

My Deareſt, Adopted Biern▪

THe noiſe, and news of your Obſcurity, and Poetry; the latter whereof you
ſeconded with a Letter; have ex­torted from me ſuch proofs, and reproofs, as I
do very ſeldome uſe to ſend any of my Sons: and now, ſomething muſt precede
be­fore I can proceed. I have lately ſomewhat over-much indulg'd my Canine
Appetite, and eaten ſomewhat that lies at my Stomach as heavy as a load of
Lead; the Crudities where­of have ſent up ſuch Vapours into my Head, as if the
Fenns had broken wind backward; ſuch Fumes, that they make me foam like a
Bedlame: inſomuch, that I think my ſelf now in the ſame pickle, wherein the
Poets tell us Madam Tellus was, when Phaeton took Her
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=26) for a
Witch, and ſet Fire about her ears: Yet (my Boy!) for thy ſweet fake Ile do,
as ſhe did, heave my ſelf in the midſt of my Collique fits; nay, and I will
anſwer thine Epiſtle, though there were no other Pen to be had then A Peſtil.
And now Son (for ſo you ſay you would gladly be) let me give you good counſel.
I am ſerious. In the whole ſeries of your Letter, I finde a great many
Metaphors, things, which ſome count Abſolute; but I tell you, they are
Ob­ſolete, and do adviſe you by all means not to love them, but to leave them:
I would have you take a Word, and Twang it; then liſten how it ſounds; obſerve
diligently its Rever­beration, mark its Eccho, and if that chance to bring
into your minde any other Conſonant word, apprehend it be ſure, in ſpite of
all the repugnancy which a diſſonant Vowel, or two may make. Take but this
Courſe, and you ſhall have all my Bleſſing, and none of my Curſe. But now
(Son) to particulars. I won­der why you ſhould call me [Dam;] truly, I thought
[Madam] would have better be­fitted your mouth; or rather Eve then A­DAM. Then
agen, I am certain you could not have found a word Odder then that ſame
[Udder:] think you that I can't  [...] with­out
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=27) being
call'd A-Cow? But 'tis no great matter; courage▪ my Lad! whatſoever
diſ­contents may ariſe, or you can raiſe to your ſelf, are all to no purpoſe,
if you will but pro­poſe to your ſelf the Fame you ſhall acquire by this your
Book. But I muſt have done: I am at this inſtant, in Poſt-haſte. Take my minde
in a few words. I applaud your Ob­ſcurity, and commend your Darkneſs a­mongſt
the Light Whimſies of this Age. I ſhall eaſily grant thoſe your two
reaſon­able Requeſts. Your Friends I eſteem very highly of. Your ſelf, becauſe
you are a Foot-ſoldier to the Muſes; when you Die, Ile baniſh Muſquets, and
Piſtolls, and I'le Cannonize you with a thundring Volley of loud Elogiums; ſo
that aſtoniſht Europe ſhall take notice how much I ſet by

My dutiful Son

K. Q.

## Table of contents

  * An Advertiſement to the READER.
  * Naps upon Parnaſſus.
    * Ʋpon the Infernal Shades of the Authors Poems: or, The hooded Hawk.
    * Incerti Authoris. Ʋpon the Incomparable, and Inimitable Author, and his obſcure Poems.
    * To his Ingenuous Friend, the unknown Author of the following Poems.
    * To the Abſtruſe Authour on his Night-work Poems.
    * On Mr. Somebody's Poeticall Naps upon Parnaſſus.
    * Sonetto in Lode del Autore. Or in plain Engliſh, A Jews Letter in Ink to commend our Negro.
    * Drollery. Upon the moſt Illuſtrious, (though moſt Obſcure, Dark, Black, Miſty, Cloudy Poems of the Authour: Or the Aquila in Nubibus.
    * A Son amice, l' Autheur de cette Liure ſur ſon Obſcuritie.
    * Ʋpon the ſame.
    * Ʋpon the Gurmundizing Quagmires, and moſt Adiaphanous Bogs, of the Author's obnubilated Roundelayes.
    * To his ingenuous Friend, the Author, on his imcomparable Poems. Carmen Jocoſerium.
    * Once again.
    * An Autoſchediaſtique To the Ingenuous Authour, on his Poems ſo Miſcellaneous.
    * Ʋpon the nebuligerous, tenebricoſiform'd Wit, of the Authour, abſconded in the nigricated Womb of theſe Poems.
    * To his highly eſteemed Friend the Authour: on his inſpired Poems.
    * Ʋpon the light-footed, though dark Poems of the Authour, ſo nimble, that they skip out of the Readers ſight, though he haſtes never ſo faſt to overtake them.
    * To the unknown Author.
    * Ʋpon the Blackneſs of Darkneſs: the Authours Poems.
    * Ʋpon the Author's incomparable Hogan Mogan Myſteries lockt up in the duskie ſhady Cheſt of his Poems: or, Jack in a Box:
    * Ʋpon the Author's Myſtery of Babylon.
    * Ʋpon the imcomparably-high-fancied Poems of the Author, ſo monſtrouſly Obſcure.
  * The Epiſtle Dedicatory made by the Authour (upon ſome diſlike) and preſented to his now adopted Mother, the Univerſity of Cambridge.
  * The Anſwer to that Epiſtle which I ſent runs thus.

## 1\.

### 1.1.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=27)

THE AUTHORS OWN Verſe and Proſe.

VVith Marginall Illuſtrations on his OBSCURITIES, by a Friend, to the Reader.

Semel in anno ridet Apollo.

_[figure]_

Printed by the ſame Order.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=28)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=28)

### 1.2. Sic Incipit.  
The Author's humble Opinion concerning his Book.

THey'r Dog-dayes now: he that appears in Print,

To coin his words muſt firſt finde out a Mint.

I deal not by retail, nor eke by ſtealth,

To make of this my Book

A Book much eſteem'd by the Author.

Wit's Commonwealth:

Then buy my Wit in cleanly words well dreſt,

Wit deareſt bought is alway counted beſt.

### 1.3. Ʋpon one buried after He was Dead.

WIth Eye-bright water waſh thy face,

Since Here there lies a Babe of Grace:

Why ſhould

Not hot in effect, but in operation.

Hot waters ſcald thine eye?

The Darling of the Gods did dye.

Why weep you for him, and lament?

Pluto long ſince hath

The de­vil a bit he h [...]'s▪

broke up Lent.

And feeds on fleſh both day and night,

By a baſe carnall Appetite.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=29)At

(Viz.) Pluto's.

this ſoul's glory▪ none can gueſs,

Who doth  [...] in happineſs▪

[...] in this Duſt bed,

[...]

### 1.4. On another▪ ſerv'd after the ſame cruel manner.

THe fates of late have made a Mint,

And  [...] pale▪ fac't Image in't:

We'r all their Tenants, and muſt pay

Our lives for Rent: Souls are their prey;

Sickneſs is their Apoſtle, ſent

For to poſſeſs their Tenement▪

Death did abbreviate his life,

And bequeath'd Glory for his Wife.

### 1.5. Ʋpon one who died, and never lived after it.

PUt on thy mourning Clothes my Muſe, come cry,

If thou canſt weep for Him in ſympathy▪

Tears have their Tunes▪ whoſe muſick in ſad cries

Is warbled forth by watry Elegies.

Nature hath giv'n our Organs leave to play

Loth to depart, Loth to depart away:

But all in vain; Death ha's long ſince compounded

For

Higgle­dy piggle­dy.

Clergy-Lay, both Cavalier, and Round-head.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=29)

### 1.6. A New-years Gift.

Sing this to the diſmal Tune of the Lady and Blackamore.

NO Venus Gloves, or Lady's

Viz. A ſwitch­lock.

Lock,

I here preſent to thee:

I give a Damask Roſe of Love,

Mine Heart, keep it for me.

Hearts are beſt New-year's Gifts 'mongſt friends,

In giving mine I'le pleaſe;

Return me yours, then ſo ſhall I

From You receive

A flower that ſel­dom grew in the Au­thors gar­den.

Heart's-eaſe.

### 1.7. On a Royall Perſon that diſguiſ'd himſelf.

GIve

The Au­thor was going to dinner when he made theſe

thanks my Muſe, let Bells the Changes

Charles is made Secretary to the King.

My Faith is huddled up in ſenſe, I ſee ring:

A Revelation in this Myſterie.

Here's ſweet meats for all hungry

[Eyes] for [tongues] a very Fi­gure:

Eyes, come feed,

Firſt bleſs your food, and then rehearſe your Creed.

The cleareſt Viſion in a drouzie Trance,

Wiſdom inwrap't in dusky Ignorance:

A Coppy of a King, which ſure was writ

In Baſtard hand; part true, part counterfeit.

In a Jew's coat a Gentile, change the ſtile,

And on his face you may throw Croſs, and Pile.

A Prince ſhrivell'd to a great-man, in a Damp

Of ſpirits he's ſhrunk to one of Nabal's ſtamp.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=30) Majeſty
droops by a fantaſtick Wile;

The Holy Ci [...] impriſon'd in a Tile▪

Jew Chriſtianiz'd▪ ô! that he ſhould (

A won­derful thing, that▪ a King ſhould be a man.

a man)

Be bound up like to Mahomets Alkoran!

My prating eyes tell tales; how can I write?

A Devout Saint, an hotehpot Hypocrite!

His Habit preach't to us, and did diſpenſe

The holy Scriptures in a doubtful ſenſe;

Art, by its Sophiſtry did him deface,

Making him caſt a Deuce upon an Ace.

Bring here an Heralds Grammar; ſhew the Rules,

Why Sables makes a Comment upon Gules?

When Stuart could not fly from Charles, then he

Through Arts temptation acts Adultery

With his own ſelf; and ſo in fine I rate

Him baſe begot, though moſt Legitimate.

When I look up, with him my thoughts commence,

Who by tranfiguration parted hence.

Mutation ſtrange! None e're did read of this

In

And a good rea­ſon too; for the King liv'd a little▪ while af­ter Ovid.

Poet Naſo's Metamorphoſis.

Like as the Sun, before it ſets, that ſhrowds,

And muffles up its brighter face in Clouds:

Thoſe loyal Mourners that attend its fall,

And go in

What ſhould they go in elſe? in Blues?

Blacks unto his Funeral:

Even ſo did he o'recaſt the Heavenly Lamp

Of's Countenance by glozing a new ſtamp

For Charles the King; and ſo appear'd to be

A Bird of Prey, Plum'd like a

A ſtrange Bird hard­ly to be found in Paradiſe.

Phariſee.

Could I but pip my Phraſe, I ſhould not ſin

To ſay, the Mixt Aſſembly's met in Him:

My ſaucy Muſe ha's fed ſo on his face,

Pardon (great Sir) if I forget my Grace.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=30)

### 1.8. The Common Fire.

The Au­thor is teaching his Muſe to ſwim, and ſo gives her good coun­ſel.

HOld up thy head my Muſe, and walk aloof

I'th Spaniſh mode; here's Boyes are armour proof▪

Againſt all petty Piſtol Rimes; do'nt venter

Them to aſſail with ſuch: for they'l not enter.

Firſt levy all thy force, then give thy Darts

Licenſe to tope the Gravy of their Hearts.

Turn Mountebank for once; command my Pen

Which nature Squir'd to

Now he barks, bow wow.

mouth out Gentlemen

In various colours: ſuch is this noble Rout,

I muſt ſpeak often, yet not ſpeak them out.

Like an unskill'd Carver, who can't hit the point,

Unleſs he firſt doth Cuckold the poor Joynt.

Tune then ſome Janus Rimes, that two fac't Wit

Ey'd on both ſides ſuch faſhion'd heads doth fit,

Whoſe profound learning none can roundly praiſe,

Unleſs his Verſes

Back­ſtroke, and foreſtroke, like a bell.

ſound alikc both wayes.

Saint now the Devil Poet which doth fence

Bis Cloven Rimes with an united Senſe.

That Grecian Eccho which hous'd in the Roof

Of Him, which did ev'n ſtone it with reproof,

Did ſound, and build up it's cur'ſt Landlords name,

By frequent repetitions of the ſame;

This, this it is which muſt be crown'd with Bayes,

And all your names with much advantage raiſe.

The fore-front man ſtarts me, whoſe head is letter'd

1.

With Attick Characters, not with them fetter'd

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=31)Like thoſe
clogg'd Pates, whoſe mute wants are

expreſt

By th' loud tongu'd Paſtboard hung before their Mother,

breſt.

That proud Greek ſiſter-hood, which diſclaim'd their

Quickly fell out, and would not own each other.

See they ſhake off their Mam's old clothes, as fetters

But

I think he means [effemina­ted] 'tis a difficult place this!

petticoat themſelves with different Letters;

Shifting their Dialects, (even as Proteus he

New-fac'd himſelf with Form's variety.)

Hence cruel Wars were nurs'd: until it's quill

In making Peace it's deareſt blood did ſpill:

Nor may I chain him up to words: He's one

Cut out for Rhetorick's living Manſion.

If Ages could retreat, and ſum their ſtore

Of elegant Aires to hatch an Oratour.

If

A ſhort expreſſion for [look­ing cun­ningly.]

ſquinting Time could backwards run, and bring

Up in it's front, thoſe wits, which once did ſpring;

Should all conſpire to Man-midwife a ſpirit,

They could not reach one of his worth, and merit?

For why? more Rhetoricians meet in Him

Then e're at once did in our Tripos Limbe.

Face about now (my Muſe) and view the next;

2.

Expound him fully, but don't name the Text;

One

Some read it [doublet­ted.]

coated up in Miſts, we can't a Glance

Of Him, unleſs we'l pry through Ignorance;

Thus the world's Goggle Eye ſometimes appears

At the firſt ſight, ſtrait ſwaddled up in tears.

Thus pale-fac'd Cynthia black-bagg'd in Clouds,

Doubles her form when ſhe her ſelf unſhrowds.

That changeling ſoul mov'd ſlow pac't: but his skips

Through all the

Datur penetratio dimenſio­num ergò falleris.

Bodies of letter'd Manuſcripts,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=31)Of Tongues
of Babel paramount in Him,

In Judgement He outvies the Sanhedrim;

String then his Judges, hang them on his fiſt,

That glittring Bracelet well becomes his Wriſt.

Call an high Court of

For [Arts and Sciences] by a Fi­gure call'd Metatheſis

Sciences and Arts,

In full mouth'd praiſes let them breath their parts.

One to whom Nature ha's bequeath'd her ſtore,

And Godmother'd his tongue an Oratour,

Ʋnlike to him whoſe found-lung'd Eloquence,

Doth often gape for a full pointed ſenſe:

I ſpeak him faintly, ſi'th I am not fed

With th'

☜ 3.

Pamper'd Air, that Rome's vaſt Roſtrum bred;

An health to that merry Boy, who tunes the ſpheres,

And makes my ſoul lie liſtning in my ears:

Orpheus reviv'd, 'fore whom the Air doth prance,

And Muſicks

In plain Engliſh Fiddles.

wooden, Carcaſſes do dance▪

Knowledge ingroſt! whoſe ſoul is fit to be

A ſprightful ſeed-plot of all Hiſtory;

I may not bleſs Him, as I've bleſt the reſt;

For He holds nought in Common with the reſt.

* * * * * * * * * * * * * *4. * * * Caetera deſiderantur. * * *

### 1.9. Ʋpon my Mothers running Eyes; preſented to her for a New-years Gift.

LEt your eyes drop, he that for

Sucking bottles for new-borne pigs.

Bottles ſeeks,

Shall find two Twins a hanging in your Cheeks;

Which Nature bare, and whilſt ſhe lay abed,

Venus a Nurſe became, and colour'd Red,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=32)You heart's
fire ſtills the moiſture of your brain,

Through your Eyes Liimbeck which doth drop

al. An Ocean.

amain:

And whil'ſt your lungs the fire doth gently blow,

Eye-water drops into your

He mea­neth her blinde cheeks.

Cheeks below.

The running of your Eyes doth ſure maintain,

That you within have got a Curdled Brain.

Within thoſe Windows Fancy oft was fed,

In which that Spider ſpins a watry web;

Your Eyes are pregnant with thoſe drops, and cry

Out for your help in their Delivery:

Their circled motion turns each beam-like thred

Into a skain of ſpirituall white-brown-thred;

Which Nature's Semſtreſs uſes when ſhe knits

Each object to her in fantaſtick fits.

Their Still may leak; but ne're thoſe waters can

Quite overflow your little

His mo­thers belly

Iſle of Man.

Scollars want Gold, therefore their Brains they

ſift,

To ſtrain for friends the fineſt New-year's-gift:

And ſo want I; therefore my wit I

Thats' a naſty word.

poop

The mellow Apples of your Eyes to ſcoop

With this my Pen, which in your brine I ſop,

Which Dripping baſt's your raw cheeks while they

drop.

If for your ſins, then let Suſanna's eye

Drop more ſuch Beads for Heaven's Roſary.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=32)

### 1.10. On a Blackamore Maid courting me▪  
A Dialogue.

KEep

The Ket­tle calls the Pottage­pot burnt arſe.

off, thy Chimney hue offends,

From which (like ſmoke) thy breath aſcends.

Author.

My Breath is ſmoke; hence is my ſmart,

Black­more.

That fire within burns up mine Heart.

The Fire of Love I cannot ſee,

A.

Aegyptian darkneſs hinders me.

This Darkneſs will ſoon paſs away,

B.

If thy Sun but afford one Ray.

My Sun of Beauty is not ſeen,

A.

If thy dark Body comes between.

My Body's dark, but if thy Light

B.

Shine clear, it cannot force a night,

When I would view thy Sloe-like eyes,

A.

Miſts from thy Mooriſh face do riſe.

Clear dayes of Love theſe Miſts foretell;

B.

For Heat of Love ſhall them expell.

But thou art Black, and wilt diſgrace

A.

The pure whiteneſs of my face.

I'me Black, then let it be my lot,

B.

To ſerve for you a Beauty ſpot.

Thou art both Black, and what is worſe,

A.

Thou'rt clouded in thy Countrey's curſe.

The beſt clothes Nature to thee gave,

Are but ſad Emblemes of a Grave.

I'me clad in Black; Black's mine aray,

B.

Hence I go mourning every day.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=33)Flay my
black coat, apparel me

With thy white Robe of Purity.

I am thine Ʋmbra, take delight

To diaper my black with white.

Come then, let's crisp, and curle in pleaſure,

A.

Our ſpotleſs loves ſhall keep no meaſure.

Thy comely blackneſs doth much grace

The ſober ſadneſs of thy face,

Thy black is ſubtle, thin; and rare,

A Film-hood (ſuch Queen

His  [...] ha's now hopt into a Coſtard­mongers Basket▪

Apples wear

To hide a Bluſh!) a Cobweb'd skreen,

Through which thy luſter's clearly ſeen.

Thou'rt veil'd and ſhadowed in my ſight,

Ile dapple o're thy ſhade with light.

Let's twiſt our ſouls then: one ſpickled ray

B.

Will force for us a Wedding day.

Make haſte my Love: my panting ſoul

Dies, if we ſtill live on Parol.

### 1.11. On a Reputed Courtezan.

To the Tune of the Mad Mans Morris.

SOme ſay that you a Book have been

Handled in ſheets. Aha!

Then ſure I cannot

But he might ride by Sea thither.

go by Sea

To your Virginea.

A Man in your Moon there hath been,

Hence men diſdain your ſcorns:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=33)Your Moon of
Beauty is at

Not at Empty.

full,

And hath late ſhed its horns.

Let Incubus ride thy Hackney-ſoul,

Till death doth claim its ſhare.

In thee: And mayeſt thou ever ſerve▪

For a Common Thorow-fare.

### 1.12. On a Gentleman that gave me a Bent Sixpence.

HEnce ye Tin-Merchant Poets: quickly hence,

You who pay ſilver by your Corniſh pence.

Thus Hypocrites golden favours repreſent

By a Bath-yellow-ſandy Complement:

But he that would your kindneſs full expreſs,

Muſt firſt know how to ſwell in golden verſe.

'T would poſe an whole-ſale Poet for to fit

Me with fine Phraſe out of his ſtore of wit,

To ſet your favour off: but his Art fails,

Where nought but all the Muſes power prevails.

Could I but mouth it ſtoutly, then perhaps

I'de flaſh in wit, and crack in Thunder-claps

Of Rimes, as Ʋſhers to a ſhow'r of verſe.

But that ſhall be your debtour to your Herſe.

My left-handed ſucceſs to raiſe my ſtate,

Shall never vote your good will out of Date.

I do purſue your favour by the

Brave Jowlet▪

ſcent,

And finde it in your boſome reſident.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=34)He that by
words ſeeks you to recompence;

Soils Diamonds with a Briſtol Eloquence.

### 1.13. The Drone's Indictment of the Bee.

THe Bee arreign'd at Natures

Not Gum wa­ter.

Size,

For robbing Flora's Paradiſe,

Tuning his humms in goodly ſort,

Makes a dayes journey to the Court.

Where with his Life-guard he appears,

And all the Drone's Indictments hears.

Enter Drone.

Indict. 1.

She ranſackt gardens, and by ſtealth,

Did fill her bag with Flora's wealth;

And (leſt it ſhould be ſearched for)

Turns Coats: her Argent into Or.

Indict. 2.

She did deflower the beautious fields;

And tyth'd the Crop which Ceres yields.

Indict. 3.

She watcht where Flora's childe did lie

And ſtole 'way her

And that was a fire bit.

Virginity.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=34)

Indict. 4.

She Counterfeits Dame Nature's mold,

And guilds her Coin with yellow Gold.

At Nature's Bar this pretty Elf

Turns Lawyer, and pleads for it ſelf.

Plea. 1.

Whilſt Cloris liv'd, to me ſhe ſold

The Gardens for a Copy-hold:

And when Deaths Bed did her embrace

With the Green Sickneſs in her face;

Her Love being dead, my Landlady

By a Fee ſimple gave't to me.

Plea. 2.

The Fields for Commons, and her Bed,

Plea. 3.

To take her Daughters

Female, with Fe­male! ſure­ly this Bee had a Pego

Maiden-head.

Plea. 4.

'Ere ſince, I Natures Student try

Mine Art in natural Chymiſtry.

At this the Drone pluckt in his head,

The Bees did hum, and humming fled.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=35)The Miſtreſs
now being all alone,

Doth ſue an Out-law for the Drone;

Who ſaid he ſtole, and brake the Peace,

'Cauſe he held Land by Parol Leaſe.

Well then.

This Natures Leveller now returns,

To lie with Flora's Maid ſhe burns:

She flames with luſt, and void of ſtrife,

Doth lead a moſt licentious life.

What a deviliſh Lecher was this Bee?

Every Maiden flower ſhe meet,

She raviſhes whilſt that ſhe greets,

She breaks into Diana's grove,

And all about the Woods doth rove:

Her wings turn Fans to cool her face,

Whilſt that by Zeal ſhe courts her grace.

She woes her Virgins to the Springs,

And them defiles; whilſt that ſhe ſings,

The expans'd ſweetneſs that doth lie

Wrapt up in Flora's Library.

In every Folio Schollar-wiſe

She doth her uſe Epitomize.

She extracts Honey from the Bay

[Horſe,] and makes a Blur where was a Gay.

Here's nothing but who­ring and drinking.

She turns a Tapſter to the Vine,

And quaffs the beſt of Flora's Wine.

The Woodbines pulſe by a ſenſe he feels,

Tippling in Pleaſure till he reels.

The Indian ſweets he taſtes, and ſtrains

Free quarter on th' Arabian Plains.

All the day long he ſwills delight,

Till th' evening cools his Appetite.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=35)

### 1.14. Ʋpon Mr. John Cleeveland, my quondam Chamber-fellow.

Dear Jack!

COme on brave ſpirit; help me thy name to dreſs;

Leſt I blaſpheme thee with my home-ſpun verſe▪

Reach me a deep-mouth'd Quill; and let me write

Thee out at

Thus; (viz. t-h-c-e.

length: a ſhort-breath'd Epithite

Will not ſuit you: He that would ſound thy praiſe,

Muſt court in Ariſtophanes his phraſe;

Whoſe words command a Parliament of Letters;

That lie impriſon'd in their Attick Fetters.

Shelton's ſhort cramped fiſt, can ne're graſp thee,

Who far excel'ſt all ſuch Semigraphy.

Text onely

Where note the Texttakes ſome; and the Devil takes others.

takes you. He that doth diſpence

With that ſhort-handed new found Eloquence,

Beſpeaks but a poor Brieve for thy large praiſe;

And makes thee go a begging for thy Dayes.

Call him th' Muſes Metaphyſick Reader,

Of all the Poets Troup ſtile him the Leader;

Who with rare Novelties baffles the Senſe

Of the buſie pated Weeks intelligence,

For the Diurnal's kin doth ſcrutiny,

Makes it poſſeſs its rug'd Genealogy.

We date not higher, leſt I my Ink ſhould ſpill,

And force his try'd Committee to my Quill,

Whoſe blockiſh heads may they Cambado'd be

With Leather patcht claim their leir legs property,

And ſtill wear Caps cut out of ſome Bulls Coat,

Thong-buckled under their conſcientious Throat.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=36)Beſide
(Great Sir) good wit in theſe our times,

With wiſdom muſt be cloath'd as well as Rimes:

The Muſes ſure will worſhip at thy ſhrine,

Who are well man'd by thee: for ſince the Nine

Drunk in thy ſpirits, which trickled through thy quill,

Bald-pate

It want­ed a Pe­riwig.

Parnaſſus is a Cuckold-Hill,

And hugs his Horns, waxing moſt proud, that he

Cornuted was by ſuch an one as thee.

I muſt needs falter now: Negations are

The beſt ſad clothes that ever Angels wear;

Theſe now are dumb, if not he ſcorns their ſpeeches,

Having caſt off ſuch preciſe Logick Breeches,

Spun of old

A new kinde of Stuff, a-la mode.

Ignorance, which can't him unwind,

Unleſs he'l be penuriouſly defin'd.

Thoſe gaudy Negatives which titely dreſs

A living ſpirit, him onely dead expreſs:

His ſhame-fac'd wit its countenance doth ſhroud,

Like as the Sun when mantled in a Cloud.

'Tis dark, and veil'd, till the illuſtrious ſenſe

Wrapt in Ink Clouds by a wiſe Intelligence

Is quite unbodied; then it ſhews its face

Through that black mask of Letters with much grace.

Thou'rt gon men ſay, this is no news to me,

I deem this Land far too hide-bound for thee,

Who ſtrides to Heaven in one Poetick ſtory,

And makes the world but a ſcant Promontory.

Let that

al. The Pocky Ec­cho.

French Eccho, which preaches out of holes

And makes long-winded Sermons to All Souls

Which thither throng; let that extend thy merit,

Not as 'tis inſpir'd by a common ſpirit;

Mean while your ſilenc'd

Mark that well.

Miniſter Ile be.

Since Learning's Body is condens'd in Thee.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=36)

### 1.15. On the ingenuous Poet Mr. Cowley.  
A Pyndarique Ode.

I Can't now comprehend unleſs I'me taught

To write a ſtrein above my ſelf, aloft:

If that my Muſe would honour him with a Song,

It muſt firſt learn to chat in th' Hebrew tongue.

Stand off thou

One Bil­lingſley wrote a Martyro­logy in Verſe, Anno 1657.

Poetaſter from the Preſs,

Who pygni'ſt Martyrs with thy dwarf-like verſe

Whoſe white, long bearded flame of Zeal aſpires,

To wrack their Aſhes, more than did their Fires.

Confine not this our Poet to thy Black, durty Ink,

Leſt thou beſpot his name, and make it ſtink.

Hand then at Quill that's plundred in the fight

Of Mercury, whil'ſt he beat's by flight.

He muſter'd up the Forces of his Armes,

Ordred each Wing for to eſcape the charms

Of the eaſie conquer'd Air, and ſhall not I

Alarum now the Muſes Chevalry?

And beat up the Head-quarters of my ſtrength,

Whoſe power drawn out, may help my ſoul at length,

To finde his Ambuſcado'd Verſes out,

Which on all ſides beſiege me round about.

2.

I here condemn plain Seneca's crumpled ſtyle,

And Sentence, Cicero's longer by a mile.

For neither ſpan'd him; none can ſpeak his worth

More fully, then a ſtiff-neck't Holder forth,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=37)Who draws
his mouth at large, ſpins out his lungs

And ne're is tir'd with tuning holy Songs,

Whoſe ſurly Ela's note he far exceeds,

For body'd Angels cloth'd in Ladies

In con­tradiſtin­ction to Ladies Flowers.

weeds

Can only throat him, whoſe virtues cannot brook

A ſpirit's knowledge through a ſingle look.

That vaſte Triumvirate's Poetique hand

Which dig'd graves for loſt ſenſe in words, is damn'd

By Him, and muſt at laſt grant His the better,

Who buries Myſteries in every letter.

3.

Antiquity is fettred in their Verſes:

O baw­dry!

Long hangers on each ſide the Printer Preſſe's,

Rais'd on the Publique Faith, for the defence

Of their benighted, and moſt doubtfull ſenſe:

But ſtay!

That jolly Trine if any Eye will round,

A

Sure the Authour's wits went on wool­gathering here.

flock of Books in ſheep's clothes may be found:

But his Muſe mounts enrob'd in Noon-day glory,

Candied with light, as if his head were heary.

Firſt dipped in thoſe ſacred ſtreams with thee,

And when grown up coated with purity.

His Fancy in

Now he conjures.

Black-art mourning owns the name

Of a dark lanthorn'd Dungeon to a flame.

Whileſt I the letters, and the clear ſenſe finde;

My weaker Eye can't reach the Soul behinde.

So that in reverence my head is bow'd,

Thinking of Juno clothed in a Cloud.

Like that dunc't wit, how does my willing hand

Scribble that out, which I

Sanat confeſſio crimen.

can't underſtand I

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=37)For feigned
ill Husbandry let none thee mock,

VVho ever heard that Poets e're did ſmock

Their naked coin in Napkins: frank they be

Both of their Jeſts, and of their Money free.

4.

That Ethnick Prieſt which did attire his Pelf

All this I don't un­derſtand.

VVith th' ſame Trunk-breeches which he wore him­ſelf.

VVhilſt in his wooden Pulpit ſtuff apparel'd

Did ſeem a Hogshead in an Hogshead barrel'd:

Had he but known the Grecian would disjoynt,

And burſt in two ſtout Vulcan's Iron point,

VVhich tied th' luxurious placquet of his Cheſt

In th' Italian Mode, that deifi'd it might reſt

Coop't up t' one maſter: that ſubtle Cub

Had ſtrait unbutton'd the Codpiſs of his Tub,

And brok up his ſoon cooled Zeal in haſte

To ſave his Gold from running out in th'waſte,

I dare not Poet chriſten him by birth,

VVho Atheiſt like ador'd that guilded Earth;

This onely common I hold faſt with thee,

I ſcorn ſuch dirt, and worſhip Poetrie.

A Knocking

A Ring for the Author—

Poet ſure, who joyntly beds

Nine luſty Girles, which bow their Maiden-heads

To Him, and ſtraightway left the Sacred Hill

For to attend upon his ſainted Quill.

Could my weak fluttring ſoul to heaven flie,

Through the ſhuffled Clouds of Maskt Divinity,

Begot by him; there then my Muſes

Olet lucernam.

taper

Breathing its laſt, would from its ſocket caper;

To ſee a viſion of him in a ſound,

VVould in deep contemplation my ſoul drown'd.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=38)

### 1.16. Againſt froathy Wits.

I Like not ſuch, who do not fear

By Juno's Pantofles to ſwear;

Yea, even by Styx, to brag moſt cruel,

That a Quart of Ceres Water-grewel

Will make their Wits to run ſo fleet,

That they'l ſpue Verſes without

Here the Authours Muſe is not trou­bled with corns.

feet.

### 1.17. Againſt ſtealing Wits.

I Diſlike thoſe make Mercury their Chief,

Clodius accuſat Maechos.

And quote him, as their Captain Thief;

Under whoſe colours they commence

Maſters of pilfer'd Eloquence.

To cheat mens Works they've got a trick

By Handy Dandi'd Rhetorick:

Who wit in Tympany do ſpawl,

Like a big belly'd Corporal,

Whoſe girded waſte while it doth hope

For a far larger Horoſcope,

At drinking time doth quite disjoynt,

And crack in twain his

Made of a piece of pack-thred

Codpiſs-point:

So they like to the women train,

With criſped ties hair-lace their Brain;

And cap their Blocks, leſt that their wits

ſhould run a gadding in mad fits:

But ne'retheleſs they cry [more ſcope,]

And ſlack their brains for want of Rope,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=38)To raiſe
their Jeſts, whileſt they would ſpand

A world of wit, with their ſhort hand.

The doun of Proteus woolen Pelt

Made up in faſhion of a felt;

Wilt ſuit their bald-pates, which do rig

Each mans hair for a Perriwig;

To hide their ſhame, but do not cry,

Or ſtartle at

That is ſtealing of Books.

Book Felony,

Such er'wig'd theives, that lie in lurch,

We'l yirk with the Mercurian Birch;

And put their ranging wits in pound,

For breaking into others ground.

But if they'l not corrected be,

We'l hang them on the Daphnean-tree

### 1.18. Againſt Antiquarians.

I Like not time obſervers of our age,

VVho bring up

'Tis plain here, that he means the Prae­adamitae.

Adam on the Stage;

And by their too long waſted crime,

Blab what was done before his time.

If you'l but crown their heads with Bayes,

They'l publiſh th' Acts of Joan Popes dayes:

They raiſe up Antiques from the Grave,

To fright away the wit they have.

They tell of Ixion in a fog

And a blinde tale of Tobits

They had read the Apocrapha

Dog.

They worſhip every Ancients ſhrine,

And kneel before the Grecian wine.

They've top'd ſo much old Maſſick Ale,

Their running wits are now grown ſtale.

### 1.19. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=39)On
the Death of his good old Tutour, Mr. G. S. of W. C.

I Keep a Faſt day: now mine eyes repent,

A ſhower of tears falls from my

Read it funda­ment.

Firmament:

Come paint him out (my Muſe) let tears now bluſh,

And force his ſable Cheeks to wear

A kinde of wear like black Skarlet.

gules Pluſh.

Come ſcan your ſobs; come ſteep your eyes in

That's a good way to be blind indeed.

Brine,

My eyes ſhall weep for him red Muſca-[dell]-dine.

But here (alas) the dew that oft doth fall

From th' region of mine Eyes

Where note, that tears are not Aqua vitae.

cannot recall

Him unto life: ſince he hath try'd the mote

Round Pluto's houſe in Charon's Ferry-boat.

His gozling ſoul long ſate in's bodies Tree,

VVhileſt that the fates hiſt at's felicity:

At length being fledg'd by Age, it ſoon got looſe,

Dropt into Styx, and turn'd a gagling Gooſe.

Now grazing pleaſure in the Eliſian Fields,

It reaps that bliſs that Jove's green medow yields.

The Popes baſe breaſts of ſin he did not nurſe,

Though he adjur'd him by his triple Curſe.

Of's learning let none doubt, he's dead and gone,

VVho was whilſt here a

Now he's a dead Helicon it ſeems.

living Helicon.

To the Pegaſides he was a Groom,

The Muſes made his Head their Dining-room.

The Synagogue of Arts he did adore,

But now no

No, nor Science neither.

Art can him to life reſtore.

Great Rhetorician ſure: and now we ſee,

That death doth prove to him a

Becauſe you know Syncope tollit de medio: there's the wit.

Syncope.

Praiſe is his debt: his debts I care not for,

Since Death by right was his Executor.

### 1.20. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=39)
Ʋpon an Hermophradite ſeen in Cornwall, who went under the ſhape of a Woman,
and yet was no Woman: is not that ſtrange

MAn's of the

So are ſome wo­men too.

Common Gender: no ſtrange ſight,

That Homo's ſplit into Hermophradite.

Nature coyn'd Male and Female in a ſpleen,

So her firſt ſtamp was purely Epicene.

Both kindes (in vertue) ſhe in man did twiſt,

And now here's one turn'd Adam's Formaliſt.

She did allow the Banes; and ſo this Elf

Can't commit Fornication with her ſelf.

Stay Hymens Prieſt, here is no need of you,

Since Nature finiſht that which you ſhould do.

O rare Arteſs! your fingers ſure did itch,

When that you wrought this piece in

Other­wiſe cal'd Rugwork, or, ſtript. carpetting

Iriſh ſtitch.

Spread-Eagle like, whoſe members all do wed

In one body, a Separatiſt in's head.

VVhilſt Venus for moſt ſhare in it did fight,

Mars ſtepping in half ſtew'd it Heteroclite.

John claims a right in Jone's

Meum & tuum.

crackt Maiden-head;

Zeal them betroth'd, and time them married.

Like man and wife in concord they agree;

From Mars and Venus ſprang ſweet Harmony,

In Morpheus reign when Nature ſeem'd to ſlumber,

It kept in Sex, what then it loſt in number.

Venus let fall her Garter in a Plot,

To tie theſe two in one true Lovers knot.

Nature did change its own command, and feature,

VVhen it did weave this linſie-woolſie creature,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=40)Great Boreas
bluſtres in a ſweat, when he

Caſts up the Spaniſh Genet's Pedegree,

Whoſe Compater he is, and now's grown bold

To

The Au­thour ex­cepts fart­ing.

cough, and ſneeze, ſince that he catcht a cold.

A furious North-wind from my mouth will blow:

Yea more then Boreas I ſhall puff, and blow,

If I ſhould undertake to ſtate the Nation,

From whence firſt came this coddled generation.

As for this Baſtard brood which is our Theme,

The mother did conceive it in a dream,

Whil'ſt that the

Surely he means the night­wizzard, for a witch is a wo­man, and a woman can't—

night-witch rid her, and ſo ſhe

Produc'd of Sexes a Plurality.

She clucking for to ſit, the wandring God

Sent his Night-raven for to have her trod.

And whil'ſt ſhe cackling to his God-head pray'd,

An Egg with two crowns tipt ſhe kern'd, and laid,

And ſo hatch't it, by whoſe heat in the ſhell,

'Twas half ſod Hen; half poach't a Cockerell;

And though nick-nam'd, a Female it doth go,

Yet 'mongſt the Cocks it hath a man-like Crow.

By the ſtrange motion of the Sun and Moon,

She roſe, and went to bed at Tillain-noon.

All Coin is naught with Parents, 'leſs it cary

The perfect Image of

Gram­mercy Mr. Cleveland

Philip and Mary;

And that they ſtill might bear this in their minde,

Nature it mint's and payes them in their kinde.

O happy Soul! Cynthia will ne're ſcare thee

With Bug-bear words, for Cod-piſs thievery.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=40)

### 1.21. The Cloſe of all; being an Admo­nition to the Reader, not to envy
his Poems.

LEt no Chriſtian that hath true grace,

View theſe with a

'Tis no matter with what Eyes he look on't.

Malignant face;

But pray that Heaven their lights would ſnuff,

'Cauſe Satan playes at Blind-man-buff

With men, and hood's their Intellects,

Caſting up Cock-all for thoſe Sects.

By which the Au­thor means the end of the Book. FINIS.

## 2\.

### 2.1.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=41)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=41)

TWO EXACT CHARACTERS, One of a Temporizer.

The other of an Antiquarian.

—Notus nimis omnibus Ignotus moriar mihi.—

_[figure]_

Printed by the ſame Order.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=42)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=42)

### 2.2. THE CHARACTER OF A Temporizer.

HE is One, that is alwayes in fa­ſhion; though Time puts on New Clothes every
Day. He is divided from none more then himſelf. He is a Spawn of Janus the
name of a fiſh, yclepped, A Cods­head. Janus, who prefac't His Old Vi­ſage
with a New mode, according to the ſeaſon of the Year; or as ſome would have
it, ſhifted His Countenance againſt Quarter Day. If I would ſpeak him fully, I
muſt Weather-cock my Phraſe, to wait upon the unconſtant Wind. What He but now
ap­plauded, He ſtrait ſnarles at, and with Ri­gour condemns. Like that Stout
Letter'd [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=43) If
any one can bring the ſenſe of this to the Cryer, he ſhall be well paid for
his pains Trencher Man, who for Theevery burnt the Innocent Board, which
before by its harſh Pa­rent was branded, though He himſelf allowed of the
action, as appeared by the Clergy of Let­ters, written in fair Characters on
the Accu­ſants, Frontiſpice, that backt with a full Sto­mach Where note,
Mi­nerva's ſtomack is in her back. Minerva did plead for the Damn'd
In­ſtrument, meerly pasſive in the Fellony. Look in his face, and you may ſee
what a Clock 'tis though the Sun don't Shine: When He holds up His noddle,
then 'tis towards Noon­day Glory with him. When He caſts it downwards, and
doubles His Shadow (for He himſelf's no better) then you may gueſs, that the
Sun is declining upon him. He hath enacted materia prima, Queen Regent of all
Forms, whilſt he perſonally ſtands Her Ri­val Probationer, and proves himſelf
capable to be crowned with every one of them, un­leſs it bee a Rational one.
To name Him Proteus is too much to All to whoop him. hallow Him: for He Turn-
Coats Himſelf, facing the Ancient Mat­ter with a New faſhion'd ſhape, which
flatly fall's out with the former: But our Theam new moulds it ſelf yet to the
ſight remains the Old man ſtill. We'l coat Him for one with Aeneus Gift, who
is already Winter­clothed with Rapes from others of all kinds,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=43) and may at
length ſtretch for them, if He timely betakes not himſelf to Long-Lane for a
Larger, and A Clook in Folio. deeper volum'd Cloak to cover His Knavery. This
Temporizing Turky-Cock, he charges His wing'd Forces, and mounts His Creſcent
Tail, as Hannibal did His half-moon'd Motley Army, againſt all that appear in
Scarlet, unleſs they be of his own In th' Author's country there are Scarlet
Turky­cocks. Gender. A Babel of opinions lie grip't up in this Religions
Amſterdam'd He means Cobler. Tranſlator, who, if we conſider as new Sold, with
his Leathern converted Ears, is alwayes Cat­terwouling for Union: though he
himſelfe proves a Breeder of diſcord. His Judgement and Conſcience are great
Separatiſts one from another; what the one approves of, the other by are flect
Act in greateſt deteſtation bannes back again; in which He murders the
Intention of the wiſe One, who hath plac't a rectified Intellect in the Fore-
front of the ſoul, to guide the underlin faculties in their Actions. But why
talk I of a Rectifi­ed Judgement to Him, who is from Heaven curſt with its
contrary: ſo that 'tis no wonder that thoſe Twins, which are familiar Cronies
in others, turne Aliens in Him. He can pa­tiently put on the gaudy Materiality
of a Bi­ſhoprick, but as for the Formality of it, down with that Bloody Whore
of Babylon. He
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=44) begets a
brood which are ready to pick out his very eyes, like to thoſe Church-going
Ethnick ſouls, who viewing their Miſtreſſes▪ do (as I may ſay with modeſty)
Forni­cation is no immo­deſt A­ction. commit forni­cation with the Virgin
Pewes; which com­mon actions makes Nature ſometimes in her operations Shitt.
work backward, and the Males bring forth a ſpurious off-ſpring of Retrograding
Animals, which in a ſhort time do attempt Oreſtes-like, the devouring of their
Tweak­ers by Jove▪ rampant Genitals, Miſconſtrue me not, gentle Reader, I
challenge any car­ping Paedagogue of them all, to Wrymouth this laſt ſentence
into prophaneneſſe; yet in that point I cannot match him, who is Religions
Litter'd The Dutch­womens iſſue of the DIL­DO. Sooterkin kindled by the Stove
of his own counterfeit Zeal. If this prodigious Shark had appeared in
Theſſaly▪ mounted on one of the winds Spaniſh race, the ſilly people with more
reaſon had Cen­taur'd the Epithite in Surnaming him Mon­ſtrous. Certainly when
Nature pen'd him out, ſhe had an eye to the Exampler of Di­veliſh A
De­ſcription of this Chara­cter. Nonſence, written on Queens Col­lege
Library's Dutch paper Walls. She hath ſo articulately pointed him out the
Coppy, that the confus'd Original ſeems in him in ſome meaſure underſtood: ſhe
begun with his Feet, thoſe gouty emblems of his Hands,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=44) where ſhe
finger'd his Toes; from thence ſhe aſcends, and makes his Knees wear Points▪
and ſo upwards ſhe Comma's every bending joynt, till towards the ending of her
work ſhe infers his long ſentenc't Noſe within the Hairy Parentheſis of his
Eye-brows; ſo ſhe proceeds ſtopping the courſe of his ram­bling Eyes with a
Colon, which with Sir re­verence. Reve­rence behold his wide gaping Mouth,
where Nature wiſely makes a full ſtop, elſe ſhe had never enjoyed Reſt all her
life time. He hath no valour and yet hee'l vie with That is when he gave
Da­nae a clap, not a thunder clap: now this ſame Jupiter was a de­viliſh
whorema­ſter, &c. ſee Far­naby upon O­vid Met. Ju­piter to ruffle in a Golden
ſtorme, ſo that he may Bride his Love and wear ſuch glittering apparrel on
Holy dayes. I cannot Nick-name him, if I Epicaene the Preſs, and Godfather hic
et haec Homo, a A Dog and Bitch. Hee and ſhee Man. He is a Candidate capable
of no other, but In­fant Moderne Nobility which ſavours too much of Parchment,
and Shrivels into no­thing, even as the Matter deceaſes out of which it was
created. He's a right Anti­quarian in this, that he loves to purſue Ru­ines.
And becauſe I'me hardly intreated by a One Jack Sa­turday. Friend, I ſhall
attempt the deſcription of an Antiquarian: neither ſhall I much vary from the
Matter in Hand, if I proceed from a Fool to an A Wit▪ Antique.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=45)

### 2.3. THE CHARACTER OF AN Antiquarian.

HE is a Corniſh Pedling Hiſtorian; for as that Country's Dwarf Merchant, grow
great Stone­cutters. monumental Tradeſ­men by degrees, with picking their
ſcattered livings from Quarries; ſo our Theme bliſters to a conſiderable
Hiſtorian, by rifling the ſtones for Hiſtory. Nay ſuch is his fletch't
Impiety, that the pure Aſhes of the Dead do not ſcape his Inquiſition; hence
'tis he vexes the Tombs for almoſt mortified Inſcrip­tions, and ſacril
[...]giouſly ſteals that away from them, which did both cover and compre­hend
them. That A cer­tain kind of Ver­mine that hath ne're a letter in his name.
unletter'd Vermine which
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=45) daily Diets
and waxes fat on Letters, de­vours more learning in his progreſs through a
Book, than he by all his jumbling produ­ctions begets, of his own, in his
whole life time. That ceremonious Soul which idola­trouſly worſhip't the
Gentlewomans thred­bare Garment, might have quietly kiſt her Rear, which
queſtionleſs was the ſenior of the two, wip'd his Mouth with her Petticoated
Antiquity, and ſo had eſcap'd without a dry'd jeer and like a good Husband
have ſa­ved his prodigal Breath to cool his Pottage. I wonder, as there is an
Order for the ex­tirpation of Papiſts out of this Land, that Antiquarians are
not inſerted amongſt that Roman zealous crew; for they are both ſin­ners of
the ſame ſtock, (viz.) Worſhippers of Graven-Images; and without equivocation,
breakers of the ſecond Commandement. With what reverence do they put off their
Heads to any old broken-ſnooted ſimilitude▪ but that ſacred Antiquated Table
to whom they ought devoutly to doff their Fe [...]ts The poorer ſort of the
Author's country­men wear caps upon their ſhoes, to conceal the holes at their
toes. Caps, they ſlightly paſs by, without the leaſt Ethick Nod of due
reſpect, had not a reverent Madam prov'd a ſhee patron to ſome Zealots in this
Doctrine: Had not other more noble Learning club'd to the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=46)
preſervation of his memorable name, cer­tainly it long e're this had been
buried with his Beard-ſhavings, in Oblivion. Praiſe­worthy onely this, that by
Art he confines a Cluſter of Ages into the narrow Compaſs of his own. Like
that Artificer which but­ton'd up a full Dozen of Silver Spoons in a
Diminutive Box. But more like that Peo­ple, which teach their Beds
contraction, whoſe drouzy Pates may be truly ſaid to lie in their Pockets all
the Day. Now I think on't, how verily do my two Theams agree? 'Tis no wonder,
good Wits alwayes jump: Like Caſtor and Pollux, Brethren in Ini­quity, how do
they criſp embraces? They both keep a general meeting in this, that they are
Men of the Times; a pair of petty Haberdaſher'd Chronologers, which keep a
cir­cumſpectMyſteries all! notary of Novelties, that ſo he may the better ſee
which way the Winde fits. But Characters ſhould be ſhort-handed, therefore
take this for a parting blow. May the Beaſts once caſt off thoſe thick skin'd
Vapours, which ſmoaking upwards, do ſhadow their dull brains. Or were they by
ſome Chymiſt Hat-maker extracted, thoſe reaking fumes by the Artiſt condens'd,
and modified, would very handſomely beaver
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=46) their
Blocks, and fit them as neatly, as e're the ancient Black-capt Cloud did the
Divine Temple.

My Muſes feet would ſurely have ſlipt, if I had (as I was deſired) attempted
theſe Rocks in Verſe, without a liberal expence of Vinegar'd The Au­thour doth
not accu­ſtome him­ſelf to piſs in his ſtan­diſh. Ink, the defect of which
(cry mer­cy) I might have ſupply'd out of the Foun­tain-head of their ſower
Looks.

Sic explicit Antiquarius.

FINIS.

## Appendix A

### Appendix A.1

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=47)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=47)

BOOKS PRINTED FOR Nath. Brook, And are to be ſold at his Shop at the Angel in
Cornhill.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=48)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=48)

### Appendix A.2 Courteous Reader, Theſe Books following are print­ted for
Nath. Brook, and are to be ſold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhill.

Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controverſies, Sermons, Devotions.

  * THe Catholique Hiſtory collected and ga­thered out of Scripture, Councils, and Ancient Fathers, in Anſwer to Dr. Vane's Loſt Sheep returned home: by Edward Cheſenſale, Eſq Octavo.
  * 2\. Biſhop Morton on the Sacrament, in Folio.
  * 3\. The Grand Sacriledge of the Church of Rome; in taking away the ſacred Cup from the Laity at the Lords Table; by Dr. Featley, DD. Quarto.
  * 4\. The Quakers Cauſe at ſecond hearing, being a full anſwer to their Tenets.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=49)5\. Re-aſſertion of Grace: Vindiciae Evangelii, or the Vindication of the Goſpel: a Reply to Mr. Anthony Burgheſs Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr. Ruth­ford, by Robert Town.
  * 6\. Anabaptiſts anatomized and ſilenced: or, a Diſpute with Mr. Tombs, by Mr. J. Grag; where all may receive clear ſatisfaction in that Contro­verſie. The beſt extant, Octavo.
  * 7\. A Glimpſe of Divine Light, being an Expli­cation of ſome paſſages exhibited to the Commiſ­ſioners at White-Hall for Approbation of Publique Preachers, againſt J. Harriſon of Land Chap. Lanca.
  * 8\. The zealous Magiſtrate; a Sermon by T. Threſcos. Quarto.
  * 9\. New Jeruſalem, in a Sermon for the Society of Aſtrologers, Quarto, in the Year 1651.
  * 10\. Divinity no enemy to Aſtrology. A Sermon for the Society of Aſtrologers, in the Year 1643. by Dr. Thomas Swadling.
  * 11\. Britannia Rediviva. A Sermon before the Judges, Auguſt 1648\. by J. Shaw Miniſter of Hull.
  * 12\. The Princeſs Royal, in a Sermon before the Judges, March 24\. by J. Shaw.
  * 13\. Judgement ſet, and Books opened, Religion tried whether it be of God or Man, in ſeveral Ser­mons; by J. Webſter. Quarto.
  * 14\. Iſraels Redemption, or, the Prophetical Hiſto­ry of our Saviors Kingdom on Earth; by K. Matton.
  * 15\. The Cauſe and Cure of Ignorance, Error, and Profaneneſs; or, a more hopeful way to Grace and Salvation; by K. Young. Octavo.
  * 16\. A Bridle for the Times, tending to ſtill the [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=49) murmuring, to ſettle the wavering, to ſtay the wan­dring, and to ſtrengthen the fainting: by J. Brinſ­ley of Yarmouth.
  * 17\. Comforts againſt the fear of Death; where­in are diſcovered ſeveral Evidences of the work of Grace: by J. Collins of Norwich.
  * 18\. Jacobs Seed; or, the excellency of ſeeking God by prayer, by Jer. Burroughs.
  * 19\. The ſum of Practical Divinity; or, the grounds of Religion in a Chatechiſticall way, by Mr. Chriſtopher Love late Miniſter of the Goſpel: a uſeful piece.
  * 20\. Heaven and Earth ſhaken; a Treatiſe ſhew­ing how Kings and Princes, their Governments are turned and changed, by J. Davis Miniſter in Dover, admirably uſeful, and ſeriouſly to be conſidered in theſe times.
  * 21\. The Treaſure of the Soul; wherein we are taught, by dying to ſin, to attain to the perfect love of God.
  * 22\. A Treatiſe of Conteſtation, fit for theſe ſad and troubleſome times, by J. Hall Biſh. of Norwich.
  * 23\. Select thoughts; or, choice helps for a pious ſpirit, beholding the excellency of her Lord Jeſus: by J. Hall Biſhop of Norwich.
  * 24\. The Holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion; to which is added, Songs in the night, or chearfulneſs under afflictions: by J. Hall Biſhop of Norwich.
  * 25\. The Celeſtial Lamp, enlightening every di­ſtreſſed Soul from the depth of everlaſting darkneſs: by T. Fetiſplace.

Admirable, and Learned Treatiſes of Occult Scien­ces in Philoſophy, Magick,
Aſtrology, Geomancy, Chymiſtry, Phyſiognomy, and Chyromancy.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=50)26\. Magick and Aſtrology vindicated by H. Warren.
  * 27\. Lux Veritatis, Judicial Aſtrology vindicated and Demonology confuted; by W. Ramſey Gent.
  * 28\. An Introduction to the Teutonick Philoſo­phy; being a determination of the Original of the Soul: by C. Hotham Fellow of Peter-Houſe in Cam­bridge.
  * 29\. Cornelius Agrippa, his fourth Book of Occult Philoſophy, or Geomancy; Magical Elements of Peter de Abona, the nature of ſpirits: made Engliſh by R. Turner.
  * 30\. Paracelſus Occult Philoſophy, of the My­ſteries of Nature, and his ſecret Alchimy.
  * 31\. An Aſtrological Diſcourſe with Mathema­tical Demonſtrations; proving the influence of the Planets, and fixed Stars upon Elementary Bodies: by Sir Chri. Heydon Knight.
  * 32\. Merlinus Anglicus Junior; the Engliſh Merlin revived, or, a Prediction upon the Affairs of Chriſtendom, for the year 1644. by W. Lilly.
  * 33\. Englands Propheticall Merlin; foretelling to all Nations of Europe, till. 1663. the actions de­pending upon the influences of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, 1642\. by W. Lilly.
  * 34\. The Starry Meſſenger, or an Interpretation of that ſtrange Apparition of three Sunnes ſeen in [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=50) London, the 19. of November 1644\. being the Birth­day of King Charles; by W. Lilly
  * 35\. The Worlds Cataſtrophe; or, Europes ma­ny Mutations, until 1666. by W. Lilly.
  * 34\. An Aſtrological Prediction of the Occur­rences in England; part of the Years 1648, 1649. 1650. by W. Lilly.
  * 37\. Monarchy or no Monarchy in England; the Propheſie of the White King, Grebner his Propheſie, concerning Charles, Son of Charles, his Greatneſs; illuſtrated with ſeveral Hieroglyphicks; by W. Lilly.
  * 38\. Annus Tenebroſus, or the Dark Year; or, Aſtrological Judgements upon two Lunary Eclipſes, and one admirable Eclipſe of the Sun in England, 1652\. by W. Lilly.
  * 39\. An eaſie and familiar Method, whereby to judge the effects depending on Eclipſes; by W. Lilly
  * 40\. Supernatural Sights and Apparitions ſeen in London, June, 30\. 1644. by W. Lilly. As alſo all his Works in a Volume.
  * 41\. Cataſtrophe Magnatum: an Ephemerides for the Year 1652. by N. Culpepper.
  * 42\. Teratologia; or, a diſcovery of Gods Won­ders, manifeſted by bloody rain and Waters; by J. S.
  * 53\. Chyromancy; or the Art of divining by the Lines engraven in the hand of Man, by dame Na­ture, in 198. Genitures; with a Learned Diſcourſe of the Soul of the World; by G. Wharton Eſq
  * 44\. The admired Piece of Phyſiognomy, and Chyromancy, Metopoſcopy, the Symmetrical Pro­portions, and Signal Moles of the Body, the In­terpretation of Dreams; to which is added the [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=51) Art of Memory; illuſtrated with Figures: by Rich. Sanders, in Folio.
  * 45\. The no leſs exquiſite then admirable Work, Theatrum Chemicum, Britannicum; containing ſe­veral▪ Poetical Pieces of our famous Engliſh Philo­ſophers, who have written the Hermitique Myſte­ries in their own ancient Language; faithfully col­lected into one Volume, with Annotations thereon: by the Indefatigable induſtry of Elias Aſhmole, Eſq illuſtrated with Figures.

Excellent Treatiſes in the Mathematicks, Geometry, of Arithmetick, Surveying,
and other Arts, or Mechanicks.

  * 46\. The incomparable Treatiſe of Tactometria, ſeu Tetagmenometria; or, the Geometry of Regu­lars, practically propoſed, after a new and moſt ex­peditious manner, together with the Natural or Vulgar, by way of Menſural compariſon) and in the Solids, not onely in reſpect of Magnitude or De­menſion, but alſo of Gravity or Ponderoſity, ac­cording to any Metal aſſigned: together with uſe­ful experiments of Meaſures and Weights, Obſerva­tions on Gauging, uſeful for thoſe that are practi­ſed in the Art Metricald; by T. Wybard.
  * 47\. Tectonicon, ſhewing the exact meaſuring of all manner of Land, Squares, Timber, Stone, Stee­ples, Pillars, Globes; as alſo the making and uſe of the Carpenters Rule, &c. fit to be known by all Surveyors, Land-meters, Joyners, Carpenters, and Maſons: by L. Diggs.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=51)48\. The unparallel'd Work for eaſe and expedi­tion, intituled, The exact Surveyor: or, the whole Art of Surveying of Land, ſhewing how to plot all manner of Grounds, whether ſmall Incloſures, Champain, Plain, Wood-lands, or Mountains, by the Plain Table; as alſo how to finde the Area, or Content of any Land, to Protect, Reduce or Di­vide the ſame; as alſo to take the Plot or Cart, to make a Map of any Mannor, whether according to Rathburne, or any other Eminent Surveyors Me­thod; a Book excellently uſeful for thoſe that ſell, purchaſe, or are otherwiſe employed about Build­ings; by J. Eyre.
  * 49\. The golden Treatiſe of Arithmetick, Natu­ral and Artificial, or Decimals; the Theory and Practice united in a ſimpathetical Proportion, be­twixt Lines and Numbers, in their Quantities and Qualities, as in reſpect of Form, Figure, Magnitude, and Affection; demonſtrated by Geometry, illu­ſtrated by Calculations, and confirmed with variety of Examples in every Species; made compendious and eaſie for Merchants, Citizens, Sea-men, Ac­comptants, &c. by Th. Wilsford Corrector of the laſt Edition of Record.
  * 50\. Semigraphy, or the Art of Short-writing, as it hath been proved by many hundreds in the City of London, and other places, by them practiſed, and acknowledged to be the eaſieſt, exacteſt, and ſwifteſt method; the meaneſt capacity by the help of this Book, with a few hours practice, may attain to a perfection in this Art; by J. Rich Author and Teach­er thereof, dwelling in Swithings-Lane in London.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=52)51 Milk for Children; a plain and eaſie Me­thod teaching to read and write, uſeful for Schools and Families, by J. Thomas D. D.
  * 52\. The Painting of the Ancients; the Hiſtory of the beginning, progreſs, and conſummating of the practiſe of that noble Art of Painting; by F. Junius.

Excellent and approved Treatiſes in Phyſick, Chy­rurgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preſerving, &c.

  * 53\. Culpeppers's Semiatica Ʋranica, his Aſtro­logical judgement of Diſeaſes from the decumbi­ture of the ſick, much enlarged: the way and man­ner of finding out the cauſe, change, and end of the Diſeaſe; alſo whether the ſick be likely to live or die, and the time when Recovery or Death is to be expected, according to the judgement of Hipocra­tes and Hermes Triſmegiſtus; to which is added Mr. Culpeppers cenſure of Urines.
  * 54\. Culpeper's laſt Legacy, left to his Wife for the publick good, being the choiceſt and moſt pro­fitable of thoſe ſecrets in Phyſick and Chyrurgery; which whilſt he lived, were lockt up in his breaſt, and reſolved never to be publiſhed till after his death.
  * 55\. The Torkſhire Spaw; or, the vertue and uſe of that water in curing of deſperate diſeaſes, with directions and rules neceſſary to be conſidered by all that repair thither.
  * 56\. Moſt approved Medicines and Remedies for [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=52) the diſeaſes in the body of Man: by A. Read Dr. in Phyſick.
  * 57\. The Art of Simpling: an introduction to the knowledge of gathering of Plants, wherein the definitions, diviſions, places, deſcriptions, differen­ces, names, vertues, times of gathering tempra­tures of them are compendiouſly discourſed of: alſo a Diſcovery of the Leſſer World, by W. Coles.
  * 58\. Adam in Eden, or, Natures Paradiſe: the Hiſtory of Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, with their ſeveral original names, the places where they grow, their deſcriptions and kindes, their times of flou­riſhing and decreaſing; as alſo their ſeveral ſigna­tures, anatomical appropriations, and particular phyſical vertues; with neceſſary Obſervations on the Seaſons of planting and gathering of our En­gliſh Plants. A Work admirably uſeful for Apothe­caries, Chyrurgeons, and other Ingenuous perſons, who may in this Herbal finde compriſed all the En­gliſh phyſical ſimples, that Gerard or Parkinſon, in theis two voluminous Herbals have diſcourſed of, even ſo as to be on emergent occaſions their own Phyſicians, the ingredients being to be had in their own fields and gardens; Publiſhed for the general good, by W. Coles, M. D.
  * 59 The Compleat Midwives practice, in the high and weighty concernments of the body of Man­kinde: or perfect Rules derived from the experien­ces and writings, not onely of our Engliſh, but the moſt accompliſht and abſolute practices of the French, Spaniſh, Italians, and other Nations; ſo [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=53) fitted for the weakeſt capacities, that they may in a ſhort time attain to the knowledge of the whole Art: by Dr. T. C. with the advice of others, illu­ſtrated with Copper Figures.
  * 60\. The Queens Cloſet opened: incomparable Secrets in Phyſick, Chyrurgery, Preſerving, Candy­ing, and Cookery; as they were preſented to the Queen by the moſt experienced perſons of our times; many whereof were honoured with her own Practice.

Elegant Treatiſes in Humanity, Hiſtory, Ro­mances, and Poetry.

  * 61\. Times Treaſury, or Academy, for the ac­compliſhment of the Engliſh Gentry in Arguments of Diſcourſe, Habit, Faſhion, Behaviour &c. all ſummed up in Characters of Honour, by R. Brath­wait Eſq.
  * 62\. Oedipus, or, the Reſolver of the ſecrets of Love, and other natural Problems, by way of Que­ſtion and Anſwer.
  * 63\. The Admirable and moſt impartial Hiſtory of New England, of the firſt plantation there, in the yeart 1628. brought down to theſe times: all the material paſſages performed there, exactly related.
  * 64\. The tears of the Indians: the Hiſtory of the bloody and moſt cruel proceedings of the Spani­ards in the Iſland of Hiſpaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, and other places of the Weſt-Indies; in which to the life are diſcovered the tyrannies of [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=53) the Spaniards, as alſo the juſtneſs of our War ſo ſuc­ceſsfully managed againſt them.
  * 65\. The Illuſtrious Shepherdeſs. The Imperious Brother: written originally in Spaniſh by that in­comparable wit, Don John Perez de Montalbans; tranſlated at the requeſts of the Marchioneſs of Dorcheſter, and the Counteſs of Stafford, by E. P.
  * 66\. The Hiſtory of the Golden Aſs, as alſo the Loves of Cupid and his Miſtreſs Pſiche: by L. A­pulcius tranſlated into Engliſh.
  * 67\. The Unfortunate Mother: a Tragedy by T. N.
  * 68\. The Rebellion: a Tragedy by T. Rawlins.
  * 69\. The Tragedy of Meſſalina the inſatiate Ro­man Empreſs: by N. Richards.
  * 70\. The floating Iſland: a Trage-Comedy, acted before the King, by the Students of Chriſts-Church in Oxon; by that renowned wit W. Strode, the ſongs were ſet by Mr. Henry Lawes.
  * 71\. Harvey's Divine Poems, the Hiſtory of Ba­laam, of Jonah, and of St. John the Evangeliſt.
  * 72\. Fons Lachrymarum, or, a Fountain of tears; the Lamentaions of the Prophet Jeremiah in Verſe, with an Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas; by I. Quarles.
  * 73\. Nocturnal Lucubrations, with other witty Epigrams and Epitaphs; by R. Chamberlain.
  * 74\. The admirable ingenuous Satyr againſt Hy­pocrites.

Poetical, with ſeverall other accurately iugenuous Treatiſes, lately Printed.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=54)75\. Wits Interpreter, the Engliſh Parnaſſus: or a ſure Guid to thoſe admirable Accompliſhments that compleat the Engliſh Gentry, in the moſt ac­ceptable Qualifications of Diſcourſe or Writing. An Art of Logick, accurate Complements, Fancies, Devices, and Experiments, Poems, Poetical Ficti­ons, and A la mode Letters: by J. C,
  * 76\. Wit and Drollery; with other Jovial Po­ems: by Sir J. M. M. L. M. S. W. D.
  * 77\. Sportive Wit, the Muſes Merriment; a new Spring of Drollery; Jovial Fancies, &c.
  * 78\. The Conveyancer of Light, or, the Com­pleat Clerk, and Scriveners Guide; being an exact draught of all Preſidents and Aſſurances now in uſe; as they were penned, and perfected by diverſe Learned Judges, Eminent Lawyers, and great Con­veyancers, both Ancient and Modern: whereunto is added a Concordance from King Richard the 3. to this preſent.
  * 79\. Themis Aurea, The Laws of the Fraternity of the Roſie Croſs; in which, the occult Secrets of their Philoſophical Notions are brought to light: written by Count Mayerus, and now Engliſht by T. H.
  * 80\. The Iron Rod put into the Lord Protectors hand; a Prophetical Treatiſe.
  * 81\. Medicina Magica tamen Phyſica; Magical but Natural Phyſick: containing the general Cures [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=54) of Infirmities and Diſeaſes belonging to the Bo­dies of Men, as alſo to other animals and domeſtick Creatures, by way of Tranſplantion: with a De­ſcription of the moſt excellent Cordial out of Gold; by Sam. Boulton of Salop.
  * 82\. J. Tradiſcan's Rareties, publiſht by himſelf.
  * 83\. The Proceedings of the High Court of Ju­ſtice againſt the late King Charles, with his Speech upon the Scaffold, and other Proceedings, Jan. 30\. 1648.
  * 84\. The perfect Cook; a right Method in the Art of Cookery, whether for Paſtry, or all other manner of Al a Mode Kick-ſhaws; with the moſt refined wayes of dreſſing of fleſh, fowl, or making of the moſt poinant Sawces, whether after the French, or Engliſh manner, together with fifty five wayes of dreſſing of Eggs: by M. M.

Admirable Ʋſeful Treatiſes newly printed.

  * 85\. The Expert Doctours Diſpenſatory: the whole Art of Phyſick reſtored to practice: the Apothecaries ſhop, and Chyrurgeons Cloſet open­ed; with a Survey, as alſo a correction of moſt Di­ſpenſatories now extant; with a Judicious Cenſure of their defects; and a ſupply of what they are defi­cient in: together with a learned account of the ver­tues and quantities, and uſes of Simples and Com­pounds; with the Symptomes of Diſeaſes; as alſo preſcriptions for their ſeveral cures: by that re­nowned P. Morellus, Phyſician to the King of France; a work for the order, uſefulneſs, and plain­neſs [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=55) of the Method, not to be parallel'd by any Diſ­penſatory, in what Language ſoever.
  * 86\. Cabinet of Jewels, Mans Miſery, Gods Mer­cy, Chriſts Treaſury, &c. in eight Sermons; with an Appendix of the nature of Tythes under the Go­ſpel; with the expediency of Marriage in publique Aſſemblies, by J. Crag, Miniſter of the Goſpel.
  * 87\. Natures Secrets; or the admirable and won­derful Hiſtory of the generation of Meteors; deſcri­bing the Temperatures of the Elements, the heights, magnitudes, and influences of Stars; the cauſes of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges, Epidemical Diſ­eaſes, and Prodigies of Precedent times; with pre­ſages of the weather: and deſcriptions of the wea­ther-glaſs: by T. Wilsford.
  * 88\. The Myſteries of Love and Eloquence; or, the Arts of Wooing and Complementing; as they are managed in the Spring Garden Hide Park the New Exchange, and other eminent places. A work, in which are drawn to the life the Deportments of the moſt Accompliſht Perſons; the Mode of their Courtly Entertainments, Treatment of their Ladies at Balls, their accuſtomed Sports, Drolls and Fan­cies; the Witchcrafts of their perſwaſive Language, in their Approaches, or other more Secret Diſ­patches, &c. by E. P.
  * 89\. Helmont diſguiſed; or, the vulgar errours of impercial and unskilful Practicers of Phyſick con­futed; more eſpecially as they concern the Cures of Feavers, the Stone, the Plague, and ſome other Diſ­eaſes by way of Dialogue, in which the chief rare­ties of Phyſick are admirably diſcourſed of, by I. T.

## Appendix B

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=55)

Books very lately Printed, and in the Preſs now printing.

  * 1\. THe Scales of Commerce and Trade: by T. Wilsford.
  * 2\. Geometry demonſtrated by Lines and Num­bers; from thence, Aſtronomy, Coſmography, and Navigation proved and delineated by the Doctrine of Plain and Spherical Triangles; by T. Wilsford.
  * 3\. The Engliſh Annals, from the Invaſion made by Julius Ceſar to theſe times: by T. Wilſ­ford.
  * 4\. The Fool transformed: A Comedy.
  * 5\. The Hiſtory of Lewis the eleventh King of France: a Trage-Comedy.
  * 6\. The Chaſte woman againſt her will; a Co­medy.
  * 7\. The Tooth-drawer; a Comedy.
  * 8\. Honour in the end: A Comedy.
  * 9\. Tell Tale; a Comedy.
  * 10\. The Hiſtory of Donquixiot, or the Knight of the ill-favoured face; a Comedy.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=56)11\. The fair Spaniſh Captive; a Trage-Co­medy.
  * 12\. Sir Kenelm Digby, and other perſons of Honour, their rare and incomparable ſecrets of Phyſick, Chyrurgery, Cookery, Preſerving, Con­ſerving, Candying, diſtilling of Waters, extraction of Oyls, compounding of the coſtlieſt Perfumes, with other admirable Inventions, and ſelect Experi­ments, as they offered themſelves to their Obſerva­tions; whether here, or in forreign Countreys.
  * 13\. The Soul's Cordial in two Treatiſes, the firſt teaching how to be eaſed of the guilt of Sin, the ſe­cond, diſcovering advantages by Chriſts Aſcention; by that faithful Labourer in the Lords Vineyard, Mr. Chriſtopher Love, late Parſon of Lawrence Jury: the third Volume.
  * 14\. Jacobs Seed, the excellency of ſeeking God by Prayer; by the late reverend Divine, J. Burroughs.
  * 15\. The Saints Tomb-ſtone; or, the Remains of the bleſſed. A plain Narrative of ſome remark­able Paſſages, in the holy Life, and happy Death of Miſtreſs Dorothy Shaw, Wife of Mr. John Shaw, Preacher of the Goſpel at Kingſton upon Hull, col­lected by her deareſt Friends, eſpecially for her ſor­rowful Husband and ſix Daughters conſolation and invitation.
  * 16\. The accompliſht Cook, the myſtery of the whole Art of Cookery, revealed in a more eaſie and perfect method, then hath been publiſht in any Language: expert and ready wayes for the dreſſing [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=56) of fleſh, fowl and fiſh, the raiſing of Paſtes, the beſt directions for all manner of Kick-ſhaws, and the moſt poinant Sauces, with the terms of Carving and Sewing: the Bills of fare, an exact account of all diſhes for the ſeaſon, with other Al a mode curio­ſities, together with the lively illuſtrations of ſuch neceſſary figures, as are referred to practice: appro­ved by the many years experience, and careful indu­ſtry of Robert May, in the time of his attendance on ſeveral perſons of honour.
  * 17\. The exquiſite Letters of Mr. Robert Loveday, the late admired Tranſlater of the Volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating his Memory, Publiſhed by his dear Brother Mr. A. L.
  * 18\. The ſo long expected Work, the New World of Engliſh Words, or, a general Dictionary, con­taining the Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and perfect Interpretations of the proper ſignifications of hard Engliſh words throughout the Arts and Sci­ences, Liberal, or Mechanick; as alſo other ſubjects that are uſeful, or appertain to the Languge of our Nation; to which is added the ſignification of Pro­per Names, Mythology, and Poetical Fictions, Hi­ſtorical Relations, Geographical Deſcriptions of the Countreys, and Cities of the World; eſpecially of theſe three Nations, wherein their chiefeſt Anti­quities, Battles, and other moſt memorable Paſſa­ges are mentioned: A Work very neceſſary for Strangers, as well as our own Countrey-men, for all perſons that would rightly underſtand what [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=57) they diſcourſe, write or read. Collected an publiſh­ed by E. P. for the greater honour of thoſe learn­ed Gentlemen and Artiſts that have been aſſiſtant in the moſt Practical Sciences, their Names are pre­fixed before the Book.
  * 19\. The ſo much deſired, and deeply learned Comentary, on Pſalm the fifteenth, by that Reve­rend and Eminent Divine Mr. Chriſtopher Cart­wright, Miniſter of the Goſpel in York to which is prefixed a brief account to the Authours life, and of his Work, by R. Bolton.
  * 20\. The way to bliſs, in three Books, being a learned Treatiſe of the Philoſophers Stone, made publique by Elias Aſhmole Eſq.
  * 21\. Wit reſtored in ſeveral Select Poems, not formerly publiſht by Sir John Mennis, Mr. Smith and others.
  * 22\. The Judges charge, delivered in a Sermon before Mr. Juſtice Hall, and Mr. Sergeant Crook Judges of the Aſſize, at St. Mary Overies in South­wark by R. Purre M. A. Paſtor of Camerwel, in the County of Surrey; a Sermon worthy of the per­uſal of all ſuch perſons, as endeavour to be honeſt and juſt Practitioners in the Law.
  * 23\. The Modern Aſſurancer, the Clerks Dire­ctory, containing the Practick Part of the Law, in the exact Forms and Draughts of all manner of Preſidents for Bargains, and Sales, Grants, Feoffe­ments, Bonds, Bills, Conditions, Covenants, Join­tures, Indentures; to lead the uſe of Fines and Re­coveries, with good Proviſo's, and Covenants to [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=57) ſtand ſeized, Charter parties for Ships, Leaſes, Re­leaſes, Surrendets, &c. And all other Inſtruments and Aſſurances now in uſe, intended for all young Students and Practicers of the Law, by John Hern.
  * 24\. Moor's Arithmatick, the ſecond Edition much refined and diligently cleared from the for­mer Miſtakes of the Preſs. A Work containing the whole Art of Arithmetick, as well in Numbers, as Species. Together with many Additions by the Author, to come forth at Machaelmas Term.

Likewiſe,

  * 25\. Exercitatio Elleiptica Nova, or a new Ma­thematicall Contemplation on the Oval Figure, called an Elleipſis; together with the two firſt Books of Mydorgius his Conicks Analiz'd, and made ſo plain, that the Doctrine of Conical Secti­ons may be eaſily underſtood, a Work much deſi­red, and never before publiſht in the Engliſh Tongue; by Jonas Moor, Surveyor General of the great Level of the Fennes.
  * 26\. The Joyes of Heaven, the Saints ſupport in Gods Promiſes on Earth, Chriſts Sermons on the Beatitudes. An Expoſition of the fifth Chapter of St. Matthew, delivered in ſeveral Sermons by Mr. Jeremiah Burroughs, the laſt Sermons he preacht a little before his Death, at St. Giles Cripple-gate, London.
  * 27\. Naps upon Parnaſſus. A ſleepy Muſe nipt and pincht, though not awakened. Such voluntary and Jovial Copies of Verſes as were lately receiv'd from ſome of the WITS of the Univerſities, in a [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=58) Frolick; dedicated to Gondibert's Miſtreſs, by Ca­ptain Jones and others. Whereunto is added for Demonſtration of the Authors proſaick Excellen­cy's, his Epiſtle to one of the Univerſities, with the Anſwer; together with two Satyrical Characters of his own, of a Temporizer, and an Antiquary, with Marginal Notes by a Friend to the Reader.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=114610&page=58)

[Home](/)

Flatman, Thomas, 1637-1688.. Date: 1658  

