---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Poor Robin's jests: or, The compleat jester Being a collection of several
jests not heretofore published. Now newly composed and written by that well-
known gentleman, Poor Robin, knight of the burnt island, and well-willer to
the mathematicks. Together with the true and lively effigies of the said
author. Licensed Feb. 2. 1666. Roger L'Estrange.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=1)

MS Phale & Company Enter  [...] Cave they meet a Solitary

M Delegaard Returns back M.S. Phale Receives a letter.

M.S. Phale Examins ye Footman yt bro by• Let from her  [...]ro [...]

M. Ponſin Gives his Mother acc [...] • of M.S. Phale's Rescue.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=1)

POOR ROBIN'S JESTS: OR, The Compleat Jeſter.

Being A Collection of ſeveral Jeſts not heretofore publiſhed.

Now newly compoſed and written By that well-known Gentleman, Poor Ro­bin,
Knight of the burnt Iſland, and well-willer to the Mathematicks.

Together with the true and lively Effigies of the ſaid Author.

Licenſed Feb. 2\. 1666. Roger L'Eſtrange.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Kirkman and Richard Head.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=2)

## To the Intelligible Reader.

DId not Cuſtom claim an E­piſtle, I might have ſaved my ſelf this labour of
writing one; and yet let me tell thee, that good Wine may be ſold within,
although there hangs no Buſh at the door. Now thou doſt expect (I ſuppoſe)
that I ſhould ſay ſomething of theſe Jeſts; if I ſhould tell thee that they
were all good, I think thou wouldſt not be­lieve me; and if thou ſhouldſt ſay
they were all bad, I profeſs I ſhould not believe thee. I ſuppoſe they are not
like to the women in the World, becauſe here is more good ones then bad ones;
whereas amongſt them,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=3) there is more
bad then good: if af­ter the peruſal of them thou finde fault, reflect upon
thy ſelf, whether thou haſt not more Vices then Ver­tues within thee, and
forbear to cen­ſure too rigidly, leſt a wiſer head then thy own commending
them, thou for thy pains be accounted a fool.

But me thinks I hear ſome long­ear'd fellow to ſay that the moſt of theſe are
but Collections, the Works of other men; and therefore the leſs to be
regarded: why Apes-face, let me aſk thee this Queſtion; Is the Honey the
worſe, becauſe the Bee ſucks it out of many flowers? or is the Spiders Web the
more to be praiſed, becauſe it is extracted out of her own Bowels? Wilt thou
ſay the Taylor did not make the Gar­ment, becauſe the Cloath it was made of,
was weaved by the Weaver? 'Tis true, many of theſe Jeſts were delivered before
by others; but with ſo much prolixity, and in ſuch a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=3) rough ſtile,
as was both tedious and unpleaſant to the Reader; but now they are ſo ordered,
that the worſt of them all may paſs with approbati­on, if thou doeſt not marre
their ſence, by thy ill-favour'd reading of them; which if thou ſhouldeſt do
in my hearing, I profeſs, as I am a true man, an honeſt man, and no Taylor, I
ſhould be very angry with thee for thy labour.

And now let me tell thee, that be­ſides the old, here is a great many new
ones; yea, ſpick and ſpan new, ſcattered amongſt the others (like Plumbs in a
Cake) to make the old ones to reliſh the better: and indeed Jeſts are like
Cakes, which ſhould have in them the ſweet Plumbs of pleaſant language, ſpiced
with de­light, and ſugered with pleaſure; but the neareſt reſemblance is, that
Jeſts and Cakes are both of them beſt when they are broken.

Now if thou likeſt them, ſo; if thou
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=4) diſlike them,
then ſo, ſo: but if thy teeth ſtand like an old Park-pale, here one rotten,
and there one out; forbear to read them before thy Sweet-heart, leſt when thou
grinneſt, thou diſcover ſo much, as to help thee, thou be forced to flee to
the old Proverb for refuge, That thoſe whoſe teeth are out kiſs ſoftly.

Much more might be ſaid, if there were a neceſſity for it; but if thou beeſt
not wiſe, then thou art other­wiſe; now if thou beeſt wiſe, then a word to the
wiſe is ſufficient; and if beeſt otherwiſe, all the words that I can uſe, will
not make thee a wiſe man.

Next, a word or two to the women, and then I will conclude: Two ſorts of the
Female Sex would I adviſe by all means not to read this Book; viz. thoſe women
that have made their Husbands Cuckolds, and thoſe that paint their faces. For
the firſt ſort, thoſe women that wear Cork-ſhooes,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=4) which makes
them to be light-heel'd, let them not dare to touch it, leſt they meet with
ſome paſſages in it, which may make them to bluſh as red, as if they had been
drinking of burnt-Cla­ret; when they conſider with them­ſelves, that by their
doing, and being done, their Husbands, who (had they had honeſt Wives) might
have lived and dyed handſome, fine, ſmooth-foreheaded men, now by theſe
wag­tails are metamorphoſed into ſuch-kinde of Creatures, as Bulls, Oxen,
Stags, Rams, Goats, Humble-bees and Snayles.

Then for thoſe that paint their faces, if they ſhould laugh them­ſelves into
an extraordinary Sweat, it might chance to ſpoil their com­plexions, by reaſon
of their Fucus melting off; let them therefore for­bear, forewarn'd,
forearm'd: for all other ſorts of women, let them read and welcome, laugh till
they be­piſs [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=5)
themſelves, it is but waſhing their Smocks again; ſo fall too, and much good
may it do you.

Yours in all civil Mirth, POOR ROBIN.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=5)

## Will. Summers in Commendation of this Book.

I Who did live i'th' days of eighth King Harry

(That in his time ſix ſeveral wives did marry,)

And oft did make him laugh his belly full

With Jeſts I put upon Cardinal Wol-Sey,

do now appear again in print

For this ſame Book, to tell you what is in't;

'Tis with a medley of ſuch queint Jeſts ſtor'd,

The beſt that any Age did yet afford:

For other Commendations it don't need them;

They're good upon my word, and therefore read them.

## Scoggin on the Book.

I Nither to have lived in great fame,

But theſe queint Jeſts will quite eclipſe my name,

And put me down (ſo far they do excel)

Even as a Bucket is put down a Well:

For thoſe whoſe Wits are dull, whoſe brains are dry,

Here is at leaſt a twelve-months freſh ſupply.

Me thinks I ſee when Tom and Will doth read them,

How all the Company with attention heed them:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=6)Such ſtore of
mirth it breeds when they ſit quaffing,

That Jenny breaks her twatling-ſtrings with laughing.

My Commendations of them in this Verſe,

Is like my greazing the fat Sow o'th' Ar—

For they are ſtor'd with ſo much mirth & ſport,

The longeſt Verſe doth in their praiſe come ſhort.

## Dick Tarlton on the Compleat Jeſter.

NExt to Will Summers, and my Brother Scoggin,

Let me amongſt the reſt put my dry bob in;

For you will ſay there were ſome reaſon for't,

If you had ſeen me in Queen Beſſes Court,

Where I did live in great renown and bravery,

And pleas'd moſt people with my harmleſs kna—

But ſome will ſay, what needeth all this clatter?

Here's nothing hath been ſpoken to the matter.

'Tis true indeed, the thoughts of my paſt glory

Had made me almoſt quite forget my ſtory;

Which was (if I am not therein miſtook)

To give my approbation of this Book:

All I ſhall ſay, is, thoſe that diſcommend it,

Let them (if they can do the ſame) come mend it.

## Paſquil upon the following Jeſts.

MY being was i'th' days of Mother Bunch,

Who ſold good Liquor, Sider, Ale & Punch,

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=6)Metheglin,
Perry, Ʋſquebah and Coffee,

As good as ere was drunk by Perſian Sophy:

And ſometimes Brandy, Chocolet, Stepony,

Which thither did invite many a Croney;

Where whilſt they ſat a drinking of their Ale,

Each man by turns did tell a merry tale;

Which I had printed in one Book for ſport too,

Neither in Twelves, nor Octo, but in Quarto:

That Book of mine and if you do reſort to,

'Twill make you laugh, and ſmile, and if not fart too:

But yet I muſt confeſs, I can't deny it,

This following Book (unleſs I ſhould bely it)

Surpaſſes mine in ſo many degrees,

As Water is by Wine, or Chalk by Cheeſe.

## Long-Meg of Weſtminſter on the Book.

AMongſt the men, next give a woman place too,

Who once did live in great renown and grace too;

And for being tall, and kept a filthy ſtir,

Men ſtiled me Long-Meg of Weſtminſter.

Many mad pranks I plaid, and many a gam­ble,

Whilſt in this lower Orbe I had my ramble;

For which my name grew great, and thundred ſo,

Lowder then Cannon-ſhot, or Bell of Bow.

And be it known unto all Chriſtian people,

It mounted higher far then is Pauls-ſteeple:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=7)That ſince the
days Eve woo'd our father A­dam,

Was never known a ſtouter ſtrapping Madam.

But now I fear as ſure as Egs are Egs too,

And that mens Bodies are born by their Legs too;

Theſe Jeſts puts down my fame, have me out-ſtripped,

As School-boys puts down hoſe when they are whipped.

## Hobſon, the merry Londoner, in praiſe of this Book.

FOrth from the hollow Caverns of old Tellus,

I come to ſpend my breath, like winde from Bellows,

To tell the world this Book it hath no f [...]llows;

Read it, 'twill cure the jealous of the Yellows,

The rich of Pride, the ſad of Melancholy,

The poor of Spleen, the ſimple-man of folly:

It is the onely Ʋniverſal Doctor,

'Twill cure thee of the P— if thou haſt knockt her.

There's no diſeaſe of care, nor yet of grief too,

But reading this, it gives the minde relief too:

Then if for to be cur'd, thy minde be willing,

Pull out thy purſe, the price is but a ſhilling.

## Archy in praiſe of this Book.

AMongſt the train of nimble wits next march I,

King Charles the Martyrs Jeſter, famous Archy:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=7)Valiant I was,
as was french Knight de Amadis,

And full of mirth, as Egge-ſhell with meat cramb'd is;

And which o'th' matter ſets a higher rate too,

Jeſted my ſelf into a good Eſtate too.

Now ſince my cenſure muſt paſs on this Book,

I durſt avouch, if that thereupon you look,

You'll finde rare jocund tales, both new & old too,

By ſeveral men, and at ſeveral times told too.

For what Taylor of Coriats works once utter'd,

Th' were good as toſted Cheeſe, or Fiſh that's butter'd;

Might in a better ſence of theſe be taken,

They're good as powder'd Beef, or Egs & Bacon.

## Poor Robin on himſelf.

LAſtly, for to bring up the Rear

In my own perſon I appear,

To make it known unto the world

What falſhoods have on me been hurl'd:

One ſays I'm this, another that,

And moſt do prate they know not what:

For like to Geeſe in mud that paddle,

Each broods his Eggs, and all prove addle.

One ſays that I a Parſon am,

He heard me Preach, and knows my name;

And if that lyes be true, then he

Has hit the truth aſſuredly;

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=8)But if that it
be otherwiſe,

Then truth is truth, and he tells lyes.

Another in me a Lawyer ſees,

That in falſe caſe I ne'er took fees;

But ſure the mans in's judgement's blind,

For why, ſuch Lawyers few can finde.

Another doth affirm me for

A Doctor, or a Quackſalver,

(Or if you will a Mountebank,

Where Jack Pudding on Stage is crank)

And that I do cure each diſeaſe,

Loſt Maiden-heads, or what you pleaſe:

But were I Doctor, I'd be trying

To cure that party of his lying.

Another ſays it is a Knight

Poor Robin's Almanack does write:

Another ſays it is a Squire;

And I ſay each of them's a lyar.

One did report I was a Vulcan;

Becauſe (they ſay) I love a full Can:

Another in his words did vary,

Said I was an Apothecary.

A third, whoſe brains were ſomething adler,

Aver'd for truth I was a Sadler.

A fourth hath an Opinion newer,

That I love Beer, and am a Brewer:

But he had been a truer hinter,

That I love Wine, and am a Vintner:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=8)For though in
trade from truth they vary,

I muſt confeſs I love Canary.

Now I have told you what I am not,

But what I am, to tell I cannot;

For he who can himſelf conjecture,

Is wiſer then our late Protector,

Who had forgot he was a Brewer,

And could above him none indure:

Nor think I he could prophecy,

When dead, his head ſhould mount ſo high;

Or that his Trunk with two on's fellows

Should buried be under the Gallows.

But they who do deſire to know me,

If they ſuch love or kindneſs owe me,

Come to Limehouſe neer to Dicks-ſhore,

A mile from Aldgate, if not more;

Neer unto Signe of the White Lyon,

Hard by's a Shop, if you caſt eye on:

[...] may be found without all doubt,

Always within, if not gone out.

There do I ſit ſome certain hours,

Contemplating the ſtarry powers:

And from that place as may be gueſt,

Brought up Will Summers and the reſt

Brom Elyzium, or from Limbo,

To make Verſe like rime in Crambo,

[...] commendation of this Book,

As you may read, if there you look.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=9)Now I imagine
in all reaſon

I've writ enough at this ſame ſeaſon:

And thoſe who like not this Epiſtle,

Lay the book down, and go whilſtle.

P.R.

WRitten at Lime-houſe neer Dick [...] ſhore,

The day o'th' month, five and a ſcore:

The month April, th' hour Eleven,

Year Sixteen Hundred Sixty Seven.

## Table of contents

  * To the Intelligible Reader.
  * Will. Summers in Commendation of this Book.
  * Scoggin on the Book.
  * Dick Tarlton on the Compleat Jeſter.
  * Paſquil upon the following Jeſts.
  * Long-Meg of Weſtminſter on the Book.
  * Hobſon, the merry Londoner, in praiſe of this Book.
  * Archy in praiſe of this Book.
  * Poor Robin on himſelf.
  * 1\. POOR ROBIN'S JESTS: OR, The compleat Jeſter.
    * 1.1. The Lady and Tenant.
    * 1.2. Another.
    * 1.3. Will. Summers and Cardinal Woolſey.
    * 1.4. King Henry the Eighth.
    * 1.5. This Scholar deſerv'd Wine.
    * 1.6. An impertinent Hoſt.
    * 1.7. The Cut-purſe and Watch.
    * 1.8. The Gallant Cut-purſe.
    * 1.9. One cured of his money.
    * 1.10. Sir Harry Vane.
    * 1.11. The Jeſuite and Fryar.
    * 1.12. Three Wiſhes produced but a Ladle.
    * 1.13. A providential Father.
    * 1.14. The Vintners Boy.
    * 1.15. 〈…〉
    * 1.16. Good to ſave ſomething for laſt.
    * 1.17. Too true, the more's the pitty.
    * 1.18. Nothing ask'd, nothing given.
    * 1.19. Children and Fools tell truth.
    * 1.20. A double miſtake.
    * 1.21. Some ſeeking to praiſe, diſpraiſe.
    * 1.22. A Taylors Hell.
    * 1.23. Anger without cauſe.
    * 1.24. A coſtly truth.
    * 1.25. A witty theiviſh anſwer.
    * 1.26. More afraid then hurt.
    * 1.27. A miſtake.
    * 1.28. Another.
    * 1.29. Wit without Book.
    * 1.30. Of Witches.
    * 1.31. Of the Wall.
    * 1.32. An alone Jeſt.
    * 1.33. The Spaniards wooden God.
    * 1.34. A friend at need.
    * 1.35. Who are Debters.
    * 1.36. A wiſe queſtion of a Mahumetan.
    * 1.37. A hungry Banquet.
    * 1.38. Health before Wealth.
    * 1.39. The building of Cripple-gate.
    * 1.40. The Fryars Doctrine.
    * 1.41. Earl Gowry
    * 1.42. A ſhirking ſhift.
    * 1.43. A Parſon out-witted by a Woman.
    * 1.44. The Country-man and Maſtive Dog.
    * 1.45. Much adoe about nothing.
    * 1.46. Truth miſtaken.
    * 1.47. A ſhrewd miſtake.
    * 1.48. A witty retort.
    * 1.49. Mr. Beaumont and Mr. Fletcher.
    * 1.50. Valorous Love.
    * 1.51. Of Mr. Johnſon.
    * 1.52. Another.
    * 1.53. A Poetical Jeſt.
    * 1.54. A good Jeſt d'you ſee?
    * 1.55. Another of that kinde.
    * 1.56. Queen Mary and Heywood.
    * 1.57. French arms and French harms.
    * 1.58. A gall'd Horſe will wince.
    * 1.59. A new way to get Mony.
    * 1.60. All covet, all looſe.
    * 1.61. Cromwel and the Scotch Parſon.
    * 1.62. No Plague greater then a curſt Wife.
    * 1.63. A Bull.
    * 1.64. The Gallant and Gentlewoman.
    * 1.65. The Sick-man.
    * 1.66. Hanging ends all trouble.
    * 1.67. The Country-man and his Aſs.
    * 1.68. A Bull.
    * 1.69. The Country man and his wife.
    * 1.70. The Maids miſchance.
    * 1.71. A Painter.
    * 1.72. The Scold.
    * 1.73. No life to Leachery.
    * 1.74. Saving in this caſe the greateſt gains.
    * 1.75. A Bull.
    * 1.76. The young man and his father.
    * 1.77. The Cuckolds Cap.
    * 1.78. The Country-man and Fryar.
    * 1.79. The Fryar and the Pope.
    * 1.80. The Arch-biſhop and Country-man.
    * 1.81. The Noble-mans Arms.
    * 1.82. A Bull.
    * 1.83. Another.
    * 1.84. A merry old man.
    * 1.85. A Bull.
    * 1.86. The hungry Traveller.
    * 1.87. The Taylor and Weaver.
    * 1.88. The skilful Phyſitian.
    * 1.89. The Gardiner and his wife.
    * 1.90. A Tinkers Character.
    * 1.91. Of early riſing.
    * 1.92. Of Roger Bale.
    * 1.93. Of Wood the great eater.
    * 1.94. The Parſon and his man.
    * 1.95. Of Muſitians.
    * 1.96. A cunning Laſs.
    * 1.97. The ſlender-witted Gentleman.
    * 1.98. Eaſier to come down then go up.
    * 1.99. The Fryar and Woman.
    * 1.100. The Dominican and Franciſcan Fryars.
    * 1.101. The learned Conies.
    * 1.102. A poor Scholars pittance.
    * 1.103. Of Dr. Mathews.
    * 1.104. The turning Doctor.
    * 1.105. Phyſitians and Lawyers.
    * 1.106. A Muſitian.
    * 1.107. A miſtake.
    * 1.108. The Knight and Gentleman.
    * 1.109. The Yeoman and Gallant.
    * 1.110. Jack Franck.
    * 1.111. A witty anſwer of a Jester.
    * 1.112. A miſtake.
    * 1.113. The Printers man.
    * 1.114. Of the ſame.
    * 1.115. A Fiſhmonoger a Member.
    * 1.116. A vindication.
    * 1.117. Country-man and Faulkner.
    * 1.118. A miſtake
    * 1.119. Double meaning.
    * 1.120. The Maid a Waſhing.
    * 1.121. The Devil upon Dun.
    * 1.122. The Juſtice and fellow.
    * 1.123. A wiſe reply.
    * 1.124. The Maid and Phyſitian.
    * 1.125. King Edward the Sixth.
    * 1.126. The Cooper and his Wife.
    * 1.127. The French for a Cuckold.
    * 1.128. R.H.
    * 1.129. The Traveller and King Henry the Eighth.
    * 1.130. The Captain in 88.
    * 1.131. The Juſtice of Peace and Conſtable.
    * 1.132. The Country-man and Aſtrologer W.L.
    * 1.133. The Country-man and Doctor.
    * 1.134. The fellow and his Dogs.
    * 1.135. A Noble-man and his Page.
    * 1.136. The poor Man and haſty Cook.
    * 1.137. A wiſe reaſon of a Fool.
    * 1.138. A rich Heir.
    * 1.139. A witty anſwer of a Fool.
    * 1.140. Another.
    * 1.141. A witty anſwer of a mad-man.
    * 1.142. The Fool and Dog.
    * 1.143. Good to watch as well as pray.
    * 1.144. The valorous heart.
    * 1.145. The Lawyer and his Clyent.
    * 1.146. Mony gains the Victory.
    * 1.147. Nothing without mony.
    * 1.148. The caſe is alter'd, quoth Ployden, how that Proverb came up.
    * 1.149. The Parents and different Childe.
    * 1.150. The Gentleman that was in earneſt.
    * 1.151. The Turkey-Pye.
    * 1.152. A Fart.
    * 1.153. Dead and Alive.
    * 1.154. The Gentleman and Boy.
    * 1.155. The Novice Prentice.
    * 1.156. The Baſtayd Boy.
    * 1.157. Like Mother, like Daughter.
    * 1.158. The Wench with-Child.
    * 1.159. A loud Lie.
    * 1.160. The Country-man and Scrivener.
    * 1.161. The Man and his Hare.
    * 1.162. The Gentleman having ſore Eyes.
    * 1.163. The Scottiſh Parſon.
    * 1.164. Another.
    * 1.165. Ben Johnſon.
    * 1.166. Another of him.
    * 1.167. Another.
    * 1.168. Two Poets.
    * 1.169. Maſter Randolph.
    * 1.170. Another of Maſter Randolph.
    * 1.171. John Taylor.
    * 1.172. Sir Thomas Moor.
    * 1.173. Another
    * 1.174. Another
    * 1.175. Another.
    * 1.176. Another.
    * 1.177. Another.
    * 1.178. Another.
    * 1.179. A Noblemans health.
    * 1.180. A Deformed wit.
    * 1.181. The toothless Miſer.
    * 1.182. A New-faſhion'd Coat of arms.
    * 1.183. The Thiefes queſtion.
    * 1.184. A Rougiſh trick to a Stranger.
    * 1.185. The Country-man.
    * 1.186. Of one ſpitting in the fire.
    * 1.187. A deep Queſtion.
    * 1.188. Of Madam Carlton.
    * 1.189. Another of Her.
    * 1.190. Hugh Peters and Oliver.
    * 1.191. Pride and Hewſon.
    * 1.192. The Parſon and the good Wife.
    * 1.193. The Parſon and Church-Warden.
    * 1.194. Dr. Adams, and Dr. Low.
    * 1.195. Dr. Heylin.
    * 1.196. Dr. Donne.
    * 1.197. Of Pope Adrian.
    * 1.198. The Pope and St. Peter.
    * 1.199. The Spaniſh Biſhop, and Shepherd.
    * 1.200. Biſhop Bonner.
    * 1.201. The Spaniſh-Fryar.
    * 1.202. The Biſhop and his Chaplain.
    * 1.203. Reaſon for this.
    * 1.204. A uſeleſs Library.
    * 1.205. Peter Martyr.
    * 1.206. The Biſhop and Student.
    * 1.207. A Requeſt anſwered.
    * 1.208. The Abbot, and the Meſſenger.
    * 1.209. King Henry the eighth, and the Abbot.
    * 1.210. Another of King Henry the eighth, and the Abbot of Glaſtenbury.
    * 1.211. King Henry the Eighth, and Will. Summers.
    * 1.212. Another.
    * 1.213. King Henry the eighth and the Prior of Dunmow.
    * 1.214. King Henry the thirds baſe Son.
    * 1.215. The Portugal Fryar.
    * 1.216. An Atheiſtical ſpeech of a French-man.
    * 1.217. The Iriſh Lord and Tory.
    * 1.218. The winking Parſon.
    * 1.219. Cardinal Wolſey and the Nobleman.
    * 1.220. The Welſhman that faſted againſt his will.
    * 1.221. A good Jeſt of a Welſhman.
    * 1.222. Another.
    * 1.223. Dulman and the Lords Ape.
    * 1.224. Welſhmens prerogative.
    * 1.225. Of a Welſhman.
    * 1.226. Another.
    * 1.227. Another.
    * 1.228. Of a Milk-woman.
    * 1.229. The impertinent babler.
    * 1.230. Doctor Trigg and the wench.
    * 1.231. On ſpitting in the face.
    * 1.232. Another.
    * 1.233. The Maſter and man.
    * 1.234. Whereabouts Cuckcolds horns grow.
    * 1.235. On one named Sampſon.
    * 1.236. The Lord and his Steward.
    * 1.237. On Claret.
    * 1.238. A Witty claſh of words.
    * 1.239. On Mr. Stone.
    * 1.240. On a Recorder of London.
    * 1.241. On a fooliſh Book.
    * 1.242. Of Gaming.
    * 1.243. The wordleſs Song.
    * 1.244. Of going to Bedlam.
    * 1.245. An Ignoramus.
    * 1.246. Every one to his Trade.
    * 1.247. King James and the Welſhman.
    * 1.248. Of the French Kings Letter.
    * 1.249. The Taylors man.
    * 1.250. How Taylors came to be of the bloud-Royal.
    * 1.251. Of a Taylor.
    * 1.252. Another of Taylors.
    * 1.253. Another.
    * 1.254. The Gentleman and Beggar.
    * 1.255. Another.
    * 1.256. The Loving Wife.
    * 1.257. Of a Witch.
    * 1.258. The unbelieving Cuckold.
    * 1.259. The Judge and his Tenant.
    * 1.260. Marrying a Scold worſe then hanging.
    * 1.261. The Fool beſt liked.
    * 1.262. On diſturbing the Players.
    * 1.263. Of Harry Martin.
    * 1.264. A ſharp nip.
    * 1.265. A watchful Mayor.
    * 1.266. Of ſpeaking Latine.
    * 1.267. The riotous Gallant.
    * 1.268. A witty Jeſt.
    * 1.269. A ſharp retort.
    * 1.270. The Lawyer and his man.
    * 1.271. A fair woman, a Heavenly Creature.
    * 1.272. The upſtart Gentleman.
    * 1.273. Of a vain boaſter.
    * 1.274. Another.
    * 1.275. A chaſt Gentleman.
    * 1.276. Nothing without mony.
    * 1.277. The Traveller and Cobler.
    * 1.278. On Mr. Prat.
    * 1.279. On John Brown.
    * 1.280. The Gentleman and Muſitian.
    * 1.281. The gra•eless Son.
    * 1.282. The modeſt Captain.
    * 1.283. Fool-hardineſs.
    * 1.284. Of Lent.
    * 1.285. Dreams Fables.
    * 1.286. Put always the Cart afore the Horſe.
    * 1.287. Of an old man.
    * 1.288. A quick anſwer, to a vain Boaſter.
    * 1.289. Great bribes, do great matters.
    * 1.290. Nothing like money.
    * 1.291. The Serving-man and Mr. Jordan.
    * 1.292. Of dying in Debt.
    * 1.293. Of telling a Lye.
    * 1.294. Of a Calves head.
    * 1.295. The Country-fellow and Ship.
    * 1.296. The Drunkards cauſe of ſpewing.
    * 1.297. Of greedy eating.
    * 1.298. Woodcock and Swallow.
    * 1.299. The Gentleman and Mare.
    * 1.300. Of picking a bone.
    * 1.301. The Gentleman and Butcher.
    * 1.302. The Maſter and Maid.
    * 1.303. Another.
    * 1.304. An illiterate Church-warden.
    * 1.305. Of Maſtery 'twixt man and wife.
    * 1.306. A Bull.
    * 1.307. A tale of a pack of Cards.
    * 1.308. 425.
    * 1.309. 426.
    * 1.310. 427.
    * 1.311. 428.
    * 1.312. 429.
    * 1.313. 430.
    * 1.314. 431.
    * 1.315. 432.
    * 1.316. 433.
    * 1.317. 434.
    * 1.318. 435.
    * 1.319. 436
    * 1.320. 437
    * 1.321. 438
    * 1.322. 439
    * 1.323. 444.
    * 1.324. 445.
    * 1.325. 446.
    * 1.326. 447.
    * 1.327. 448.
    * 1.328. 449.
    * 1.329. 450.
    * 1.330. 451.
    * 1.331. 452.
    * 1.332. 453.
    * 1.333. 454.
    * 1.334. 456.
    * 1.335. 457.
    * 1.336. 458.
    * 1.337. 459.
    * 1.338. 460.
    * 1.339. 461.
    * 1.340. 462.
    * 1.341. 463.
    * 1.342. 464.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=9)

## 1\. POOR ROBIN'S JESTS: OR, The compleat Jeſter.

### 1.1. The Lady and Tenant.

A Lady inviting ſome of her Tenants to Dinner at a Chriſtmas, as ſoon as Grace
was ſaid fell to commending her meat; ſaying, there was a Sir-loyn of Beef,
the Ox whereof coſt ten pounds, and a Capon that coſt half a Crown, &c. A poor
man ſit­ting at the lower end of the Table, hearing her diſcourſe, fell
ſtraightways upon the Ca­pon, before the others were paſt their roaſt Beef:
the Lady ſeeing that, called to him, ſaying, My friend, eat ſome of that roaſt
[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=10) Beef. No
Madam (ſaid he) an Ox of ten pounds is too dear meat for me, a Capon of half a
Crown will ſerve my turn well enough, I thank you.

### 1.2. Another.

THe ſame Lady carving a wing of a moſt dainty Bird to another of her Gueſts,
told him that thoſe ſorts of Birds were worth no leſs then five pounds a
dozen: To whom the fellow ſaid, If you pleaſe Madam, I will content my ſelf
with Beef or Pork, and give me my ſhare of thoſe Birds in money.

### 1.3. Will. Summers and Cardinal Woolſey.

WIll. Summers that was firſt Cardi­nal Woolſey's Fool, hearing that his Maſter
was like to be Pope, came run­ning to the Cardinal, and with great
ex­preſſions of joy, told him what he ha [...] heard: Why art thou ſo over-
joy'd at this news, ſaid Woolſey to his Fool? Marry quoth Will, becauſe that I
hope when you are Pope, you will do as St. Peter did when he was Pope. What
was that, ſaid the Cardinal? Why St. Peter, when he was Pope he brought in
Lent, and all the Faſtings days becauſe his Father and Brothers were
Fiſhermen; and I hope when you are Pope, you will [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=10) put them all
down, becauſe your Father and Brothers were Butchers.

### 1.4. King Henry the Eighth.

KIng Henry the Eighth having behead­ed two or three of his Wives, and deſirous
ſtill of more change, ſent a Meſſen­ger into Germany, to treat with a very
ho­nourable Lady there in way of Marriage; ſhe that had heard how he had
ſerved other of his Wives before, returned this anſwer by the Meſſenger, That
to be his Queen ſhe would willingly venture her body, but ſhe was very loath
to venture her head.

### 1.5. This Scholar deſerv'd Wine.

A Young and pregnant Scholar who was Nephew to an Arch-biſhop of Canter­bury;
the Biſhop ſent him from his own Table a Diſh of Fiſh, and bad that he ſhould
make a pair of Verſes ex tempore upon that ſubject; which the Scholar
preſently did in this manner:

Mittitur in diſco mihi piſcis ab Archiepiſco▪

Po non ponatur, quia potus non mihi datur.

The Arch-biſhop, and they that were at Table with him, laughed heartily at the
[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=11) conceit;
but one Gentleman who under­ſtood not Latine, wiſht it had been in Eng­liſh,
that he might have laught with them; whereupon the paper was ſent back to the
Scholar, that he ſhould turn it into Eng­liſh, which he did thus:

There was ſent me fiſh, in a diſh, from the Arch­biſh­Hop

was not here, becauſe he ſent no beer.

### 1.6. An impertinent Hoſt.

AN Hoſt (a ſmall Wit) had bargain' [...] with an humorous Painter for the new
drawing of his Sign, which was to be that of St. George and the Dragon; an
[...] moſt earneſtly and often, even to the inter­ruption of his work,
importuned and intreated him to have an eſpecial care, that he drew St. George
with a moſt killing Countenance (to the life) and ever and a non renewing his
deſire, the choleric [...] Painter looked very ſternly upon him, and taking
off his Pencil from the frame, ſaid Mine Hoſt, be quiet, and leave your
prating or (the Devil take my wife) if I do not make the Dragon kill St.
George.

[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=11)

### 1.7. The Cut-purſe and Watch.

A Company of Gentlemen being drink­ing together in an Ale-houſe, a bold Cut-
purſe intruded himſelf into their company: at laſt' one of the Gentlemen miſt
his Watch; and knowing he had it when he came into the room, a Conſtable was
ſtraight ſent for, where by mutual con­ſent it was agreed amongſt them, that
all the Company there preſent ſhould be ſearched for it; amongſt which was
this Cut-purſe, but he had before conveyed it into ſuch a ſe­cret place in his
hoſe, that nothing was found about him; but long he had not ſat there, when
the Watch which had a La­rum in it, rang ſuch a peal, as gave notice to them
all who was the Thief; which he ſeeing, gave the Gentleman his Watch a­gain,
ſaying, What ill luck had I to eſcape the Conſtable, and be taken by the
Watch?

### 1.8. The Gallant Cut-purſe.

ANother Cut-purſe being in a very gen­tile habit, or as we ordinarily ſay, as
fine as a Lord, had in a Crowd nipt the Bung of a Country-man, and taken away
all his mony; which the Country-man perceived well enough, but ſeeing him ſo
brave, durſt [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=12) not charge him
with it. Soon after, his hand was taken in another mans Pocket, and a cry
being made of a Cut-purſe, a Cut-purſe, he was thereupon hurried away by the
multitude before a Juſtice of the Peace, with whom the Country-man went along
for company; where when the accuſer had done his tale, the Country-man ſtepped
up before the Juſtice, and told him, That his worſhip (meaning the Thief) had
alſo ſto­len away his purſe. Marry, ſaid the Juſtice, and I'll tell ye friend,
we ſhall make ſo bold  [...] to hang his worſhip for the ſame.

### 1.9. One cured of his money.

ONe who had gotten a pain in his limbs rid down to the Bath to be cured of the
ſame; but being come thither, h [...] chanced to light into ſome drunken
company, where firſt he ſpent all his money, afterwards ſold his Horſe, and
ſpent that: upon his return he told ſome of his friends that he was perfectly
cured, For though be ri [...] down to the Bath on Horſe-back, yet he ca [...]
up again from thence on foot.

### 1.10. Sir Harry Vane.

SIr Harry Vane Junior having made Speech in the long-Parliament, abo [...]
[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=12) the
beginning thereof; when he had done, Sir Arthur Hazelrig ſtept up and ſaid,
Well Gentlemen, if young Sir Harry Vane lives till he be old— and breaking off
there abruptly, one ſaid, Sir Arthur, and what then? then (ſaid he) he will be
old Sir Harry Vane.

### 1.11. The Jeſuite and Fryar.

A Jeſuite preaching at the great Church in Padua, towards the end of his
Ser­mon, he fell into a large commendation of the Order of the Jeſuites,
extolling it a­bove all the religious Orders that then were, or ever had been
in the world, giving God thanks, that he had the happineſs to be of that
Order; and in the cloſe of his diſcourſe, he told his Auditory that he would
acquaint them with a Viſion which he had lately ſeen: The other night (ſaid
he) I dreamed that I was in Hell, where me thought I ſaw Popes, Emperours,
Kings, Queens, Cardinals, Biſhops, Abbots, Monks, Fryars, and ſome of all
ſorts of men both Eccleſiaſtical and ſecular, but not one Je­ſuite amongſt
them all; which made me to bleſs God that ever I was born to be of ſo bleſſed
a Society; which though it had ſent ſo many thouſands of that holy Order to
the Grave, yet never any of them went [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=13) to Hell; and ſo
he concluded his Sermon with a freſh Encomium of the Society of Jeſuits. The
next Sunday after, a Domi­nican Fryar preached in the ſame Church, and he
alſo, towards the end of his Sermon fell upon the high praiſes of the Order of
the Jeſuits; repeating much of the Jeſuits Ser­mon the day before, and
bewayling him­ſelf that it was not his fortune to be of that holy Order,
whereof none ever went to Hell, as the Reverend Father had told them the day
before; at laſt he told the people, that he alſo had ſeen a Viſion, and
dreamed likewiſe one night that he was in Hell, where he ſaw Popes, Emperours,
Kings, Cardinals, and all ſorts of Orders, as the Je­ſuit had notably ſhewed
them the day be­fore; but not a Jeſuite (ſaid the Fryar) could be ſeen amongſt
them all: then thought I to my ſelf, O what a bleſſed Or­der is this, that
there ſhould not be a Jeſuit there! and ſtill I caſt my eyes all over Hell,
wiſhing my ſelf had been a Jeſuit and not a Dominican, to ſee not one piece of
that Order there: At laſt me thought I beckon­ed a little Devil to me, and
askt ſoftly in his ear, whether there were any Jeſuits in that place or no? He
anſwered, That there were none there, but that they were kept [[Page
9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=13) in a Hell by
themſelves, which is a great room under this, where (ſaid the little Devil)
there be abundance of them; and they come hither ſo faſt, that my Maſter
Lucifer ſcarce knows were to beſtow them; and beſides, they are ſo unruly,
that if they were not kept by themſelves, every body would be ſoon weary of
this place: adding withal, that his Maſter durſt not let them have any Gun-
powder, for fear they ſhould blow up Hell it ſelf.

### 1.12. Three Wiſhes produced but a Ladle.

A Poor Country-man had ſo ſpent his time in true and honeſt pains, con­tented
and not murmuring, that Fortune ſeemed to ſmile upon him, as oft as he came to
worſhip at her Temple, whither he oft re­ſorted; the gracious looks of the
Goddeſs encouraged him to ask ſomething more then before he uſed; and yet
conſidering with himſelf, that too bold a Votary might be repulſed, he
modeſtly bounded his re­queſt with this ſuit, that her goodneſs would confer
three wiſhes upon him, which from the Oracle was anſwered, Ratified, wiſh, and
be happy. The joyful man ac­quainted his Wife ſtraight, who having been the
conſtant companion of his Labours, [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=14) was to meet
ſhare in his good fortunes; and deſired of her Husband that one of thoſe
wiſhes might be left to her diſpoſal. The good old man willing to gratifie
her, grant­ed her requeſt: ſo to the Fair they came▪ whither they were bound,
and the woman caſting her eyes round about, to ſee what ſhe ſhould make the
choice of her wiſh, at laſt (remembring what ſhe wanted at home) ſpyed a
handſome wooden Ladle, which ſhe forthwith wiſhed for, and as ſoon the thing
was in her hand; which her Husband ſeeing, and impatient at the miſcarriage of
the firſt wiſh, wroth with his Wife for her ſimplicity, wiſhed the Ladle in
her Breech which out of hand was inſtantly ther [...] But the poor woman (like
a Fly with a ſtra [...] in the ſame place) was ſo tormented, beſides the
ſhame, that ſhe deſired her Husband, that as he ever hop'd to partake  [...]
[...]he delights of the oppoſite place, he would remove this impediment: to
which the U [...] orious man condeſcended, and in chari [...] to his Wife,
wiſhed it out again: So as the three wiſhes went in and out with Ladle.

[[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=14)

### 1.13. A providential Father.

THere was a Gentleman who was very diſcreet, and ſearching into the Na­tures
and diſpoſitions of his Family, and finding amongſt his Daughters that one,
and one of the leaſt and youngeſt, was ripeſt, and more requiring then the
reſt; very provi­dentially provided her a Husband. The Virgin over-joy'd that
her good hour was come, could not contain and be content that the Servants
ſhould invite the Gueſts, but her ſelf would needs ſpeak to ſome of eſpecial
familiarity with her, unwilling any ſhould foreſtall the news to thoſe, whom
ſhe wiſh'd in the ſame happy condition with her ſelf; which when ſhe had done
to her play-fellows, (for ſhe was not well wean'd from that ſociety) they
wonder'd, and ſaid, (good Lady!) Mrs. Dorothy, how comes it to paſs that you
are ſo forward, and leap over your Siſters heads? we ſhould never have
believ'd it, but from your own ſweet lips. Truely (ſaid ſhe, ſimpering, and
with her Handkerchief at her mouth) it were preſumptuouſly done, but that my
Father, who knows me of an Egg, gave very good reaſon for it, for he ſaid, (I
know not what he meant by it) That ſome Eggs would hatch [[Page
12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=15) in an Oven, and
that in hot weather things w'ont keep without ſalt.

### 1.14. The Vintners Boy.

TWo Gentlemen being drinking in a Tavern, chanced ſo  [...]o fall out, that
from words they proceeded to blows; whereupon ſoon after enſued a ſuit of Law:
the main witneſs to prove what was done, was the Vintners Boy, who being ſub-
poena'd and ſworn at the day of tryal, began to tell his tale in this ſort: My
Lord (ſaid he) I live at the ſign of the St. Pauls head, my name is John, and
by reaſon I draw to Gentlemen of the beſt Wine, they have given me the
appella­tion of honeſt, ſo that I am now commonly called honeſt John. My Lord
ſeeing him ſo impertinent in his preface, called to him, and bid him ſpeak to
the matter, for that was quite beſides it. I'll warrant you (ſaid John) you
ſhall find it to the purpoſe preſent­ly, and thereupon proceeded: My Lord,
theſe two Gentlemen came in there to drink, the one of them his name is Mr. B.
the other Mr. F. it was about three of the Clock in the after­noon, and we had
newly riſen from dinner: we had to dinner that day a piece of boild powder'd
Beef, and butter'd Turneps, and part of a roaſted Breſt of Mutton cold; I
could not eat [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=15) very much of it,
by reaſon I had gotten a cold with ſitting-up late two or three nights before.
My Lord hearing him flie out thus again in his impertinences, bid him ſpeak
more home to the matter, or elſe hold his tongue for a Doe. My Lord (ſaid
John) I was ſworn to ſpeak the truth, and all the truth, and I am reſolved to
do it; and ſo went on: Theſe two Gentlemen asked for a room, and I ſhewed them
up into the green Chamber, it was two ſtories high, upon the left hand as ſoon
as you are up two pair of Stairs. Honeſt John (ſaid my Lord) if thou art ſo
called, trouble us not with theſe impertinences, but come to the matter. I am
about it, quoth John, and ſo proceeds: As ſoon as they were in the room, they
ſaid unto me, Now honeſt John bring us up a pint of the beſt Canary, which I
did; it was of the furthermoſt Pipe but one in all our Sel­lar, and we had no
better wine in all the houſe; it coſt my Maſter four and twenty pound the
Pipe: as I was going up the ſtairs, my Maſter called to me, and asked me
whither I was carry­ing up that pint of wine, and I told him to the two
Gentlemen. John (ſaid my Lord) that is not the queſtion I asked you, but what
paſ­ſed betwixt theſe two Gentlemen? I ſhall tell you, quoth John, preſently:
When I had carried them up the wine, and that they had [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=16) taſted of it,
they told me that I was as good as my word, and that it was of the beſt
Canary. But, ſaid my Lord, what is this to the pur­poſe? Yes (ſaid John) it is
to the purpoſe, and if your Lordſhip pleaſes to come thither at any time, I
ſhall draw ye of the ſame wine, and then you will ſay that honeſt Johns words
were true indeed. My Lord ſeeing no good to be done with John, bid them ſet
him aſide, which John took in very great dudgeon, profeſſing he had ſpoken
nothing but the truth, neither durſt he ſpeak any thing but what was true, his
Maſter bidding him be­fore he came to have a ſpecial care of what he ſaid.
After ſome other Witneſſes be­ing examined, the Counſel on the Plantiffs ſide
began to ſpeak in the name of his Cly­ent (as the uſual cuſtom is) ſaying, My
Lord, we came into this Tavern with a peaceable in­tention, onely to drink a
pint of wine with that Gentleman, where we were by him abuſed, bea­ten and
miſuſed, and put in danger of our life. John hearing him to ſay ſo, could
for­bear no longer, but ſtepping up, ſaid, My Lord, that fellow with the coyfe
there tells a moſt damnable lye, for he ſays he was beaten and miſuſed in our
houſe, when (I can juſtifie) that he never was in our houſe in all his life.

[[Page 15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=16)

### 1.15.  [...]

A Ric [...] [...] [...]nteſtate, his ſon came up to London to take out
Let­ters of Adminiſtration of his Eſtate, but be­ing unacquainted with the
cuſtoms belong­ing to the Spiritual Courts, he went firſt to a friend of his,
telling him, That his Father dyed deteſted, leaving onely him and two young
Infidels, and therefore he was deviſed to come up to London to a Concealer of
the Law, that he might thereby deminiſh the Eſtate.

### 1.16. Good to ſave ſomething for laſt.

ONe who was much conceited of his wit, had made ſeveral Encomions on his
Miſtreſs, beginning firſt with her head, and ſo proceeded upon each member,
until ſuch time as he came to her feet, miſſing no part ſave onely her neck;
the reaſon whereof being demanded, O, ſaid one, there is great reaſon for
that, He reſerves the neck-verſe for himſelf, knowing he ſhall have occaſion
for it hereafter.

TWo men walking through a Church­yard, one of them affirmed that the Grave was
Hell; the other who had a ſhrewd curſt wife lately buried there, point­ing
[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=17) to her
Grave, ſaid▪ Then one of the great­eſt Devils in Hel [...] [...]

### 1.17. Too true, the more's the pitty.

ONe that was a common ſwearer, being ſub-poena'd upon a tryal at Law, where a
Book was tender'd him whereon to take his Oath, he told them they might ſave
that labour, For there was no oath but he could ſwear it without Book.

### 1.18. Nothing ask'd, nothing given.

ONe asked a certain boon of a Gentle­man, for which his main reaſon to
in­force it, was this; Alas, Sir, you may very well grant it me, for this is
nothing. To whom the Gentleman replyed; Sir, I ſhall grant you your requeſt,
for (according to your own words) 'tis nothing that you ask me, and ſo nothing
I grant you.

### 1.19. Children and Fools tell truth.

ONe was chiding his Prentice for being ſo great a gurmundizer, telling him
that his Miſtreſs did not eat the fourth part ſo much as he, and yet ſhe was
plump and fair; to whom the Prentice ſaid, I onely eat at ſet meals, but my
Miſtreſs hath Cul­liſes before Dinner, and ſweet-meats after [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=17) dinner, and puts
more into her belly then ever you ſee or heard  [...]

### 1.20. A double miſtake.

A Gentleman lodging in a ſtrange Inne, having ſtore of mony in his pockets,
put his Breeches under the Bolſter, when he went to Bed to ſecure them: but
the next morning (having gotten a pretty doſe over night) he had quite
forgotten where he had beſtowed them; and having fruitleſly ſearched a pretty
while, deſpairing of find­ing them, he called for the Chamberlain, asking him
if he knew what was become of them? Sir, (ſaid the Chamberlain) are you ſure
that you brought any in with you? Why, quoth the Gentleman, do you think that
I came without Breeches? Sir, ſaid he, if you are ſure that you brought them
with you, you had best ſearch your pockets, and I queſtion not but you will
finde them there.

### 1.21. Some ſeeking to praiſe, diſpraiſe.

A Gentleman having invited (about the Lent-time) ſome friends to his houſe,
his Lady provided ſuch chear as was ſeaſonable, the Collops and Eggs, and as
it fell out (a Hog being ſlain) ſhe had a ſer­vice [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=18) vice of the
puddings, which being deſerved­ly commended by t [...] [...]eſts; Nay, ſaid
the Gentleman, frie [...] be [...] known to you, my wife is abomination good
pudding-wife.

### 1.22. A Taylors Hell.

A Certain Taylor, who had in his life­time damned many a peece of Stuff to
Hell; at laſt chanced to fall extreamly ſick, and being in a trance, he
thought he ſaw all the Feinds of Hell muſtered in his Chamber, where they
diſplayed a Banner of ſundry colour'd Silks which he had ſto­len, wiſhing that
he might finde them all in Hell. This Viſion ſo affrighted him, that upon his
recovery he reformed his life, carried home what was remaining of any Garment,
and laid a ſpecial charge upon his Journey-man, that if any ſtuff brought in
fell out too large, if he ſaw his fingers in­clined to filch, that he ſhould
put him in minde of the Viſion. Not long after, a Cap­tain of a Ship brought
to him ſome Velvet to make him thereof a pair of Breeches, which being too
much, he ſnipt away three quarters of a yard of it under his Shop­board: his
Journey-man ſeeing this, called to him, and ſaid, Remember Maſter the Viſion:
Peace knave (ſaid he) peace, there [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=18) was not one ſu
[...]h colour as this in all the whole Flag.

### 1.23. Anger without cauſe.

A Gentleman ſent to an Arras-maker, bidding him to work him on a piece of
Cloath the figure of a Caſtle with a Dog in it, ſitting upon his tail and
barking, and at the Caſtle-gate a man ſtanding in ar­mour; all which the Work-
man promiſed to do, and not long after brought it unto him. But when the
Gentleman ſaw it, he began to fume, asking the work-man where was the Dog that
he bid him to make? O Sir, ſaid the work-man, I ſuppoſe thoſe that are in the
Caſtle are now gone to dinner, and the Dog may be in ſome corner gnaw­ing of a
bone.

### 1.24. A coſtly truth.

A Wealthy Citizen had a riotous ſpend­thrift to his ſon, whereupon he vow­ed
that when he dyed, he would give all his Eſtate to the poor. In a little
whiles time his ſon, what with Dice, and what with Drabs, had ſpent all the
maintainance that he had; whereupon he told his Father that he might now give
all his Eſtate to him, and yet keep his vow, for he could not give it to one
poorer then himſelf.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=19)

### 1.25. A witty theiviſh anſwer.

A Fellow that was weary of going on foot, ſpying a luſty Gelding in a
Pa­ſture, was reſolved to ride, but having no bridle (and a halter being
ominous) he was enforced to imbrace the Brute about his neck, and with all
ſpeed made to the road: But the Owner being in ſome grounds not far off, and
eſpying the cheat, made after him undiſcovered, and being very well hors'd,
over-took this rank Rider; and requiring of him the reaſon of his ſpeed, the
other ſaid, Sir, are you in a good hour the Maſter of this wilde Jade? In a
good hour I am, re­plyed the Gentleman, for half an hour la­ter I believe had
alterd the caſe. In troth, Sir, (ſaid the Theif) it is the joy of my heart
that you have thus happily over-taken me, for this head-ſtrong Jade might very
well have run away with me: Or elſe, ſaid the Gentleman, you have run away
with him, for therein was moſt danger; but howſoe­ver I will eaſe you of that
trouble; and ſo diſ­mounting him, forced him to walk on foot to the next
Village, where at the Whipping-poſt he had the price of his poſtage ſcored up
upon his  [...]

[[Page 21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=19)

### 1.26. More afraid then hurt.

A Gentleman in a Duel-having received a ſmall ſcratch, being unaccuſtomed to
wounds, ſent for a Chyrurgion in all haſte to dreſs him; who having opened it,
bid his man with all ſpeed poſſible fetch ſuch a ſalve from ſuch a place in
his Study. Why, quoth the Gentleman, is the hurt ſo dangerous? O yes (anſwered
the Chyrur­gion) if he returns not the ſpeedier, the wound will heal it ſelf,
and ſo I ſhall looſe my fee.

### 1.27. A miſtake.

A Mechanick in the late times of liber­tiſm, when every one took a free­dom to
himſelf to preach and prate what he would; this fellow uſurping the Pulpit,
would needs be in his compariſons, how that the wicked kept company and
flocked together, even like, ſaith he, as you ſee the Crows how they fly in
the Air by them­ſelves, and the Rooks fly in the Air by themſelves; the White
Herrings they ſwim in the Sea by themſelves, and the Red Herrings they ſwim in
the Sea by them­ſelves.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=20)

### 1.28. Another.

A Young Maid being come out of the Country to live in London, upon a diſcourſe
concerning Lent, and what Coun­tries were beſt provided for Fiſh; ſhe very
ſoberly atteſted, that where ſhe was born (being near the Sea-ſide) the
Fiſher-men there with their Nets did catch ſo many Red Her­rings, as ſerved
all their County, not onely for Lent, but for Wedneſdays and Frydays all the
year long.

### 1.29. Wit without Book.

ONe having read a very pithy, learned and witty Dedication before a flat,
dull, fooliſh Book, he very much admired, and ſaid, how they ſhould come to be
ſo match'd together: In truth, ſaid another, they may very well be match'd
together, for I pro­feſs they are nothing of kin.

### 1.30. Of Witches.

A Company being in a place together diſcourſing of Witches, one of them
affirming that there were no Witches; a woman then preſent with more
earneſtneſs (I ſuppoſe) then truth, contradicted him, ſaying, That there were
Witches, ſhe knew it by experience.

[[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=20)

### 1.31. Of the Wall.

ONe walking in London-ſtreets, met a Gallant, who cryed to him a pretty
diſtance beforehand, I will have the wall. Yea, (anſwered he) and take the
houſe too, if you can but agree with the Landlord.

### 1.32. An alone Jeſt.

ANother paſſing along London-ſtreets, ſaw written upon a Paper that was fixed
on a Door: This Houſe and Shop is to be let: which he having read, asked a
Shop­keeper at the next Door, If that Shop were not to be let alone? Yea,
(ſaid he) you may let it alone if you pleaſe.

### 1.33. The Spaniards wooden God.

A Country man in Spain coming to an Image enſhrined, the extruction and firſt
making whereof he could well remem­ber; and not finding from the ſame that
reſpectful uſuage which he expected, You need not be ſo proud (ſaid he) for I
have known you from a Plum-tree.

### 1.34. A friend at need.

SOme Gueſts being at Dinner at a Gen­tlemans table; amongſt other di­ſcourſe,
[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=21) the
Miſtreſs of the houſe asked a Gentleman, how many Children he had. Madam, ſaid
he, my wife hath eight. Now fie, ſaid ſhe, theſe men are always putting of
cauſeleſs ſuſpitions upon women; why could you not as well have ſaid that you
had eight? Tuſh, quoth her husband, why do you blame the Gentleman? he hath
ſpoken very diſcreetly, for it might redound to his ſhame to name all his own
Children, and therefore he onely tells you how many his Wife hath.

### 1.35. Who are Debters.

ONe notwithſtanding that he owed much, was boaſting that he was out of Debt;
to whom another ſaid, That may very well be, for thoſe onely are in debt who
mean to pay it.

### 1.36. A wiſe queſtion of a Mahumetan.

A Perſian in England attending on the Embaſſador, anno 1625; who per­ceiving
wealthy people in London, in the time of the Plague tumultuouſly poſting to
their Country Houſes: What (ſaith he) have the Engliſh-men two Gods, the one
for the City, and the other for the Country?

[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=21)

### 1.37. A hungry Banquet.

ONe invited ſome friends in a comple­menting way home to dinner with him,
which contrary to his expectation was ac­cepted of; in their way as they went,
he told them though they found ſhort of meat at his houſe, yet they ſhould
have good ſauce; which he made good in the performance, for when they came to
his houſe, there was not any Victuals, and hunger (you know) is of all other
the beſt ſauce.

### 1.38. Health before Wealth.

A Rich man told a poor man that he walked to get a ſtomack for his meat: And I
(ſaid the poor man) walk to get meat for my ſtomack.

### 1.39. The building of Cripple-gate.

TWo men walking by Cripple-gate, one of them asked the other from whence the
name of that Gate was derived, to which he anſwer'd, That there was a Cripple
of famous memory, who ſtole the golden Wea­ther-cock from Pauls Steeple,
before it was a Tower, which was, ſaid he, the higheſt piece of deſperate
valour that ever was performed, but that his Piety was as noto­rious [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=22) as his
Sacriledge, for with the ſame Weather-cock he built this Gate, which e­ver
ſince retains his name.

### 1.40. The Fryars Doctrine.

A Fryar being to preach, took for hi [...] Text this Theme, Erat qu [...]dam
homo, which is in Engliſh, There was a certain man ▪ Out of which words, ſay
[...] he, you muſt not that the Text ſays there was, it doth no [...] ſay
there is: for now adays men are uncer­tain, both in promiſe, oath, word an
[...] deed; yet however you finde by my Tex [...] that a certain man there
was, but if yo [...] ſearch all the Bible over, you cannot find this Text,
That there was a certain woman.

### 1.41. Earl Gowry

WHen Gowry (who attempted to ki [...] King James) was had to the To [...] er,
a friend of his told him, Ah, my Lord I am ſorry you had no more Wit. Tu [...]
(quoth he) thou knoweſt not what thou ſaye [...] when ſaweſt thou a fool come
hither?

### 1.42. A ſhirking ſhift.

A Nimble Taylor coming to an In [...] ſomething late at night, was by reaſon
of his handſome outſide lodged in a better [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=22) room and bed
then he deſerved; for the Candle being left with him, he very ſuc­cinctly made
him a good Shirt of one of the Holland Sheets, diſpatching the remaining
ſhreds in the fire. In the morning he found very much fault with his lodging,
for that he had but one Sheet; the Wench ſwore ſhe thought ſhe brought two:
and none ever imagining the converſion of the Linen, he came cleanly off,
though he came lowzily on, being better able to ſhift ever after.

### 1.43. A Parſon out-witted by a Woman.

A Woman whoſe Neighbour was dead, was ſent by the deceaſeds wife to a Parſon,
to ſpeak to him to preach a Funeral Sermon; ſhe that would diſpatch her
bu­ſineſs throughly, having a promiſe of him to do it, would likewiſe be ſo
inquiſitive as to know the price of it: The Parſon told her twenty ſhillings
was the loweſt. Why, ſaid ſhe, an Aſs once ſpake for an Angel, and will not
you ſpeak under a piece? The Parſon feel­ing himſelf a little gall'd, told her
ſhe was better fed then taught. True, ſaid ſhe, for my husband feeds me, and
you teach me.

[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=23)

### 1.44. The Country-man and Maſtive Dog.

A Poor man having a Pike-ſtaff on his ſhoulder, and travaili [...]g thorough
[...] Country Village, a great Maſ [...]ive Cur ra [...] mainly at him, ſo
that hardly he could de­fend him from himſelf. At the length it was his chance
to kill the Dog: for which the owner immediately apprehending him▪ and
bringing him before a Juſtice, alleadge [...] that he had ſlain his Servant,
which de­fended his life, houſe and goods, and there­fore challenged
ſatisfaction. The Juſtice leaning more in favour to the Plaintiff, as being
his Friend, Neighbour and familia [...] then to the juſtice of the cauſe,
reprove the poor fellow very ſharply, and peremptorily commanded him to make
ſatisfaction, or elſe he would commit him to pr [...] ſon. That were
injuſtice, replyed the poor man, becauſe I killed him in defen [...] of my own
life, which deſerveth much better reſpect then a Million of ſuch Cur [...]
Sirrah, ſirrah, ſaid the Juſtice, then you ſhould have turned the other end of
you Staff, and not the Pike; ſo the Dogs li [...] had been ſaved, and your own
in no danger. True, Sir (quoth the fellow) if the Dog would have turn'd his
tail and bit  [...] [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=23) with that, and
not his teeth, then we both had parted quietly.

### 1.45. Much adoe about nothing.

A Brace of Students who were kept ſhort of the Colledge-fines (for that
[...]as meat for their betters) while their Se­niors were ſharing that money,
walkt in their Grove, (taking the freſh Air without any contradiction of
Superiours:) At laſt one makes a ſuppoſition, If thou or I now should happily
finde a purſe of Gold, how should we divide it? They were you muſt conceive of
different degrees, one Maſter, the other Batchelor of Arts. The Maſter of Arts
like the Lyon, asked the greateſt part; the other ſaid no, Simul occupantes,
aequè divi­dentes: Equal purchaſe, equal ſhare. The Maſter would not forgo his
priviledge of Se­niority; the Junior inſiſted upon his title of half: at laſt
it grew ſo hot, that they fell to cuffs, and bang'd one another very ſound­ly,
until weary of their blows, they began to examine each other of the ground of
their falling out, which was no other then about the divident of a purſe of
gold which was never yet found.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=24)

### 1.46. Truth miſtaken.

A Lady ſent her ſervant to the Play-houſe, to inquire what Play was acted that
day; the Players told him, 'Tis pitt [...] ſhe is a Whore. The fellow
miſunderſtand­ing them, that they ſpake this of his Lady▪ and not the name of
the Play, when he returned, refuſed to tell his Lady, but ſaid They were a
company of Rogues to abuſe his Lady, who was as honeſt as any of their
Mothers.

### 1.47. A ſhrewd miſtake.

ANother ſeeing in a Play-bill upon poſt, A great man gull'd, and unde [...]
neath, By his Majeſties ſervants, read it thus A great many gull'd by his
Majeſties Servant [...] adding to it theſe words: By my ſoul as tru [...] a
thing as ever was writ.

### 1.48. A witty retort.

MR. Burbage the Player riding a Gallop up the Strand, one called t [...] him
out of a Tavern-window, asking his what Play was to be acted that day: he
being angry to be ſtopped upon ſuch a frivolous buſineſs, told him he might
ſee that upon every Poſt. O cry you mercy (ſaid the other) indeed I took you
for a Poſt, you rid ſ [...] faſt.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=24)

### 1.49. Mr. Beaumont and Mr. Fletcher.

MR. Beaumont and Mr. Fletcher thoſe Gemini of Wit and Learning, being about to
make the Play called, The Maids Tragedy: whiles it was yet in the Embryo, they
being walking in the fields contriving their deſign, of which one part was
concern­ing murdering a King, one ſaying he would have him ſtabb'd, the other
poyſoned; A Country fellow who undiſcerned heard their diſcourſe, concluding
it no leſs then high Treaſon that they were about, fol­lowed them to the next
Town, and ob­serving the Tavern whither they went to drink, hyed him to the
Conſtable, who taking a ſtrong Guard along with him, apprehended the two
Gentlemen; but be­ing had before a Juſtice of the Peace, they making the truth
of the matter appear, were ſoon diſmiſt; when returning to the Ta­vern, they
had great ſtore of mirth to ſee their Tragedy to have ſuch a Comical
beginning.

THe ſame Play being to be acted in the time of the Rump-Parliament; in that
part thereof where a Lady was to be ſworn to ſecreſie concerning the murther
of the [[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=25)
King aſoreſaid; ſome being of Opinion to binde her to it one way, and ſome
another: A Gentleman Spectator hearing the Con­troverſie, bid them to give her
the Covenant, and he would warrant them that would do it.

### 1.50. Valorous Love.

A Butcher being once at a Play, called, The Greeks and Trojans, ſeeing Hector
over-powred by Myrmidons, got upon the Srage, and with his Battoon took the
Tro­jans part ſo ſtoutly, that he ſoon routed the Greeks, and rayled upon them
loudly for  [...] company of cowardly ſlaves to aſſault one man with ſo much
odds. He ſtroke moreover ſuch an eſpecial aquaintance with He­ctor, that for a
long time Hector could not obtain leave of him to be kill'd, that the Play
might go on; and the cudgelled Myrmidons durſt not enter again, till Hect
[...] having prevailed upon his unexpected ſ [...] cond, returned him over the
Stage agai [...] into the yard from whence he came.

### 1.51. Of Mr. Johnſon.

BEn. Johnſon the famous Comoedia [...] having been drinking at the Devi [...]
Tavern; as he came down ſtairs his fo [...] ſlipt, ſo that he fell down three
or four ſte [...] [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=25) at once, and in
his fall beating againſt a door, made it to fly open, in which were a company
of Gentlemen a drinking: having recovered himſelf, and gotten again upon his
feet, he ſaid unto them, Since it was my chance Gentlemen to fall into your
company, I intend for to drink with you before that I go.

### 1.52. Another.

AT another time Ben. Johnſon being in place with a company of Gentlemen, who
were buſie in riming; one of them con­cluding his Speech with Nebuchadonozer,
another ſaid it was impoſſible for any one to make a rime to that: Yes, ſaid
Ben. that may be done thus: A miſchief light on you Sir.

### 1.53. A Poetical Jeſt.

MR. Randolph (whom all muſt acknow­ledge for one of the prime Wits of his age)
having been drinking hard late one  [...]ight, the next morning went to an
Ale­  [...]ouſe to quench that thirſt which com­monly burns in a man after
immoderate drinking: there was in the ſame room with  [...]im two Mizers, who
had adventured upon  [...]e coſtly charge of a penny a piece for their
[...]ornings draught. Now Mr. Randolph by  [...]aſon of his drought ſpitting
very dry, [[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=26)
one of theſe Mizers perceiving it white, i­magining it to be a piece of
Silver, ſtooped to take it up; which Mr. Randolph ſeeing, ſaid unto him, I
pray, Sir, do not rob the Spittle.

### 1.54. A good Jeſt d'you ſee?

A Certain Vintner was extreamly troubled with the word d'you ſee, ſo tha [...]
upon all occaſions he would be ſure to u [...] it: upon a time being put to it
to ſay Grace he began, The eyes of all things, d'you ſee do look unto thee,
d'you ſee? and tho [...] provideſt their meat, d'you ſee? in due ſeaſon, d'you
ſee? and ſo on d'you ſee, t [...] he came to Amen d'you ſee. But before  [...]
had done, no man could ſee for laughing which ſo vexed him, that he ſwore he
wou [...] not ſay Grace d'you ſee? ſo long as he liv [...] for this, d'you
ſee? that a man ſhould laugh'd at for his good will, d'you ſee?

### 1.55. Another of that kinde.

MUch of the ſame nature was that of Judge, whoſe cuſtomary word to a [...]
material thing was, in that kinde. He being once to give a charge at the
Affizes, beg [...] thus: Gentlemen of the Jury, you oug [...] to inquire after
Recuſants in that kinde, [...] ſuch as do not frequent the Church in t [...]
[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=26) kinde;
but above all, ſuch as haunt Ale­houſes in that kinde; notorious Whore­maſters
in that kinde, Drunkards and Blaſ­phemers in that kinde, and all notorious
of­fenders in that kinde, are to be preſented in that kinde, and as the Laws
direct in that kinde, muſt be proceeded againſt in that kinde; which ſet all
the people into ſuch a laughter of that kinde, that being charged by the Cryer
to ſilence, they could not, till they had ended laughing and crying together:
And a Gentleman after the Court aroſe, being asked how he liked the Judges
charge, ſaid, It was the beſt in that kinde, that e­ver he heard.

### 1.56. Queen Mary and Heywood.

QUeen Mary lying upon her death-bed, Mr. Heywood the Poet came to ſee her, to
whom ſhe ſaid; Ah Heywood, here they in­tend to kill me, for my Phyſitians
will force me to ſweat, which is ſo great a pain to me, that I will rather dye
then to endure it. Madam (ſaid he) be contented, you muſt ſweat, or elſe I
ſwear we ſhall all ſweat for it.

### 1.57. French arms and French harms.

A Stranger coming up to London, chanced to happen into a houſe of iniquity,
[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=27) which had
the Flower-de-luce to its Signe, where he got a Clap with a French Coul-ſtaff;
whereupon at his going forth, he wrote this Verſe over the Door:

All you who hither chance to come,

Mark well ere you go in;

For French-mens arms are Signs without,

And French-mens harms within.

### 1.58. A gall'd Horſe will wince.

ONe called a man Aſs before his wifes face, whereat ſhe was nothing
diſ­pleaſed; ſoon after he called him Ox, at which ſhe began to curſe and to
ſwear: A [...] Miſtreſs (ſaid he) now I ſee you begin to wince, when I touch
your husband in the gall'd place.

### 1.59. A new way to get Mony.

NO longer ago then in the year 1666, a certain Quaker, upon a certain day,
came a wooing to a certain Widow, living in a certain place not far from
Aldgate: In the concluſion of his wooing diſcourſe, he told her he had
forgotten to bring his purſe with him; and being to buy ſome wares be­fore his
return, Canſt thou not (ſaid he) lend me an Angel of the worldy Mammon till I
ſ [...] thee again? Yea, (ſaid ſhe) I will lend the [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=27) an Angel; but
this ſpirit of light could ne­ver ſee the way to the Houſe any more
af­terwards, for neither he nor the Angel ever appeared to her again.

### 1.60. All covet, all looſe.

A Poor Clyent went to a rich Lawyer to have his Counſel in a certain Cauſe,
which after ſome long attendance he ob­tained; but going away without paying
him, the Lawyer asked him for mony: Sir, ſaid the Clyent, I have no coyn, but
will it pleaſe you to take a Hare? The Lawyer who had rather play at ſmall
Game then ſtand out, told him that he would: Then (quoth the fellow) you muſt
run apace, for this morning one run quite away from me.

### 1.61. Cromwel and the Scotch Parſon.

WHen Cromwel was with his Army in Scotland, one Andrew Cant a Scotch Parſon
was to preach before him; who in his Prayer uſed theſe expreſſions, Lear
[...], we beſeech thee, look down here upon our Ge­neral before us, and  [...]
thou haſt put a ſweard into his hands, ſee, we beſeech thee, to put it into
his heart, for the geud of the three Nations.

[[Page 38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=28)

### 1.62. No Plague greater then a curſt Wife.

IN a great Plague-time, a Conſtable paſ­ſing by one of his Neighbours houſes
heard his wife ſoundly baſting him; where­fore that night he ſet up a Red-
croſs upon the door. The man next morning ſeeing it, was highly offended, and
complained thereof to the Alderman of the Ward; who whereupon was ſent for to
anſwer wherefore he did it. To which the Con­ſtable ſaid, Yeſterday paſſing by
his houſe, I heard his wife ſoundly belam him, and I think there can be no
greater Plague in a houſe then that.

### 1.63. A Bull.

A Citizen riding from London to Cam­brige, upon his return, ſome of his
friends asked him what he ſaw worthy of notice in his Journey: Truely, ſaid
he, I ſaw little memorable, but onely at a place called Stableford, where was
a Church tyled with thatch.

### 1.64. The Gallant and Gentlewoman.

A Young Gallant having ſome diſcourſe with a Gentlewoman, of which ſhe doubted
the truth of it; he to confirm it, ſaid, Upon my ſoul, Madam, it is true. To
[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=28) which ſhe
replyed, Pray ſtake down ſome other pawn, for that is forfeited long ago.

### 1.65. The Sick-man.

A Man lying deſperately ſick, was adviſed by his Phyſitians to prepare himſelf
for Heaven, for he was not like to continue long in this world: I (ſaith he)
God par­don me as I forgive all them that have in­jur'd me; and for ſuch a one
who hath much wronged me, I pardon him with all my ſoul; but if it pleaſe God
that I recover this ſickneſs, I will be revenged on him, if it be poſſible.

### 1.66. Hanging ends all trouble.

A Plain Country-man riding up to the Term, met by the way a Priſoner, who was
going to the Gallows to be hanged; to whom he ſaid aloud, Thrice happy man
thee, that haſt nothing at all to do at the Term.

### 1.67. The Country-man and his Aſs.

A Country-man driving his Aſs before the Court-gate, beat and miſuſed the poor
Beaſt; which a Gentleman or two ſee­ing, bid him be more milde, and favour the
dumb Creatu [...]e: with that the Clown [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=29) ſtraight ways
doſt his cap, and made a low courteſie to the Aſs, ſaying, I beſeech you, good
Maſ [...]er Aſs, pardon my boldneſs all this while, for I never thought that
you had friends in the Court before now.

### 1.68. A Bull.

TWo Neighbours walking in Smithfield on a Market-day, one of them eſpyed a
goodly Stear: Look yonder (ſaid he to his fellow) did you ever ſee a braver
Cow in your life, then is that ſame Bull?

### 1.69. The Country man and his wife.

A Country-man having been at London, ſaw there many brave women and o­ther
fine Laſſes, far ſurpaſſing his homely Jone at home; wherefore upon his
return, when his wife gave him a meſs of hot broath to Supper, he bid her take
it away, for he had ſeen ſuch fine Laſſes at London, as had quite taken away
his ſtomack: his Wife asking him if he did not alſo ſee fine men there, he
replyed, Yes: Why husband (ſaid ſhe) thoſe fine women were made for thoſe fine
men. Nay then wife (ſaid he) reach me my porridge again.

[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=29)

### 1.70. The Maids miſchance.

A Country-maid riding to the Market in Leaden-hall-ſtreet, in the Market-place
her Mare ſtumbled, and down ſhe fell over and over, ſhewing all that ever God
ſent her; whereupon being much abaſht▪ at riſing up again, ſhe turn'd her
round abou [...] unto the people, and ſaid, Uds foot (Sirs) did you ever ſee
the like before?

### 1.71. A Painter.

ONe deſired a Painter to paint him the Picture of a fair Whore: Sir (ſaid he)
you may ſpare that coſt, for if ſhe be a right Whore, ſhe will paint her-ſelf.

### 1.72. The Scold.

A Country-man who had a ſcold to his wife, when ſhe dyed, he would needs have
theſe two Lines written upon her Grave for an Epitaph:

Here in this ground lyes buried a wife,

Who was a Plague to her husband all the days of her life.

[[Page 42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=30)

### 1.73. No life to Leachery.

CErtain merry Blades ſeeing a fair Gen­tlewoman ſtanding at her window, one of
them ſaid, I could willingly pawn my Cloak for a nights lodging with yonder
Gentlewoman: A Beggar ſtanding by, and over-hearing him, ſaid, I, and thither
ſhould my Crutches go too.

### 1.74. Saving in this caſe the greateſt gains.

ONe being in danger of drowning, ano­ther that ſtood on the ſhore ſaid to him,
If you gain but to yonder tree, you are ſafe enough. Tell not me (ſaid he) of
getting or gaining, for I care now but onely to ſave my ſelf.

### 1.75. A Bull.

ONe commended a Greyhound of his for an excellent running Dog: Sir, ſaid
another, I have a black Bitch at home, I am confident is a better running dog
then he.

### 1.76. The young man and his father.

A Young man receiving an hurt on his face which much disfigured him, his
father ſaid, it would not have grieved him half ſo much if it had been in his
arm, leg, or any place but there. To whom [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=30) he ſon replyed,
Oh father, receivers muſt  [...]e no chuſers.

### 1.77. The Cuckolds Cap.

A Country-woman whoſe Hen had new­ly hatched, was perſwaded that the Chickens
would thrive the better if they were kept in a Cuckolds Cap; whereupon ſhe
went to moſt of her Neighbours to borrow one; but they denying they had any,
ſhe in a chafe ſaid, Well, before I will be thus troubled to borrow, I will
ere long have one of my own.

### 1.78. The Country-man and Fryar.

A Fryar being belated in his Journey as he travel'd the Country, deſired
lodging of a poor man, who very charitable to ſuch people, lodged him in his
own bed; the Fryar being weary fell faſt aſleep, and the man and his wife
having no other lodging went to bed to him: the next morning the man aroſe
betimes, and went to work, leaving the Fryar abed with his Wife: be­ing at his
work he fell into a great laugh­ter, and being by one of his fellows de­manded
the reaſon thereof, I laugh, ſaid he, to think how ſhamefac'd the Fryar will
be whom I left abed with my wife.

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=31)

### 1.79. The Fryar and the Pope.

A Preaching Fryar came once to ſee Pope Sixtus the Fourth, who ſhewed him all
his Treaſure and Jewels, and withal ſaying, I cannot ſay as my Predeceſſor St.
Peter did, Gold and ſilver have I none. Truely, anſwer'd the Fryar, neither
can you ſay as he did to the ſick, lame, and impotent people, Ariſe, take up
your Couch and walk.

### 1.80. The Arch-biſhop and Country-man.

AN Arch-biſhop of Cullen riding with a great train after him, by a place where
a Country-man was a ditching; the Swain burſt out into an exceeding great
laughter; which the Biſhop perceiving, com­manded him ſtraight before him, and
asked him, Why he laughed ſo? Marry I laugh (ſaid the Peſant) to think that
St. Peter, who was the Prince of the Apoſtles, ſhould live and dye ſo poor;
and that thoſe who pretend to be his Succeſſors ſhould ride in ſo great Pompe
and State. The Arch-bi­ſhop ſeeing himſelf thus nearly toucht, ſaid, My
friend, I ride not with this great train as I am an Arch-biſhop or Prieſt, but
as I am a Duke and Prince of the Empire. The Swain hearing him ſay ſo, burſt
out into a [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=31) greater laughter
then before; and being a­gain demanded the reaſon thereof, I laugh (ſaid he)
to think that if this Duke, you name your ſelf to be, were in Hell, where do
you i­magine the Arch-biſhop would be?

### 1.81. The Noble-mans Arms.

THere was a Noble-man which gave the Half-Moon to his Creſt, and had it fairly
engraven upon a Wall: one of his Pages ſeeing it, wrote underneath with a
Coal, Be it never at full. His Maſter having knowledge of what he had written,
asked him the reaſon thereof; who anſwered, Marry, Sir, becauſe the Moon being
once at full, of force it muſt decreaſe.

### 1.82. A Bull.

A Gentleman and his man riding along the way, the man chanced to ſpye a fellow
aſtride upon a Cow, and ſaid to his Maſter, Look yonder, Sir, is one on
horſe­back upon a Cow. That, ſaid the Gentle­man, is a notorious Bull. Nay,
Sir, (ſaid his man) it is a Cow, I kn [...]w by her teats.

### 1.83. Another.

ONe being invited to a Breakfaſt, there was ſet before him a Rib of Beef
hard­ly [[Page 46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=32)
roaſted: being afterwards asked by one what cheer he had; Why, ſaid he, we had
an excellent Rib of roaſt Beef, but I coul [...] eat none of it, becauſe it
was raw.

### 1.84. A merry old man.

ONe asking a merry Blade how old his wife was; he anſwered, Her mark is not
yet out.

### 1.85. A Bull.

TWo men being at Bowls, the one of them fell a ſwearing grievouſly. To whom
the other ſaid, Wherefore do you ſwear thus? it is the great mercy of God that
the Bowling-green doth not fall up­on our heads.

### 1.86. The hungry Traveller.

TWo Travellers meeting together at an Inne, had a Capon ſerved them in for
their dinner: the one of them being very ſharp ſet, to while the other off,
asked him whether he had a father living or no? the other anſwered, No; and
withal enter'd into a long diſcourſe, how, where, and when his father dyed. In
the mean time the Queſtioniſt had eaten up all the beſt of the Capon; which
the tale-teller at laſt per­ceiving, [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=32) half angry ſaid
unto him, Now I pray you tell me, have you a father living? He anſwered, No.
Then tell me (quoth the other) how he dyed: He very earneſt at his victuals,
briefly anſwered, Suddenly, ſuddenly, very ſuddenly.

### 1.87. The Taylor and Weaver.

A Taylor and a Weaver being at a Far­mouts houſe together, had a hot Cuſtard
ſet before them: the Taylor being hungry, very nimbly took a ſpoonful thereof
and put it in his mouth, which ſo much ſcalded it, that it made his eyes to
run over with water: the other looking on him, asked him why he wept? he not
being willing to be known that he had burnt his mouth, told him that he had
but one Unkle in all the world, and he was hanged, and whenſoe­ver he thought
of him it made him to weep. The Weaver thinking he had ſaid true, put a
ſpoonful in his mouth, and burnt it alſo, that his eyes likewiſe water'd: the
Taylor perceiving it, ſpake to the Weaver, and ſaid, Tell me wherefore do you
cry? The Wea­ver perceiving how he was beguil'd, Marry, ſaid he, I weep
becauſe you were not hanged when your Ʋnkle was.

[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=33)

### 1.88. The skilful Phyſitian.

THere was a Phyſitian who pretended by his skill in caſting of Urines to tell
what diſtemper any man was troubled with; a woman whoſe husband had fallen
down a pair of ſtairs, went with her husbands  [...]a­ter to this cunning
Leach, who having by diſcourſe pumpt out as much as he could of the Woman, at
laſt gueſt that he fell down eight ſtairs; but the woman making it ap­pear
that it was eleven, he asked her if there were all the water: ſhe confeſſing
there was ſome left, O then (ſaid he) there went the three ſtairs away.

### 1.89. The Gardiner and his wife.

A Gardner being to be hanged, his wife followed him to the Gallows to give him
her laſt kiſs; who ſpying her ſaid, Out upon ye you idle quean, we are to like
thrive well at the years end, when there cannot be a meeting in the Country
but you muſt be at it; home and weed houſwife, home and weed, and do not ſtand
loytering here.

### 1.90. A Tinkers Character.

ONe ſaid that a Tinker was no coward but a man of Metle, and that a canting
[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=33) Rogue was
an enemy to Hoſtlers, be­cauſe he was of the Infantry, and al­ways went on
foot.

### 1.91. Of early riſing.

A Father chid his Son for lying ſo long abed in the morning, telling him that
ſuch a one with early riſing had found a bag of gold; to whom the ſon
anſwer'd, Too early roſe he (father) that loſt it.

### 1.92. Of Roger Bale.

ONe Roger Bale a poor Carpenter, but a good Workman, was for his skill
em­ployed chief Maſter in the building of a Bridge, whereby he gained ſo much
that he became a rich man. And in oſtentation up­on one of the main Poſts
thereof engraved theſe words, (Roger Bale made this Bridge) another came
after, and wrote underne [...]th with a coal (This Bridge made Roger Bale)

### 1.93. Of Wood the great eater.

WOod the great eater of Kent having over-cloy'd himſelf with feeding too much
upon a wager, being invited to ſome more teeth-exploits the next day, he
complained that he had loſt his ſtomack; Well, ſaid one that ſtood by, if a
poor man [[Page 50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=34)
happen to finde the ſame, he is for certain ut­terly undone.

### 1.94. The Parſon and his man.

A Certain Parſon ſent his man one Sun­day morning to one Davids a Butcher, for
ſome meat for his Dinner: Mean while he went to Church to Preach, and having
taken out his Text, was reciting many au­thorities out of Scripture for the
proof of the ſame, And now (ſays he) what ſays Da­vid to this matter? Juſt as
he ſaid this, in ſteps his man at the Church-door, and hearing him talk of
David, ſaid aloud, N [...] more meat (he ſwears) unleſs you pay his the old
ſcore.

### 1.95. Of Muſitians.

A Gentleman being asked his opinion concerning Muſitians, ſaid, that ſi [...]
were a Conſort, five Muſitians, four Fidlers and three Rogues.

### 1.96. A cunning Laſs.

A Bridegroom the firſt night he was in bed with his Bride, ſaid unto her When
as at ſuch a time I ſollicited thy chaſtity, hadſt thou then condeſcended, I
would never have made thee my wife, for I did  [...] [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=34) onely to try
thee. Faith (ſaid ſhe) I i­magined as much, but I had been cozened ſo three or
four times before, and I was reſolved to be cozen'd ſo no more.

### 1.97. The ſlender-witted Gentleman.

IN Spain and thoſe other Countries where the Pope hath Dominion, the Biſhops
marry not. A Spaniſh Gentleman who had  [...] ſlender-witted ſon, on a time he
taught him how to entertain gueſts with ſome diſcourſe, as to ask them, How
doth your Wife and your Children, your Brother and Siſter, &c. The next day a
Biſhop came to this Gentlemans houſe, and the Wiſe-acre his ſon thus ſaluted
him: I pray you (my Lord) how doth your Wife and your Children, your Sons and
your Daughters, your Brothers and your Siſters? &c.

### 1.98. Eaſier to come down then go up.

A Certain Preacher who deſired higher preferment, on a time after his Ser­mon
was ended, coming down the Pulpit, a Gentleman proffer'd him his hand to help
him down; Pardon me, Sir, (ſaid he) may it pleaſe you rather to help me up,
for I can come down alone faſt enough.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=35)

### 1.99. The Fryar and Woman.

A Fryar being very buſie in his Sermon, eſpyed a woman as buſie in talk to one
of her Goſſips: whereupon he called to her and ſaid, Thou woman in the tawny
Gown there, leave thy babling. The wo­man angry to be reprehended thus openly,
quickly anſwer'd, I beſhrew his heart that bableth moſt of us two.

### 1.100. The Dominican and Franciſcan Fryars.

A Dominican and a Franciſcan Fryar travelling together on the way, came to a
Brook, where the Dominican requeſted the Franciſcan, (becauſe he was bare-
foot) to carry him over upon his back, to which he willingly condeſcended, and
being in the midſt of the Channel, he ſaid to the Domi­nican, Tell me Brother,
have you any mo­ny about ye? The Dominican thinking he looked for ſomething
for his pains, an­ſwered, Yes; then ſaid the Franciſcan, You know my Order
allows me to carry no mo­ny about me, and I am reſolved not to break my Vow;
and thereupon threw the Domi­nican off of his back into the water, who ſoundly
drenched, all too late repented his over-much credulity, in truſting to the
Franciſcans carrying him over.

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=35)

### 1.101. The learned Conies.

SOme Scholars on a time going to ſteal Conies, by the way they warn'd a
No­vice amongſt them to make no noiſe for ſpoiling their Game. But he no
ſooner eſpyed ſome, but he cryed out aloud, Ecc [...] Cuniculli multi:
Whereupon the Conies ran with all ſpeed into their berries; his fel­lows
chiding him therefore, Who the Devil (ſaid he) would have thought that the
Conies had underſtood Latine?

### 1.102. A poor Scholars pittance.

A Thin ſlice of cheeſe being ſet before a Scholar, as ſoon as he ſaw it, he
laid his finger on his mouth, and being asked why he did ſo, he anſwered, Leſt
my breath ſhould blow it away.

### 1.103. Of Dr. Mathews.

One Dr. Mathew a very learned man, but of little ſtature; one ſeeing him paſs
along the Street, called him in jeſt, Mi­nimus Apoſtolorum; which he over-
hearing, merrily anſwer'd, yet is Mathew Maximus E­vangeliſtarum.

[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=36)

[...]

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=36)

[...]

[[Page 54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=37)

### 1.104. The turning Doctor.

AN old Doctor which had been a Pro­teſtant in King Edwards days, a Pa­piſt in
Queen Maries days, and a Proteſtant again in Queen Elizabeths, ſeeing a Lady
dance a Galliard, commended her dancing very much; to which ſhe anſwer'd, That
ſhe knew ſhe danc'd well enough, onely ſhe could not turn ſo well as he.

### 1.105. Phyſitians and Lawyers.

IT was once a great controverſie in the U­niverſity of Leyden, between the
Phyſick and Law-Doctors, which ſhould have pre­cedency, and go foremoſt at
Commence­ments: The Chancellor being deputed to decide this Controverſie,
asked them whe­ther at an Execution the Fellon or the Hang-man went foremoſt;
and it being an­ſwered the Fellon; Then ye Lawyers (ſaid he) go ye foremoſt as
Thieves, and ye Phyſiti­ans follow after as Hang-men.

### 1.106. A Muſitian.

A Muſitian who had a very good voice was in conſideration thereof profer'd a
good exhibition in a Cathedral Church which he refuſed, and went to another
[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=37) place:
within a year after he came thither again, but with his voice much impaired,
and now he offer'd his ſervice upon thoſe conditions which he formerly
refuſed; but he had anſwer made him, That where h [...] waſted his ſteel, he
might go and waſt his Iron.

### 1.107. A miſtake.

A Citizen having been abroad in the Country, came home to his wife all bemi
[...]ed with durt; who asking him how he came in that ſad pickle, Why, ſaid
he, as I was riding along in a fair way, my Horſe ſtumbled, and threw me over
head and ears in durt.

### 1.108. The Knight and Gentleman.

THere was a Knight who ſpent much, and owed much, who had a young Gentleman
living by him, that was ſo good a fellow as he ſeldom eat at home; yet
not­withſtanding retain'd a Steward in conti­nual ſtanding wages: The Knight
upon a time merrily asked him what he means to keep a Steward, having ſo
little uſe to put him to: The Gentleman no leſs merrily an­ſwer'd, Your
worſhip hath great reaſon, for in truth my Steward and your Treaſurer may very
well be whipt at the Carts-tail for Vagabonds.

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=38)

### 1.109. The Yeoman and Gallant.

A Plain Yeoman riding upon a large lean horſe, a Gallant that met him thinking
to put a Jeſt upon him, asked him what a yard of his horſe was worth: the
Yeoman thereupon alighted, and lifting up his horſe-tale, ſaid, Enter into the
ſhop, and they within will ſhow you.

### 1.110. Jack Franck.

MY Lord Maynard kept a Fool whoſe name was Jack Franck, that went in a py'd
Calve-skin ſuit; he being one day in the High-way, a Gallant came riding by
all bedawbed with Silver-lace, who ſpy­ing Jack, asked him whoſe Fool he was:
ſaid Jack, I am my Lord Maynards Fool; and now I have told ye whoſe Fool I am,
pray tell me whoſe fool you are.

### 1.111. A witty anſwer of a Jester.

ONe asked a Lords Jeſter what vertue he thought was in a Turkey-ſtone; to
which he anſwer'd, That if you ſhould chance to fall from the top of a houſe,
you to break your neck, and the ſtone to have no hurt.

[[Page 57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=38)

### 1.112. A miſtake.

A Certain Noble-man being invited to dinner at a Knights houſe, amongſt other
chear there was a Chine of Beef, which did ſo pleaſe him, that he ſaid he
would ſpeak to his Slaughter-man to cut all his meat out into Chines.

### 1.113. The Printers man.

A London-Printer ſent his Prentice for a meſs of Muſtard, who asking where he
ſhould fetch it; he very ſurly anſwer'd him, In France; I will, Sir, ſaid the
Pren­  [...]ice; and taking a Muſtard-pot in his hand, went forthwith down to
Billingſgate, where finding a Ship bound for France, he em­barked therein, and
away he went, where he continued ſo long time before he re­turned as made up
that day twelve-month, when coming to his Maſter, he delivered the foreſaid
pot full of Muſtard, ſaying, Here Maſter is a meſs of French Muſtard for you.

### 1.114. Of the ſame.

THe ſaid Prentice going up into the work-houſe, found there a Dutch­man
working at the Preſs; and ſnatching the Balls out of his hand, gave him a good
[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=39) cuff on
the ear, and ſaid, Why how n [...]w Bu [...] ter-box, can a man no ſooner turn
his back  [...] fetch a meſs of muſtard, but you muſt ſtraig [...] ſtep in his
place?

### 1.115. A Fiſhmonoger a Member.

IN the late times, at ſuch time as the Forces had taken Abberdeen in Scotland
being betwixt ſleeping and waking, which they were debating whether they
ſhould keep or flight the Town: He thinking they had been talking of keeping
Habberdin, ſte [...] up and ſaid, For that I think there is ne [...] a one
here knows better than my ſelf, y [...] muſt put it into clean Rye ſtraw, &c.

### 1.116. A vindication.

HE being at another time one of a clo [...] Committee, a friend of his told
his he heard that he had ſpoken High-treaſ [...] there; to which he anſwered,
He lies, for I  [...] ­ver ſpake one word good or bad in all that time ▪

### 1.117. Country-man and Faulkner.

A Plain Country-man and a Faulkn [...] journeying together, the Countr [...]
man told him that his Hawk had dung' [...] the Faulkner told him he ſhould
have ſamuted. Anon after the fellow ſtumble [...] [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=39) [...]nd fell
into a Cow-ſhare; and the Faulk­  [...]er asking him how he came ſo bewray'd,
[...]e anſwer'd, He fell in a Cow-mute.

### 1.118. A miſtake

A Gentleman being in company was commending a Tobacco-box of his:  [...]ne
asked him whether it were a wooden  [...]ne or no; No, ſaid he, it is made of
Pear­  [...]ee.

### 1.119. Double meaning.

A Certain Weaver who had often broken the eighth Commandment,  [...]nd from
all his Cuſtomers would be ſure  [...]o ſteal ſomething more or leſs, which he
[...]id in a privy place he had in his houſe that  [...]e called Hell: Now
when any of his Cu­  [...]tomers uſed to charge him with ſuch theft, he would
proteſt and ſwear, If I have any  [...]ore then my due, I pray God I may finde
[...]t in Hell.

### 1.120. The Maid a Waſhing.

A Maid waſhing cloaths by the Rivers ſide, as ſhe ſtooped many times her Smock
would cleave cloſe to her Buttocks; one that came by ſeeing it, ſaid, Have a
care Maid, for Bayard biteth on the bri­dle: No (quoth ſhe) not ſo, he doth
but [[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=40) onely
wipe his mouth, imagining you wi [...] come and kiſs him.

### 1.121. The Devil upon Dun.

ONe prefer'd a rich Miſer a Dun horſ [...] to ſell him, who utterly refuſed hi
[...] becauſe of the colour, ſaying, The people call me the Devil already, and
if I ſhould ride upon him, they would ſay there is t [...] Devil upon Dun.

### 1.122. The Juſtice and fellow.

A Juſtice of the peace called one th [...] was brought before him arrant knav
[...] who replyed, I am not ſo arrant a knave  [...] your Worſhip (and there
he made a pawſe,  [...] feigning to ſpit, and then adjoyned takes me to be.

### 1.123. A wiſe reply.

ONe told his Neigbour that he had Pope in his Belly; who anſwer'd, Better ſo
then to have a Devil in my heart.

### 1.124. The Maid and Phyſitian.

THere was a Maid who had taken a dra [...] too much of the Bottle, and not we
[...] knowing what ſhe ailed, carried her wate [...] to a Phyſitian, who bid
her be of goo [...] [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=40) chear, For (ſaid
he) within theſe few months  [...]u ſhall have the cauſe of your grief in your
arms.

### 1.125. King Edward the Sixth.

KIng Edward the Sixth, though he drew no ſtrong Bow, yet he ſhot well at a
[...]ark; and when Dudley, Duke of Northum­  [...]rland, commended him once
for well  [...]ooting, You ſhot better (ſaid he) when  [...]ou ſhot off my
good Unkle Protectors  [...]ead.

### 1.126. The Cooper and his Wife.

A Haſty Cooper beat his wife with a hoop for piſſing the bed: the Neigh­
[...]ours to reconcile him to her, told him ſhe  [...]as the weaker Veſſel;
Therefore (quoth  [...]e) do I hoop her, becauſe ſhe ſhould hold water.

### 1.127. The French for a Cuckold.

AN Engliſh-man asked a French-gal­lant what was French for a Cuckold: who
anſwer'd (Cocque:) Then, ſaid the Engliſh-man, is it not true French to ſay,
Monſieur vous eſtes Cocques? the French-man finding himſelf toucht to the
quick, an­  [...]wer'd, It is true French in the plural num­ber, but not in
the ſingular.

[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=41)

### 1.128. R.H.

A Gentleman was commending the Wine at the Roſe in Newgate-market I cannot
tell (ſaid one) what praiſe the Wine deſerves, but I am confident there no
better Wine in London, then the Ale  [...] the Unicorn in Queens-head-alley.

### 1.129. The Traveller and King Henry the Eighth.

A Gentleman of King Henry the Eight [...] privy Chamber went to Travel, and
upon his return, the King asked him dive [...] queſtions concerning his
journey; among others, what he had ſeen memorable in t [...] City of Venice:
To which he replyed, the truely he had taken little notice thereof For, ſaid
he, I onely gallop'd poſt thorough [...] by night, and ſo came away.

### 1.130. The Captain in 88.

THe Naval fight againſt the Spaniards 1588, was pourtrayed in a curio [...]
ſuit of hangings (which are ſtill preſerve [...] and adorn the Parliament-
houſe) together with the lively Effigies of the moſt emine [...] Commanders
and Captains in that fight A Sea-Captain, who had been in that ſervice,
looking on the Hangings, and not fin [...] ing [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=41) his Effigies
there, ſeemed very angry, ſaying, he deſerved a place there better then ſome
others that were in it: To whom one ſaid, Be content Captain, and make not
this ado, you are reſerved for another Hanging.

### 1.131. The Juſtice of Peace and Conſtable.

A Lubberly Conſtable went to appre­hend a Shoomaker within his houſe; but the
Shoomakers wife ſo well beſtirred her, that ſhe ſoundly baſted the Conſtable,
whiles in the mean time her husband got away. The Conſtable thereupon went to
[...] Juſtice of peace, and complained unto him of the battery, and of the
Shoomakers wives miſuſage; alleadging that if ſuch a thing were not ſeverely
puniſh'd, it would  [...]end much to his Worſhips diſgrace: Whereto the
Juſtice anſwered, Seeing as thou ſay'ſt the diſgrace will be mine, I forgive
the Shoomakers wife.

### 1.132. The Country-man and Aſtrologer W.L.

A Country-man having his wives ho­neſty in ſuſpition, went one morning betimes
to an Aſtrologer, to be reſolved of his doubts; the Wizard was not then up,
and the Country-man having extraordina­ry occaſion, untruſt a point upon the
[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=42)
threſhold: At laſt the Aſtrologer came down, and ſmelling what was done, in
[...] great chafe, he ſaid, If I knew who it was tha [...] did this naſty
trick, I would have him ſe­verely puniſht. The Country-man hear­ing him ſay
ſo; Nay then (ſaid he) a die [...] Wizard, I'll home again to my Jenny; if y
[...] know not who it was that ſhit at your door,  [...] am ſure you know
nothing of my wives honeſty.

### 1.133. The Country-man and Doctor.

ANother Country-man ſuſpecting that  [...] young Shepherd was over-familia
[...] with his Daughter, he went to a Doctor who was famed for a great Sooth-
ſayer i [...] that Country, and preſented him with  [...] couple of Capons,
deſiring to be reſolved  [...] his foreſaid jealouſie. The Doctor having
received the preſent, took a great Book, an [...] turning over divers leaves,
made a rumbling to himſelf as though he conjur'd: at la [...], taking his
ſpectacles off his Noiſe, he asked the Country-man both their ages, who told
him that his Daughter was fifteen years of age, and the Shepherd two and
twenty: Nay, then (ſaid the Doctor) if they be of that age, byrlady friend, it
may very well be ſo indeed.

[[Page 65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=42)

### 1.134. The fellow and his Dogs.

A Gentleman ſending a brace of Grey­hounds to a Knight, the Knight ask'd the
Meſſenger that brought them, if they were good Dogs or no: Good Dogs, quoth
the fellow, here is this (pointing to one of them) the beſt that ever ran upon
four legs; and this other here is five times better then he.

### 1.135. A Noble-man and his Page.

A Noble-man ſent his Page with a Pea­cock between two curious Venice-Diſhes to
another Earl. Now it chanced that as the Page went to take off the upper diſh,
to ſhew the Earl the preſent, it fell down and broke all to pieces; however,
the Earl re­ceived the Peacock, and ſent one of his Gentlemen with the Page,
to excuſe him to the Noble-man: Who hearing of the miſ­chance, asked the Page
angerly, how he broke it: the Page trembling, let the other fall out of his
hand, which likewiſe broke all to pieces, and then ſaid, Even thus and like
your honour I broke it.

### 1.136. The poor Man and haſty Cook.

A Poor man in the City of Paris, went to a Cooks ſhop to have had ſome meat;
[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=43) but the
Cook was ſo buſied about ſerving higher Gueſts, that in the mean time the mans
ſtomack was ſatisfied with onely the ſmell of the meat, and ſo would have gone
away: but the covetous Cook would be paid for his dinner; which the man
re­fuſing, at laſt it was agreed to be decided by the next perſon that came
by, which chanced to be the arranteſt Idiot in all the City: he calling for a
couple of pewter­diſhes, bid the man put his mony betwixt them, and then
decreed that the Cook ſhould reſt ſatisfied for the ſmell of the meat, with
onely the gingling of the mony.

### 1.137. A wiſe reaſon of a Fool.

A Fool lying aſleep in an open field, had prick'd his ſtaff in the ground
be­fore his face, to fence him from the winde▪ and telling one the reaſon why
he did ſo, the other ſaid, That could no ways ſhield him: Why (ſaid the Fool)
can the winde think ye blow thorough the ſtaff?

### 1.138. A rich Heir.

A Rich Heir was by his Unkle beg'd for a Fool, who uſed always to have him
with him, whitherſoever he went: It chanced one time they were at a
Gentle­mans, [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=43) who had the
picture of a Fool drawn in his Hangings. The Fool watching his op­portunity,
with a pen-knife cut that Picture out of the Hangings, and being repre­hended
for it, he ſaid, You have more rea­ſon to thank me for it; for if my Unkle had
ſpyed it, he would have beg'd the Hangings, as he beg'd my Lands.

### 1.139. A witty anſwer of a Fool.

A Serving-man made his Maſters Fool be­lieve he would cut off his head: The
Fool thereupon ran ſtraight to his Maſter and told him of it: who anſwered,
Fear not, he ſhall not cut off thy head, if he do, I'll hang him the next day
after. Nay, I pray (replyed the Fool) rather hang him a day before.

### 1.140. Another.

ONe chid a Fool for throwing duſt into his eyes: the Fool anſwered, Truely I
took you for a Letter.

### 1.141. A witty anſwer of a mad-man.

A Country-man coming to London, went to ſee the mad-folkes in Bedlam; one of
them asked him what place he came from; he replyed, from Newarke: The mad-man
then asked him what buſineſs he had [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=44) in Town; he told
him onely to ſee them. And come you hither onely to ſee us, ſaid he? believe
me (brother) I am not here for ſo great folly.

### 1.142. The Fool and Dog.

A Fool was bitten by a Dog: the next day the Fool found him aſleep in the
graſs, and knockt out his brains; ſaying, He that hath Enemies, let him have a
care how and where he ſleeps.

### 1.143. Good to watch as well as pray.

A Gentleman being at his prayers in the Church, a Cut-purſe pickt his pocket;
and complaining thereof, one told him, If he had watched as well as pray'd he
had not loſt his mony.

### 1.144. The valorous heart.

A Valiant perſon in theſe late Wars, be­ing to go encounter with the Enemy, he
fell a trembling; at which his men much marvailing: See, ſee, Sirs, (ſaid he)
how baſely my fleſh quakes to think what a peck of troubles my adventurous
heart will put it in anon.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=44)

### 1.145. The Lawyer and his Clyent.

A Lawyer told his Clyent, that his Ad­verſary had removed his ſuit out of that
Court into another: Let him remove it to the Devil, ſaid he, if he will, I am
ſure for mony, you'll follow after it.

### 1.146. Mony gains the Victory.

A Sergeant at the Law being at ſupper with a Gentlemen, who had a Niſt prius
to be tryed the next day: the Gen­tleman in diſcourſe ſtated his caſe to him,
and the Serjeant by ſeveral arguments made it to be moſt clear on the
Gentlemans ſide: But when it came to hearing, this Serjeant was retained
againſt him, and the cauſe went clear againſt the Gentleman; who thereupon
told the Serjeant, Sir, you were not of this opinion yeſternight. No matter,
ſaid he, for that, what I talkt at my ſupper was for my recreation, but what I
ſpeak here is for my Fee.

### 1.147. Nothing without mony.

ONe went to a Lawyer for his advice without mony, but the Lawyer was deaf on
that ear; the man being more ear­neſt with him to have his advice: Will you
[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=45) have your
Lampe burn (ſaid he) without oyl?

### 1.148. The caſe is alter'd, quoth Ployden, how that Proverb came up.

THere was a Statute in Queen Elizabeths days, that whoever had Maſs ſaid in
their houſe ſhould pay fifty pounds: Mr. Ployden being in his heart a Papiſt;
a Noble­mans Coach-man undertook to bring him into that premunire; and getting
on Prieſts weeds, went to Mr. Ploydens, who taking him for a Prieſt, he was
there admitted to ſay Maſs: The Council being informed of the buſineſs, Mr.
Ployden was ſent for, and the thing laid ſo home to his charge, that he
confeſſed it, and depoſited down fifty pounds on the Table. Then one of the
Council ſaid unto him, You may ſee Mr. Ployden what a blind Religion you are
nurſed in; for he that ſaid Maſs at your houſe was no Prieſt, but onely ſuch a
No­ble-mans Coach-man. Nay then, quoth Mr. Ployden, the caſe is alter'd; for
no Prieſt, no Maſs; no Maſs, no fifty pounds; ſo ſwept up his mony, and away
he went.

[[Page 71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=45)

### 1.149. The Parents and different Childe.

A Man and his wife who were both great drinkers, had a Son very temperate;
whereupon one ſaid, that it was contrary to Nature, that the horſe ſhould
trot, and the Mare trot, and that the Colt ſhould amble.

### 1.150. The Gentleman that was in earneſt.

A Gentleman paſſing up Fleet-ſtreet, met with another Gentleman, who gave him
ſo great a juſtle, as had well- [...]igh thrown him into the Chanel; but
recover­ing himſelf, he ſtept up to the other Gen­tleman, and asked him if he
were in jeſt or in earneſt; he replying, In earneſt; Ve­ry well, ſaid he, I am
glad it is ſo, for I tell you true, I like no ſuch jeſting.

### 1.151. The Turkey-Pye.

A Poor Gentleman had a Turkey-pye very often ſerv'd to his Table; a ſerving-
man being to carry it in again, neg­lected it; whereupon his Maſter calling
for it, and asking why he did not bring it in: he reply'd, It hath been here
ſo often, I thought by this time, it could have found the way in alone.

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=46)

### 1.152. A Fart.

MAny Clowns being eating of a Poſſe [...] together, one of them burned hi
[...] chaps for greedineſs, with pain whereof he let flie a fart; Go thy ways,
ſaid he, tho [...] art the happieſt of all thy fellows, fo [...] hadſt thou
ſtill remained within, tho [...] wouldeſt have been moſt miſerably ſcalded.

### 1.153. Dead and Alive.

ONe asked a Boy, how many horſes hi [...] Father had, who anſwer'd, five, with
four that are dead.

### 1.154. The Gentleman and Boy.

A Gentleman riding on the way, ſaw a Boy keeping of Piggs, and asking him
whoſe they were, he ſaid, his Mothers; then asked he him who was his Mother,
the Boy ſaid his Fathers wife; then asked he him who was his Father? Nay, for
that Sir (ſaid he) you muſt ask my Mother.

### 1.155. The Novice Prentice.

A Country-Boy that was new bound Prentice, ſeeing a Lord Mayors ſhow, and
wondring much at the bravery there­of, Who ſaid he would live in the Coun­try,
[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=46) ſeeing
wee muſt all come to ride in ſuch State?

### 1.156. The Baſtayd Boy.

A Young Baſtard was throwing of ſtones, amongſt a multitude of People; to whom
one ſaid, Have a care Sirrah, or you may chance to hit your Father.

### 1.157. Like Mother, like Daughter.

A Country-woman much blamed her Daughter for gadding up and down among Ale-
houſes: Indeed Mother, ſaid ſhe, you have reaſon to be jealous of me, for I
have often heard it ſaid, that I was your Daughter afore ever that you was
mar­ried to my Father.

### 1.158. The Wench with-Child.

A Country-Wench was gotten with-child, and would by no means con­feſs that ſhe
had the uſe of any Man; but being told it was a thing impoſſible; Why, ſaid
ſhe, may not I have a Child without a Man, as well as a Hen lay Eggs without a
Cock?

### 1.159. A loud Lie.

TWo Gentlemen being talking of fiſhing, one of them ſaid that he had caught a
fiſh in his time as big about as the May­pole [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=47) in the Strand;
which being hiſt at a [...] a notorious lye, he called his man in to juſtifie
it, Ralph (ſaid he) did not I at ſuch a time catch a fiſh as big about as the
May­pole in the Strand? I cannot tell, ſaid Ralph, for the bigneſs of it,
becauſe I did not mea­ſure it; but if it was not ſo big, I am ſure it was as
long.

### 1.160. The Country-man and Scrivener.

A Country-man who had never been at London before, was gaping into a
Scriveners ſhop; the Scrivener ſtanding at the Door, asked him what he would
buy; Gaffer, ſaid he, what is it you ſell? the Scri­vener told him
loggerheads: ſaid the man, I perceive you have quick trading, that you have
but one left in the ſhop.

### 1.161. The Man and his Hare.

ONe meeting a man carrying a Hare at his back, and asking him if he would ſell
it; he anwerd no, I will not ſell it, but give me twelve pence and take it.

### 1.162. The Gentleman having ſore Eyes.

A Gentleman that had ſore eyes was wiſhed to forbear drinking wine, as ve­ry
deſtructive to his eye-ſight; but he by no [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=47) [...]eans would
yeild unto it, affirming it was leſſer evil to ſhut up the windows of his
[...]ody, then to l [...]t the whole houſe fall down or want of reparation.

### 1.163. The Scottiſh Parſon.

A Scot was preaching how that all men are one anothers Neighbors and Bro­
[...]hers in Chriſt, even the Turk, the Jew,  [...]he Moore, the Canniball,
the far Indian;  [...]nd then concluded, Yea and the very En­  [...]liſhman is
our Neighbour too.

### 1.164. Another.

BEn Johnſon having over-night taken a Cup too much of the juice of the Grape,
[...]he next morning his head aking he wore a Cap, and meeting with Maſter
Drayton his  [...]llow-Poet, told him he thought he ſhould  [...]ye, and
therefore deſired him for the love that had been betwixt them, to prefix theſe
two lines upon his Grave, for his Epitaph:

Here lies Ben Johnſon

That was once one.

that ſhall I do Brother Ben (ſaid Maſter  [...]rayton) and for the love I
always bore to  [...]our Muſe, I ſhall add two more of my own, which ſhall be
theſe.

[[Page 76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=48)Who whilſt
he lived in his bravery

Was exceeding full of Knavery.

### 1.165. Ben Johnſon.

MAſter Noy the Attorny-General ma [...] once a great Veniſon-Feaſt at a T
[...] ­vern: Maſter Johnſon having a minde ſome of it, being in a room below w
[...] ſome of his Companions, wrote theſe verſ [...] and ſent them up to
Maſter Noy.

When all the World was drown'd, no Veniſ [...] could be found;

For then there was no Park:

Loe here we ſit without ere a bit,

Noy has it all in his ark.

Theſe verſes produced not only Veniſon,  [...] alſo half a piece in Gold to
waſh it do [...] in Sack.

### 1.166. Another of him.

BEn Johnſon intending to paſs tho [...] the Half-Moon Tavern in Alderſg [...]
ſtreet, (where is a thorowfare into Barth [...] ­mew-cloſe) the Tavern-door
being ſhut  [...] he was denied entrance; whereupon made theſe verſes:

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=48)Since the
Half-Moon is ſo unkind to make me go about,

The Sun my money now ſhall take, the Moon ſhall go without.

And thereupon went to the Sun-tavern [...] Long-lane end; where afterwards he
proved a good gueſt, forſaking the Half-Moon for their diſcourteſie.

### 1.167. Another.

BEn. Johnſon kept an unlucky Boy, who when he ſent him of an arrand, would
uſually loyter by the way, and then come home with ſome lye for an excuſe to
his Maſter: It fortuned one day that his Ma­ſter looking out at an upper
window, ſaw his Boy very devoutly playing at Nine-pins; whereupon when  [...]
came home his Maſter deeply charged him with Idolatry; the Boy denying that
ever he was guilty of Ido­latry in his life: No ſirrah (ſaid he) did not I ſee
you fall down and worſhip that great wooden Idol the Nine-pin? but I aſſure
ye, if ever ye commit Idolatry again, I ſhall pu­niſh ye worſe then thoſe are
puniſht that com­mit adultery.

[[Page 78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=49)

### 1.168. Two Poets.

TWo Poets went to Rime one with another, whereof the one was name Johnſon, the
other Silveſter: Silveſter fi [...] began in this manner.

My Name is Silveſter.

I lay with your Siſter.

The other anſwered,

And my Name is Johnſon.

I lay with your Wife.

But that ſaid Silveſter is no Rime; Rime  [...] Rime not, ſaid Johnſon, I
proteſt it is tr [...] though.

### 1.169. Maſter Randolph.

THo. Randalph the wit of Cambridg [...] coming to London, had a great mind
[...] ſee Maſter Johnſon, who was then drinking  [...] the Devil-Tavern near
Temple-bar, wi [...] Maſter Drayton, Maſter Daniel, and Maſt [...] Silveſter,
three eminent Poets of that a  [...] he being loath to intrude into their
compa­ny, and yet willing to be called, peeped i [...] ſeveral times at the
door, inſomuch the Maſter Johnſon at laſt took notice of him [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=49) and ſaid, Come
in John Bo-peep. Maſter Ran­dolph was not ſo gallant in cloaths as they,
however he ſat down amongſt them; at laſt when the reckoning came to be paid,
which was five ſhillings, it was agreed, that he who made the beſt extempore
verſe ſhould go Scot-free, the other four to pay it all: whereupon every one
of them put out their verſes; at laſt it came to Maſter Randolphs turn, whoſe
lines were theſe:

I John Bo-peep, to you four ſheep,

With each one his good fleece;

If you are willing to pay your five ſhilling,

'Tis fifteen pence apiece.

### 1.170. Another of Maſter Randolph.

MAſter Randolph one day and a Gentle­man being in company, they happen­ed to
have ſome angry words paſs betwixt them, inſomuch that the Gentleman at laſt
drew out his ſword, and ſtriking at Maſter Randolph, cut off his little
finger, which was no ſooner done, but ſcarcely before it  [...]uld be dreſſed,
he made theſe verſes.

[[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=50)Arithmetick nine
digits and no more

Admits of, then I ſtill have all my ſtore:

But what miſchance hath t'ane from my left hand,

It ſeems did onely for a cypher ſtand;

Hence when I ſcan my verſe, if I do miſs,

I will impute the fault only to this:

A fingers loſs, I ſpeak it not in ſport,

Will make a verſe a foot too ſhort.

### 1.171. John Taylor.

JOhn Taylor the Water-Poet, was once a­board of a Ship called the Hector,
where he was by the Maſter ſo follow'd with Wine, that it was eaſily perceived
by every Sea­man, who thereupon began to play upon him, and to abuſe him;
whereupon John in a poetical rage, thus invocated the Pa­tron of the Ship.

O thou noble Hector, the valiant Son o [...] Priam,

Grant that all theſe men may be as drunk I am.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=50)

### 1.172. Sir Thomas Moor.

ONe preſented Sir Thomas Moor once with Book, for his approbation, who
per­uſing it, and finding nothing in it worthy the reading, told him it would
be far better if it were put into verſe, which accordingly he did, and brought
it again to Sir Thomas, who taking it, and reading a few lines thereof; I
marry, ſaid he, now I ſee here is ſome rime, before there was neither rime nor
reaſon.

### 1.173. Another

THe ſame Sir Thomas Moor, for denying the Kings Supremacy, was committed
Priſoner to the Tower of London; At his  [...]rſt landing, the Gentleman-
Porter de­manded his uppermoſt garment for his Fee; Sir Thomas then pulled a
white Cap off of his head which he wore, ſaying, Here take it, this is the
uppermoſt garment I have.

### 1.174. Another

ONe commended to Sir Thomas Moor, the clearneſs of his Beer, and the well
relliſh of the hop; to whom Sir Thom [...] ſaid, If it had been a little
clearer, one could not have diſcerned it from water; and if it had hopt a
little farther, it had hopt into the Thames.

[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=51)

### 1.175. Another.

SIr Thomas Moor being once a drinking, ſpied a Flie in his Glaſs, wherefore
with his knife he took it out, but having drunk put in again; ſaying, Though I
do not love them in my drink, perhaps ſome others do.

### 1.176. Another.

WHen Sir Thomas Moor was Lord-Chancellour of England, being at his houſe at
Chelſey, ſome one had gotten a little Dog from a begger-woman, and pre­ſented
it to the Lady Moor; The beggar-woman complained thereof to Sir Thom [...],
who could not perſwade her to part with the Dog: But Sir Thomas told her it
be­longed to his Office, to do Juſtice to every one; and thereupon he
commanded his Lady and the beggar-woman to come into his great Hall, placing
the one at the one end, and the other at the other; Then took he the Dog, and
holding him in the middle betwixt them both, he bid either of them call him:
but no ſooner was the Dog let looſe, but he ran to the beggar-wo­man,
whereupon he adjudged the Dog to be­long to her, and told his Lady that if ſhe
would have him, ſhe muſt buy him of the right owner.

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=51)

### 1.177. Another.

NOt long after Sir Thomas was condemn­ed, he ſent for a Barber to the Tower,
intending to have his Beard cut; but before ſuch time as the Barber came, word
was brought him to prepare himſelf, for he muſt dye the next day; Wherefore
when the Barber came, he told him he had thoughts to have cut his Beard, but
having now ſo ſhort a time to live, he was reſolved his Beard ſhould take the
ſame fortune with his head.

### 1.178. Another.

AFterwards when he was upon the Scaf­fold ready for to dye, going to lay down
his head upon the block, he bid the Executioner ſtay a while, till ſuch time
he had laid his Beard over the block: for though, (ſaid he) the King gave you
a Com­miſſion to cut off my head, he gave you no Com­miſſion to cut that.

### 1.179. A Noblemans health.

CErtain Knights being drinking a health to a Nobleman of this Kingdome, one of
them to honour it the more, put into the Glaſs ſome pieces of gold:  [...]
laſt it came to the ſhare of a merry-diſpoſed Gentleman [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=52) to drink, who
having ſwallowed up all the wine, turn'd the gold into his hand, and put it in
his pocket, ſaying, I never drank of any drink in my life, but I could always
make bold with the toast.

### 1.180. A Deformed wit.

ONe ſeeing a man of excellent learning, crooked and deformed in body, ſaid,
Lord, what a poor Cottage doth yonder good wit inhabit!

### 1.181. The toothless Miſer.

AN over-pin'd Miſer complain'd that he had almoſt loſt all his teeth in his
head, with the Rheume; one that ſtood by anſwer'd him, it was more likely for
want of uſe.

### 1.182. A New-faſhion'd Coat of arms.

ONe ſeeing his enemies Arms fairly drawn on a wall, took a penſil to draw the
like underneath; So in the firſt houſe he drew his enemies chiefe coat, and
all the reſt of the Eſcutch [...]on he figured with twenty kinds of Pots, Cups
and drink­ing-Glaſſes, and underneath wrote thus: Theſe my fore-fathers left
me, and I will in­creaſe them.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=52)

### 1.183. The Thiefes queſtion.

ONe having done a robbery in one Shire, was taken in another, and brought
before a Juſtice there, who refuſed to med­dle with him, but return'd him to
the Shire where he had done the Robbery: the Thief thereupon ſaid unto him, I
pray Sir if that be the Law, let me ask you one queſtion; If a man be taken
abed with his Neighbours wife this night, what muſt he be ſent thither a­gain
the next night?

### 1.184. A Rougiſh trick to a Stranger.

A Stranger coming to a Brook, asked a Country-man on the other ſide, if it
were paſſable or no: Yea, Sir (ſaid he) you may paſs very well: But plunging
in, he ſtuck there ſo faſt, that he had much a­doe to get out again, whereupon
he curſt and ſwore very bitterly at the man: truly Sir, ſaid he, I had thought
you might, for my Neighbour Parkers geeſe and mine pass over it every day.

### 1.185. The Country-man.

A Fellow that was hang'd, was carted back again to the Town to be buried, and
the Coarſe being ſet down, a great ma­ny [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=53) men and boyes
ſtood gazing on it. By chance a Country-fellow came by, and ſee­ing them ſtand
ſo gazing, Away, away (Sirs) for ſhame, ſaid he, you are able to put an
ho­neſt man out of countenance, ſo to gaze on him.

### 1.186. Of one ſpitting in the fire.

ONe ſitting by the fire to warm him in very cold weather, ſaid that the fire
was his friend; and quickly after ſpit into it: to whom one that ſat by him
ſaid, In­deed Sir you do not well to quench your friends love by ſpitting in
his face.

### 1.187. A deep Queſtion.

ONe having read in the ſtory of the ſeven Champions, how St. Georg [...] had
killed the Dragon, and delivered from death Sa­bra the fair maid of Egypt, he
ſaid he won­der'd how men could invent ſuch lies: for there never was any
Dragon, neither was there ever any St. George; to which ano­thor reply'd, For
St. George or the Dragon, it matter'd not whether there were ever ſuch or no;
but the greateſt matter was, whether there was a maid.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=53)

### 1.188. Of Madam Carlton.

MAdam Carlton, commonly called or known by the name of the German-Princeſſe,
being by the procurement of her Husbands friends committed priſoner to the
Gate-houſe; one of thoſe her back-friends went to give her a viſit, telling
her he had a great deſire to ſee her, having heard much of her extraordinary
breeding: to whom ſhe replied; Alas Sir, I am ſorry you have loſt your labour,
having left that in the City amongſt my Husbands kindred, who had ſuch
extraordinary need thereof.

### 1.189. Another of Her.

ANother of theſe her viſitants among o­ther diſcourſe, told her, that
marry­ing and hanging went by deſtiny; to whom ſhe anſwer'd, that ſhe had
received from the de­ſtinies marriage, and he in probability might hanging.

### 1.190. Hugh Peters and Oliver.

OLiver the late Uſurper riding abroad one day in his Coach, Hugh Peters was
mounted on a Steed, and followed af­ter; it chanced a ſudden ſhower of rain to
fall, whereupon Oliver being unwilling his [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=54) Chaplain ſhould
be wet, ſent him his Co [...]t to keep him dry: which Hughkin modeſtly
refuſed, returning this anſwer to the Meſ­ſenger, that he would not be in his
Coat for a thouſand pound.

### 1.191. Pride and Hewſon.

PRide and Hewſon, two of Cromwels pa­geant Lords, the one formerly a Dray­man,
the other a Cobler; theſe two meet­ing together, Pride told Hewſon he ſaw a
piece of Coblers wax ſticking upon his Scar­let Cloak; No matter for that,
(ſaid Hew­ſon) a handful of Brewers grains will wipe it off well enough.

### 1.192. The Parſon and the good Wife.

A Parſon preaching a Sermon on a Good-Friday, ſaid, Now which of you all in
honour of this good day, will not forgive his enemy with all his heart? A
woman hearing him ſay ſo, ſtept forth and ſaid, Sir I do? Whom, ſaid the
Parſon? Marry (quoth ſhe) whoſoever will do ſo much as kill the knave my
Husband.

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=54)

### 1.193. The Parſon and Church-Warden.

A Parſon riding into the North of Eng­land, it was his chance to ſtay at a
ſmall Village on a Sunday, where they had no Miniſter at that time: whereupon
he of­fer'd to beſtow a Sermon on them; which the Church-Warden being informed
of, went to him, and asked him if he were Li­cenſed to preach; Yes ſaid the
Parſon that I am, and there-withall drew out of a Box his Licenſe, asking the
Church-Warden if he underſtood Latine? No (ſaid he) I do not, yet however let
me ſee it, perhaps I may pick here and there a word out of it. No quoth the
Parſon I will have no words pickt out of it, for that is the way to ſpoile my
Licenſe.

### 1.194. Dr. Adams, and Dr. Low.

TWo Miniſters, whereof the one was named Mr. Adams, the other Dr. Low, being
to preach before a great Auditory, the Doctor choſe for his Text this place of
Scripture, Adam, where art thou! he hav­ing done, Maſter Adams ſtepped up, and
took for his Text the following words, viz. Low here am I.

[[Page 90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=55)

### 1.195. Dr. Heylin.

DR. Heylin the famous Coſmographer, being ſent for to his Elder Brother [...]
by a Serving-man, who had a long time re­tained to that Family, as they
journeyed along they loſt themſelves in a Wood: the Serving-man being quite at
a loſs, deſired the Doctor to ride before; which he (a [...] good reaſon was)
refuſing, the man in  [...] pelting chaſe, ſaid, I have heard my old Maſter
your Father ſay, that you writ a book of a [...] the whole World: now if you
ſo well knew a [...] the World, me thinks you might eaſily find the way out of
a Wood.

### 1.196. Dr. Donne.

DR. Donne having privately married Si [...] George Moors daughter, whoſe name
was Anne; falling into his Fatherinlaw [...] diſpleaſure, he with a Diamond-
ring wrote thus on the glaſs-window; John Donne, Ann [...] Donne, done and
undone.

### 1.197. Of Pope Adrian.

POpe Andrian the ſixth being minde [...] to throw Paſquins Image into Tyber
[...] to take away the cauſe of Libelling, which was then uſed under the name
of th [...] [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=55) [...]mage, The
Duke of Seſa ſaid unto him,  [...]f your Holineſs throw Paſquin into Tyber, he
will then turn Frog, and croke both day and night; whereas now he only crokes
a day time ▪

### 1.198. The Pope and St. Peter.

IT is ſaid of a certain Pope, that when he was dead he went to Heaven­
[...]ates and knocked there. St. Peter de­  [...]anding who he was, he ſaid
the laſt de­  [...]eaſed Pope: then ſaid St. Peter, If you be  [...]he Pope,
why do you knock, ſince you  [...]ave the keys to come in at your pleaſure?
[...]o whom the Pope anſwer'd; that his Prede­  [...]eſſors indeed had the
keys, but ſince that time  [...]e wards were alterd.

### 1.199. The Spaniſh Biſhop, and Shepherd.

A Spaniſh-Biſhop ſeeing a Shepherd ſun­ning himſelf, ſaid unto him, I wonder
[...]at Shepherds now adays are not as they  [...]ere in time paſt, when great
Prophets  [...]nd Kings refuſed not to keep Sheep, and  [...]o them alſo the
Angels told the birth of  [...]ur Saviour; to whom the Shepherd an­
[...]er'd, Neither are Biſhops now adays as in old  [...]me, at divers of
whoſe deaths Bells are ſaid to  [...]ng of themſelves, and now can ſcarcely be
[...]de to ring with mens ſtrength.

[[Page 92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=56)

### 1.200. Biſhop Bonner.

BIſhop Bonner being at the time of the Reformation degraded from his
Bi­ſhoprick, one thinking to put a jeſt upon him, deſired a piece of his
tippet to heel­ſtall his hoſe: to whom Bonner anſwer'd, that his tippet was
not fit for that purpoſe, but told him he had a fooliſh head of hi [...] own,
which would ſerve very well to line his Hat. Another time riding abroad, one
met him and ſaid, good morrow Biſhop Quondam; to whom Bonner replyed, Adi
[...] knave ſemper idem.

### 1.201. The Spaniſh-Fryar.

A Spaniſh-Fryar had a Biſhoprick in In­dia granted unto him, but he deſiring
not to go out of his own Country, th [...] ſpake to the Kings Secretary: Sir,
knowing that a Biſhops place is a dangerous thing  [...] undertake, and being
conſcious of my own inſufficiency, I am in the mind that to take i [...] upon
me, is the high-way to Hell; and to go to Hell by India is a great way about,
wherefore I pray aſſign me ſome nearer Sea, or no [...] at all.

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=56)

### 1.202. The Biſhop and his Chaplain.

A Biſhops Chaplain helping his Lord on with his Rotchet, it being the firſt
time,  [...]nd he not very perfect at it, he ſaid unto him, My Lord, methinks
your Sleeves are  [...]ery ſtrait: True (anſwer'd the Biſhop) for I have been
theſe twenty years in getting them  [...], and never till now could do it.

### 1.203. Reaſon for this.

ANother ſaid that the chief reaſon why the Anabaptiſts would have had the
[...]ells down out of the Churches, was, be­cauſe of the Ropes, being
conſcious to them­  [...]elves what they had deſerved.

### 1.204. A uſeleſs Library.

A Scholar having a great Library, and ſeldome or never coming at it to Stu­dy,
one ſaid unto him, It ſeems (Sir) that  [...] and your books are at a truce.

### 1.205. Peter Martyr.

PEter Martyr Chronicler to the King of Spain, having a long time ſued for a
[...]iſhoprick, and hearing at laſt that four Confeſſors were made Biſhops at
once,  [...]aid, Faith amongſt ſo many Confeſſors, one Martyr would have done
very well.

[[Page 94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=57)

### 1.206. The Biſhop and Student.

A Young Student in Spain for ſome  [...] demeanors he had committed,  [...]
ſummoned before a Biſhop who had a ve [...] reverend beard: who after ſeveral
Reaſo [...] and Arguments in his defence, at laſt ple [...] ed Conſcience.
What, you talk of Co [...] ſcience (ſaies the Biſhop) and have never beard
yet? I cry you mercy, quoth the S [...] dent then, for I perceive if
Conſcience g [...] [...] beards, your Lordſhip hath got a very large  [...]

### 1.207. A Requeſt anſwered.

ONe deſired a Gentleman to ſpeak  [...] him to a certain Biſhop, that his Lo
[...] ſhip would be pleaſed to forgive him a De [...] to whom he anſwer'd, his
Graces power  [...] to bind, and not to looſe.

### 1.208. The Abbot, and the Meſſenger.

THere was a Biſhop that ſent ſix  [...] Capons to an Abbot, whereof the
Meſſenger eat up one of them by the way▪ The Abbot having read the Biſhops
Letter and underſtanding that he had ſent him  [...] Capons, bid the Meſſenger
thank his Lordſhip from him for five of them, and as for t [...] ſixth pray
thank him thy ſelf.

[[Page 95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=57)

### 1.209. King Henry the eighth, and the Abbot.

HEnry the eighth being abroad on hunt­ing, through the eager purſuit of his
Game loſt his attendants; at length he wandred to the Abby of St. Albans,
where (unknown) he dined with the Abbot, and fell ſo ſtoutly on, that the
Abbot tak­ing notice thereof, ſaid, he would give a hundred pound he had ſo
good a ſtomach, for quoth he my ſtomach is ſo queaſie, that I am ready to
Surfeit with the peſtle of a Larke, or the wing of a Partridge. The King
remembring his words, the next day ſent for him up by a couple of Purſevants,
and without ſhewing any reaſon clapt him in the Tower, where he was fed for a
Fortnight with onely bread and water: at laſt the King ſent him a Rib of roaſt
Beef, on which he fed ſo heartily, and made ſo deep an impreſſion, that the
King ſtep­ping from his Coverture wherein he ſtood to ſee what the Abbot would
do, de­manded of him his hundred pounds; ſay­ing, Since I have been your
Phyſitian, and re­covered your ſtomach, pay me my mony; which the Abbot was
forced for to do.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=58)

### 1.210. Another of King Henry the eighth, and the Ab­bot of Glaſtenbury.

THe ſame King Henry having a months  [...]nd to the Abbot of Glaſtenburies
E­ſta [...]e, (who was one of the richeſt Abbots in England) ſent for him to
his Court, and told him that without he could reſolve him three Queſtions, he
ſhould not eſcape with his life: The Abbot willing to get out of his clutches,
promiſed his beſt endeavours. The Kings Queſtions were theſe: Firſt, of what
compaſs the world was about: Secondly, how deep the Sea was; and Thirdly, what
the King thought. The Abbot deſired ſome few days reſpite, which being
granted, he re­turned home, but with intent never to ſee the King again, for
he thought the queſti­ons impoſſible to be reſolved; This his grief coming at
laſt to the ears of his Cook, he un­dertook upon forfeiture of his life, to
re­ſolve thoſe Riddles, and to free his Maſter from danger; The Abbot
willingly condeſ­cended. So the Cook got on the Abbots cloaths, and at the
time appointed went to the Court, and being like the Abbot in Phy­ſiognomy,
was taken by all the Courtiers to be the ſame man: when he came before the
King (omitting other circumſtances) h [...] [[Page
97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=58) thus reſolved
his three queſtions; firſt of what compaſs the world was about; he ſaid, It
was but twenty four hours journey, and if a man went as faſt as the Sun, he
might eaſily go it in that ſpace. The ſecond, How deep the Sea was? he
anſwered, Onely a ſtones caſt, for throw a ſtone into the deep­eſt place of
it, and in time it will come to the bottom. To the third, Which I con­ceive,
ſaith he, your Majeſty thinks the moſt difficult to reſolve, but indeed is the
eaſieſt, that is, what your highneſs thinks; I anſwer, that you think me to be
the Abbot of Glaſtenbury, whenas indeed, I am but Jack his Cook.

### 1.211. King Henry the Eighth, and Will. Summers.

KIng Henry going once by water, took Will. Summers his Jeſter along with him
for his divertiſement. It happened the weather to prove very tempeſtuous, ſo
that being in ſome danger, Summers ſaid to him, Harry, Harry, I had rather be
thy Fool by Land, then thy Companion at Sea: which made the King when he came
on Land, to laugh heartily at his timorous diſpoſition.

### 1.212. Another.

AT ſuch time as King Henry was in op­poſition with the King of France, it
[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=59) happened
that Summers was then in the French Court, in whom for his pleaſant diſcourſe
that King was highly delighted; and going upon a time to the Houſe of Of­fice,
to have the merryer Stool called Sum­mers along with him, and ſaid unto him,
Look here Summers, how I value thy King, whoſe picture thou ſeeſt hanging here
in my privy; I ſee it well, ſaid Summers, and withall I obſerve, that you
never look upon it, but at the ſight thereof you are ready to bewray your
Breeches.

### 1.213. King Henry the eighth and the Prior of Dun­mow.

KIng Henry going once to the Priory of Daumow, he obſerved therein two Monkes
which were reputed for very Holy­men: whereof the one was exceeding fat, the
other extraordinary leane; and asking the Prior the reaſon thereof, he
anſwer'd; If it pleaſe your Majeſty, this Monke who is ſo exceeding fat,
thinks onely of God and the joys of Heaven: and the other who is ſo
extraordi­nary leane, meditates continually on Death, Doomſ-day, and Hell.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=59)

### 1.214. King Henry the thirds baſe Son.

KIng Henry the third had a baſe Son named Geoffery, who in all his
prote­ſtations uſed theſe words, By the honour of the King my Father; to whom
Walter Malpas the Kings Confeſſor, ſaid: Methinkes you might do well ſometimes
to remember your Mothers honeſty, as well as ſo often to mention your Fa­thers
Royalty.

### 1.215. The Portugal Fryar.

A Portugal Fryar diſcourſing in his Ser­mon of a great victory his Nation had
obtained againſt the Spaniards that day twelve-month, he ſaid, Then both
Armies camped near unto the River, Wee Chriſtians on the one ſide, and the
Spaniards on the other.

### 1.216. An Atheiſtical ſpeech of a French-man.

A Younger Brother of a good Family in France, having committed a Robbery, was
for the ſame convicted, and Sentence of death pronounced againſt him: at which
he grew very much diſquieted, and ſome­thing outragious in his diſcourſe;
Where­fore the Fryar who was appointed to be his Confeſſor, ſought by
Religious perſwaſions to comfort him, bidding him be of good [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=60) cheere, for his
next meals meat ſhould be in Heaven; Faith, quoth the Thiefe, I have ſmall
appetite at this time to any Heavenly food; therefore if you will take the
dinner for mee, I will give you five pounds to diſcharge the ſhot.

### 1.217. The Iriſh Lord and Tory.

AN Iriſh Lord named Mac Mahowne had taken one of the Tories Priſoner, and for
ſome ſecret grudge he bare unto him, would by no entreaty ſpare his life, but
commanded he ſhould be hanged pre­ſently, and made a Fryar to ſhrive him; who
examining him of his ſins, asked him which was the heavieſt, and did moſt
burthen his Conſcience; The Tory anſwer'd, that which he moſt repented of,
was, that the laſt week when he had Ma­howne at his mercy in the Church, that
he did not ſet fire to it, but out of pitty to ſave the Church let him eſcape;
which he count­ed the worſt Act that ever he did. The Fry­ar bid him to change
his minde, and die in charity, or he would never go to Heaven; N [...]y, quoth
the Tory I will never change my minde whatſoever becomes of my Soul. Whereupon
the Fryar went to Mahowne, and deſired him to defer the fellows Execu­till he
were in a better minde, for if he died [[Page
101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=60) being ſo much
out of charity, his Soule was ſure to go to Hell: The Tory hearing the Fryar
entreate thus for him, deſired of Ma­howne, that ſeeing he was ſo unprepared
to die, and the Fryar ſo well diſpoſed, and ready to goe to Heaven, that he
would hang the Fryar, and let him tarry till another time. Mahowne hearing
this mad anſwer, forgave him his offence, and pardon'd him that time.

### 1.218. The winking Parſon.

A Parſon in a certain Church in Lon­don, uſed commonly to pray with his eyes
ſhut; one demanding the reaſon why he did ſo; it was anſwer'd, Becauſe he
would be thought to know the way to Heaven ſo well, that be could find it
blind-fold

### 1.219. Cardinal Wolſey and the Nobleman.

A Ruffling Nobleman in the time of King Henry the eighth came into the Court,
with a Suit all bedawbed with Gold and Silver-lace, ſaying, Am not I a luſty
man that can carry five hundred acres of land on my back? To whom Cardinal
Wol­ſey ſaid, You might better have employed ſome of it in paying your Debts;
'Tis true indeed, quoth the Nobleman, for the Lord my Father, ought the
goodman your Father thr [...]e [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=61) half pence for
a calves-head, hold, there is two-pence for it. Wolſeys Father being a
But­cher.

### 1.220. The Welſhman that faſted againſt his will.

A Welſhman who was not much uſed to the Religious obſervation of faſting
dayes, was entertained into a Gentlemans ſervice; where according to the
cuſtome, he was made to faſt the Eves of divers Saints; as Saint Peter, Saint
Paul, Saint Bartholo­mew, &c. All which he grudgingly per­formed: at length
came the Eve of all Saints, for which he was very willing to faſt, as
ſuppoſing no more would come after; but on Saint Andrews Eve it was told him
he muſt faſt again, which he utterly refuſed, ſaying he had faſted for all the
Saints toge­ther, and therefore he would faſt no more: but it was told him
that he muſt faſt for Saint Andrew alſo; Why then quoth he, pray tell mee,
where was Saint Andrew when all the Saints were together?

### 1.221. A good Jeſt of a Welſhman.

A Welſh ſhentleman who had one of his own country-men waiting on him, being at
a Faire, and drawing out a Purſe with ſtore of Money in it, was eſpyed by a
[[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=61) Cut-
purſe, who never left dogging him, till ſuch time he had eas'd him of that
burthen; But his man eſpying him, drew out his knife, and cut off the Thiefs
eare: who feel­ing it to ſmart, asked him what he meant by it: No great harme
friend, ſaid the Welſhman, (ſhowing him his ear in his hand) onely give hur
Maſter hur Purss, and hur will give hur ear again.

### 1.222. Another.

A Young Cockney-Squire, who loved to eat of Partridge, would to have it the
more reaſonable (as he thought) keep a Hawk of his own, and to that purpoſe
went to a ſhop where they were to be ſold; the Maſter of the ſhop perceiving
him to have no great skill, ſold him an Owl inſtead of a Hawk: which he having
kept a day or two, the Owle began to cry, Hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo; the Squire
hearing her, ſaid, I have got a good penny-worth, for I have a Hawk and a
Hawkner too.

### 1.223. Dulman and the Lords Ape.

A Certain Knight kept a Dulman to his Clerk, and having ſome occaſion to write
to the Lord chiefe Juſtice, he ſent this Clerk with the Letter: who coming to
the [[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=62)
[...] [[Page 103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=62)
[...] [[Page 104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=63)
chief Juſtice place, ſaw at the Gate an Ape ſitting there in a coat made for
him, as they uſe to apparel Apes for ſport. The Clerk ſeeing one in ſuch
bravery, imagined it to be my Lord chief Juſtices Son, and therefore pulld off
his Cap, and bowed very lowly un­to it, ſaying, My Maſter commendeth him to my
Lord your Father, and hath ſent him here a Letter; The Ape took it, looked
thereon, and afterward upon the man, mak­ing many mocks and mows, as the
property of Apes is to do: whereupon Dulman becauſe he underſtood him not,
went back again to his Maſter, ſaying he had delivered the Let­ter to my Lord
chief Juſtices Son, who ſat at the Gate in a fair coat. His Maſter asked him
what anſwer he gave him, he ſaid he gave him an an [...]wer, but it was in
French, or Latine, for he underſtood it not; but Sir, ſaid he, you need not
fear your buſineſs, for I ſaw by his looks that he would do your errand to my
Lord his Father.

### 1.224. Welſhmens prerogative.

ONe ſaid that Welſhmen are without compare on Saint Davids day, becauſe that
none wears Leeks but they.

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=63)

### 1.225. Of a Welſhman.

A Welſhman was for theft arraigned and convicted, but by the favour of the
Bench had his book granted him: be­ing burnt in the hand he was bid to ſay,
God ſave the King: Nay, ſaid he, God bleſs my Father and Mother, for had not
they taught me to read, I might have been hang­ed.

### 1.226. Another.

THere was a Welſhman who wanted both money and victuals, and being in this
extremity, yet thought it better to ſteal then ſtarve: wherefore ſpying a Bull
with a cut taile in a Paſture, there being a Faire but ſix miles off, he made
a vertue of neceſſity, and took the Bull along with him thither. It happened
that the ma [...]ket was ſo ſlow, that the owner came before he had ſold him;
but he in the mean time miſtruſting the worſt, had procured another Beaſts
taile, and ſo faſtned it to the Bull that it ſeemed to be his own; the owner
walking by, and viewing the Bull well, ſaid to a Neighbour of his, Had this
Bull a cut taile I would ſwear it were mine; the Welſhman over­hearing him,
ſaid, Sir, will you ſwear this Bull is yours? Yea ſaid the owner, I ſhould
[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=64) have
ſworn it if it had had a cut tail: I will try that preſently, quoth the
Welſhman, and thereupon ſteps to the Bull, and with his knife cuts off his
taile, juſt above the place where he had faſtned the falſe one; and throwing
it away, ſaid, Now Sir, will you ſwear that it is your Bull? The man ſeeing
the Bull bleed extremely, thought it was beſt to be gone, and ſo left the
Welſhman to ſell the Bull as he pleaſed himſelf.

### 1.227. Another.

A Welſhman having received ſome affront in Smithfield, made no more adoe but
brake the fellows head who gave him that affront, for which he was taken and
forced to pay ten Groats, (his whole eſtate:) be­ing at liberty, and both
hungry and thirſty, he went to a Cooks ſhop, and called for as much belly-
Timber of each ſort as came to five-Groats. The Cook himſelf, his houſe being
empty, ſeeing his Gueſt alone, ſat down to bear him company: in their
diſ­courſe, the Welſhman told him how he had lately been abuſed, and would
know of him whether it were a juſt thing for a man to pay ten Groats for
drawing of blood; Yes, quoth he, it is ſo according to law: then ſaid the
Welſhman, Here is five Groats to pay, [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=64) [...]reake my
head, and give me the reſt again; which was all the ſatisfaction the Cook
[...]ould have of him for his Victuals.

### 1.228. Of a Milk-woman.

A Milk-Woman in London, that had by mixing water with her Milk gotten the ſum
of an hundred Pounds, to encreaſe it more, ventured the ſame in a voyage at
Sea, but by chance of Tempeſt the Ship was caſt away; which the woman hearing
of, Then farewell hundred Pound, (quoth ſhe) lightly come, lightly go; I got
it by the water, and I loſt it by the water.

### 1.229. The impertinent babler.

ONe having made a long, tedious and idle diſcourſe, before a grave learned and
Reverend Perſon of this Realm, concluded it thus; Sir, I doubt, I have been
too te­dious to you with my many words: In troth (ſaid the Gentleman) you have
not been te­dious to me, for I gave no heed to any thing you ſaid.

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=65)

### 1.230. Doctor Trigg and the wench.

A Young Wench who had taken a dra [...] of the bottle, went with her water t
[...] Doctor Trigg, who told her the Baker ha [...] been too buſie with her,
and left a peny-lo [...] in her belly; No indeed Sir (ſaid ſhe) you ar [...]
miſtaken, it was not he, it was my Fathers ma [...].

### 1.231. On ſpitting in the face.

A Country Farmer was very angry with a Gentleman for Hawking in hi [...]
ground; whereupon the Gentleman ſpit in his face; the Farmer therewith more
incenſed, asked him the reaſon why he did ſo; Friend, ſaid the Gentleman, you
have no reaſon to be angry, becauſe I gave you warning, for I hawk'd before I
ſpit.

### 1.232. Another.

ONe by chance ſpit in another mans face, whereat as being ſorry for his
offence, he ſaid, I cry you mercy Sir for ſpitting in your face, but if you
pleaſe to l [...]e down, I will tread it out again with my foot.

[[Page 109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=65)

### 1.233. The Maſter and man.

UPon Saint Stevens day it is the cuſtome of many people to let their horſes
blood; A Gentlemans man asking his Ma­ſter if his horſe ſhould not bleed that
day according to the faſhion: No Sirrah (ſaid he) I would have you to know
that my horſe is not ſick of the faſhions.

### 1.234. Whereabouts Cuckcolds horns grow.

THree Goſſips chatting over a pinte of Canary, one of them ſaid, I wonder
whereabouts Cuckolds horns do grow; one of them ſaid in the forehead, another
in the nape of the neck; and that may very well be, ſaid the third, for my
Husbands bands are all worne out behind.

### 1.235. On one named Sampſon.

TWo or three Gentlemen were drinking together, whereof the one of them was
named Sampſon; being in diſcourſe concerning the differences betwixt the
En­gliſh and the Dutch, one of them ſaid, What need we to fear the Dutch,
ſince here is Sampſon able to conquer them all? true (ſaid Sampſon) that I may
do, if you pleaſe to lend me one of your jaw-bones.

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=66)

### 1.236. The Lord and his Steward.

A Paſſionate Lord called his Steward knave; to whom the Steward mildly
replyed, Your honour may ſpeake as you pleaſe, but I believe not a word that
you ſay, for I know my ſelf an honeſt man.

### 1.237. On Claret.

TWo Gentlemen coming into a Tavern, one of them called for quart of Claret:
the other ſaid to him, What, do you love Claret? for my part ile ſee it burnt
before ile drink a drop of it.

### 1.238. A Witty claſh of words.

A Gentleman invited ſome of his friend [...] into his Cellar to taſte of his
Sack, but wanting a Cup, one of them proffer'd to lend him a Can: No (ſaid
another) we will not drink in a Cain, for then we ſhall not be Abel to get up
again.

### 1.239. On Mr. Stone.

ONe Mr. Stone riding by a deep River, his Horſe ſtumbled and caſt him into it:
a Companion of his that was riding along with him, ſeeing him ſwim to ſave his
life, laughed heartily, and being asked his rea­ſon [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=66) therefore,
anſwer'd, That it would make  [...]ny man laugh to ſee a Stone ſwim.

### 1.240. On a Recorder of London.

ONe named Peper was brought before a Recorder of London, who miſtaking his
name, called him Piper; whereupon Peper being ſomething offended told the
Recorder of his miſtake; Why, ſaid the Recorder, what difference is there
betwixt Piper in Latine, and Peper in Engliſh? Yea, ſaid Peper, there is as
much difference as there is between a Pipe and a Recorder.

### 1.241. On a fooliſh Book.

A Learned witty Dedication being pla­ced before a dull fooliſh Book, a
Gen­tleman ſaid, he wondred how they came to  [...]e matched together; In
truth, ſaid another, they may well be matched together, for I proteſt they are
nothing akin.

### 1.242. Of Gaming.

ONe adviſed his friend who was a great Gameſter to give over play, affirming
it to be a great ſin and folly; to whom the other replyed, that it was rather
a ſpecial vertue and remedy againſt the ſeven deadly ſins; for firſt (ſaid he)
how can that man [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=67) be proud, who
having loſt a hundred or two of pounds at dice with a Nobleman, will afterward
be ſo humble as to venture his teſter with a Lacquey? Or ſecond, how can he be
covetous, that will not ſafe-guard his utmoſt penny from Play? Or in the third
place, how luſty to women, that continual­ly tires himſelf out at play? Or
fourth, how a glutton, that dares not beſtow a teſter on his belly, for fear
he ſhould need the ſame at Play? Or fifth, how envious of o­ther mens goods,
that is ſo careleſs of his own? Or ſixth, how angry, that puts up a thouſand
curſes from others, without re­turning ere a word? Or ſeventh, how ſloth­full,
that ſits up whole days and nights at play?

### 1.243. The wordleſs Song.

ONe was ſaying, that a Fidler who lived in ſuch a place had a moſt rare Song
with never a word in it; A Scholar hear­ing of it, went thither, deſiring the
Fidler to ſing it, and he would take it in ſhort-hand.

### 1.244. Of going to Bedlam.

A Country-Fellow coming to London, asked a Shop-keeper who ſtood at his door,
which was the next way to goe to Bedlam: the Citizen told him the neareſt
[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=67) way was
to be mad: and that is the reaſon, quoth the Fellow, that you horn-mad
Citi­zens can direct us in the way ſo perfectly.

### 1.245. An Ignoramus.

QUeen Elizabeth minding to favour a young Gentleman whoſe Father had been in
ſome diſgrace, ſaid unto him, I hope you will now raiſe up your Fathers houſe
again, and make amends for his default. The young Novice anſwer'd, An't like
your Majeſty, one end of my Barn is ſore decayed indeed with the laſt winds,
but my Mother hath promis'd to be at the charge of reparation.

### 1.246. Every one to his Trade.

A Ruſtical Husbandman challenged kin­dred of an eminent Biſhop of this Land,
requeſting him to beſtow an office up­on him: Couzen (ſaid the Biſhop) if your
Cart be broken, ile mend it; if your Plough be old, ile give you a new one,
and ſeed to ſowe your land; but an Husbandman I found you, and a Husbandman
ile leave you.

[[Page 114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=68)

### 1.247. King James and the Welſhman.

KIng James riding late home from Theo­balds to White-hall chanc'd to be catcht
in a ſhower of rain, whereupon command was given to his retinue to ride
faſter: amongſt the reſt was a Welſhman a retainer to the Earle of Pembroke,
who being badly mount­ed, flutterd and ſpurd with his legs to keep pace with
them, and made ſuch a buſtle with be labouring his horſe, that the King asked
him who he was? Ant pleaſe her Ma­jeſty (the Welſhman replyed) her is as good
a Shentleman as the beſt of them, but her Cattel cannot travel ſo faſt.

### 1.248. Of the French Kings Letter.

FRancis King of France, in a Letter which he ſent to the Emperours Ambaſſadour
wrote thus, To the Ambaſſadour of Kings, and King of Ambaſſadours.

### 1.249. The Taylors man.

A Taylor ſent his man to a Gentleman with a long bill for ſome little money
due to him, who rather willing to cavil then to pay, in a great rage ſaid: Why
Sirrah, does your Maſter think I am running a­way, that he is ſo haſty to ſend
for his money? [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=68) No Sir, ſaid
the Servant, my Maſter doth not imagine you to be about to run away, but he
himſelf is, which makes him ſo earneſt with you and others, to get money to
carry along with him.

### 1.250. How Taylors came to be of the bloud-Royal.

WHen King Henry the fifth was Prince of Wales, he was a very diſſolute Prince,
and with a company of Royſters that belonged to him, would oftentimes Rob on
the High way; and though for the moſt part they bore away the prize, yet
of­tentimes they met with ſtout oppoſition. It happend one time that they were
ſo hard­ly matcht, that his party received many blows, and amongſt the reſt he
had ſome cuts or ſlaſhes given him on a doublet he then wore, which for the
rarity of it his Father took ſpecial notice of: therefore, that it might not
be eſpyed, it was carried to a Taylors to mend: the Taylor having viewed it,
and conſidering it could not be well mended without taking in pieces, threw it
unto his Journey-man to un-rip, and he being poor and proud, Taylor-like,
ſcorning ſuch inferiour work as to un-rip, threw it to the under-prentice, who
in ſlaſh­ing the ſeames, chanced to find a Lowſe, [[Page
116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=69) and thereupon
cryed out, I have found a Lowſe in the Princes doublet; his Maſter hear­ing of
it, bid the boy give it to him, that by eating thereof he might become of the
blood-royal: the Journey-man hearing him ſay ſo, claimed likewiſe a ſhare, as
being the perſon that ſhould have mended it; ſo that there roſe great
contention betwixt them, which of them ſhould have the Lowſe: at laſt, to ſave
the effuſion of blood, both of them chuſing rather to feed then to fight, it
was agreed betwixt them to cut the Lowſe in two, and either of them to eat
half, by which meanes they might both become of the Royal-blood: the under-
Prentice who had found the Lowſe, thought it hard meaſure that he ſhould have
no ſhare amongſt them, but to live and die a poor Peaſant: at laſt, caſting
his eyes aſide on the Sheares, he eſpyed them all ſtained with the blood of
the Lowſe which had been ſhed in the dividing of her, wherefore lick­ing the
blood off with his tongue, he alſo became of the Royal-blood; ſo that by
eating that which had ſucked the blood of the Prince, Taylors have ever ſince
been of the blood-Royal.

[[Page 117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=69)

### 1.251. Of a Taylor.

A Taylor playing at cudgels, and hav­ing his legs well beaten, the company
laughed heartily at him. Why laugh you Gentlemen? quoth the Taylor, It is not
my legs I ſtand upon when I get my living.

### 1.252. Another of Taylors.

ONe commended Taylors much for their dexterity, ſaying, they had their
buſi­neſs at their fingers ends; and I, ſaid another, think them to be meer
Woodcocks, becauſe they have both of them long bills.

### 1.253. Another.

ONe ſaid that a Taylors feet muſt needs ſtink, for when he was at his work
they were always in his breech.

### 1.254. The Gentleman and Beggar.

A Beggar asked an Alms of a Gentle­man, who gave him a Teſter: the Beg­gar
thanked him, and ſaid he would pray to God heartily for him; but the
Gentle­man bid him pray for his ſelf, and not for him, for be did not uſe to
take any Alms uſury.

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=70)

### 1.255. Another.

A Gentleman walking over Lincolns-In­fields, was followed by a Beggar, and
earneſtly importuned with the Terms of Good your Honour, pray your Worſhip,
ſweet Maſter beſtow ſomthing on mee: he to try this Beggars humour, ſaid, that
they uſed to call ſuch as gave them nothing, Rogues and Raſ­cals: no indeed,
ſaid the Beggar, not I, I ſcorn to do it: well ſaid the Gentleman, Ile try ye
for this once; but the Beggar return'd him ſuch a peale in his eares, that he
was glad to mend his pace to get out of the hearing of it.

### 1.256. The Loving Wife.

A Kinde wife followed her Husband to the Gallows; and being half-way, he
deſired her to trouble her ſelf no further, but to go home; to which ſhe
anſwer'd: Yes, dear Husband, now I have ſeen you thus far on your way, faith
ile ſee you hang'd too before I will leave ye.

### 1.257. Of a Witch.

A Witch being condemned, and at the Stake to be burned, deſired her Son to
fetch her ſome drink, telling him ſhe was [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=70) exceeding dry:
O mother, ſaid he, it is well you are ſo, you will burn the better for that a
great deal.

### 1.258. The unbelieving Cuckold.

A Fellow looking out at a window, eſpy­ed his wife and another man very
cloſely at it in laſcivious embraces; and hearing her tell the man how dearly
ſhe loved him above all the men in the world, the Cuckold ſaid aloud unto him,
Believe her not friend, for ſhe hath told me as much a thouſand times, and a
thouſand at the end of that, and yet I have ſtill found her falſe.

### 1.259. The Judge and his Tenant.

A Judge who bare great ſway in the Country where he lived, was about a
ſumptuous building; for the bringing in of which materials, divers Country-men
were requeſted, with their carts and horſes: amongſt others, one that dwelt
neer him went with his Cart and Horſe. The Stew­ard, as was the manner of the
Country, had provided two Tables for their dinners, for thoſe that came gratis
ſpecial cheer, but for thoſe that came for hire very ordinary. Being in the
Hall, he in his Lords name invited them to ſit down, telling them one [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=71) board was for
them that came in love, the other for thoſe who came for money. This
Husbandman hearing how the buſineſs was orderd, ſat down at neither; and being
by the Steward asked why he did not place him­ſelf, the Hind replyed, he ſaw
no Table pro­vided for him, for he came neither for love nor money, but for
very fear.

### 1.260. Marrying a Scold worſe then hanging.

A Duke being highly offended with his Slave, would have hanged him; but at
laſt he bethought himſelf of a worſer puniſhment, as he thought, ſaying, No,
hanging is too mild a torment for him, I will Plague him worſe, I'll marry him
to a Scold.

### 1.261. The Fool beſt liked.

A Young youth having been to ſee a Play, was asked when he came out of the
Play-houſe, which amongſt thoſe brave fellows he liked beſt; the Youth ſaid he
liked the Fool beſt, becauſe he made moſt mirth, and could have wiſhed with
all his heart, that they had been all fools for his ſake.

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=71)

### 1.262. On diſturbing the Players.

AT ſuch time as the Rump began to bear ſway, the Players were ſoon di­ſturbed
by the Souldiers, and had the thanks of the Houſe for this their ſervice,
being not willing that any ſhould play the fool but themſelves. Amongſt
others, Al­derman A— moved in the Houſe that the Souldiers might have the
Players Cloaths for their pains: to which motion Harry Martin ſtood up, and
told the Speaker that he liked the Gentlemans motion very well, but feared
that they would fall out for the fools Coat.

### 1.263. Of Harry Martin.

THis Harry Martin being condemned for the execrable murther of the King, was
after ſentence brought before the Houſe of Lords, to ſhew cauſe why he ſhould
not ſuffer the Execution of that ſentence; to which he returned anſwer, That
he came in upon the Kings Proclamation, and well hoped, that he ſhould not
ſuffer for that which he obeyed, having never obſerved any of the Kings, nor
his Predeceſſors Proclamations be­fore.

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=72)

### 1.264. A ſharp nip.

A Young Gallant in company was up with a great deal of fooliſh and pro­phane
talk; to whom a Gentlewoman ſaid, How much is the world miſtaken in you, that
reports you to be an unthrift, when you are ſo good a Husband, that you will
not ſpend your wit and words at once?

### 1.265. A watchful Mayor.

A Mayor of London dyed the ſame day that he was ſworn; of whom one ſaid
merrily, He was a very vigilant Mayor, that never ſlept all the time  [...]f
his Mayoralty.

### 1.266. Of ſpeaking Latine.

TWo Gentlemen were talking Latine in the company of a Gentlewoman, who being
ſuſpitious that they ſpake of her, de­ſired them to ſpeak in Engliſh, that ſhe
might underſtand them, For I am per­ſwaded, ſaid ſhe, you are talking no good,
becauſe I know when men ſpeak Latine, if it be but two words, one of them is
naught: whereupon one of them ſaid preſently, Bona Mulier: to which ſhe ſaid,
I know Bona is good, but I'll warrant ye Mulier ſignifies ſomething that is
naught.

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=72)

### 1.267. The riotous Gallant.

A Young Gallant new come to his means, rioted in a very high manner; his
Mo­ther blaming him for his unthriftineſs, in a  [...]elting chafe he ſaid,
Faith (Mother) taunt  [...]e ſo but once more, and for very ſpight  [...]'ll
ſell all the land and living I have. To whom his Mother anſwered, If you ſell
it for ſix pence, you will be no looſer by it, for it  [...]ever coſt you a
groat.

### 1.268. A witty Jeſt.

TWo Gentlemens ſervants being drink­ing together chanced to fall out; and
[...]t laſt, amongſt other diſcourſe, fell to vy­  [...]ng the Nobleneſs of
their Maſters; one of  [...]hem ſaying, My Maſter ſpends more in Mu­  [...]ard
then yours does in Beef. To whom  [...]he other replyed, The more ſawcy men
his  [...]ollowers.

### 1.269. A ſharp retort.

AN ancient Knight of a Noble Family meeting with other Juſtices upon a
Commiſſion, one upſtart Juſtice, the ſon of  [...]n Husbandman, eſpy'd the
Knights Sattin  [...]oublet out at the Elbows, and ſaid unto  [...]im, Fie,
Sir, what mean you to wear  [...]uch a torn doublet? Go to ſirrah (ſaid [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=73) the Knight) you
came ſo lately out of ſack [...] cloath, that you know not what Sattin means.

### 1.270. The Lawyer and his man.

A Lawyer riding into the Country, had a man attending on him, who had been his
ſervant neer a dozen years: Sir, ſaid he, I have been with you thus long, and
yet am very ignorant in the chief matters of your Profeſſion, I pray reſolve
me which i [...] the chief point of the Law. To whom hi [...] Maſter ſaid, If
you will pay for our ſupper to night, I will tell it you: to which the ſervant
willingly yeilded. Well then, ſaid his Maſter, good witneſs is the chief
point. So at night when they came to their Inne, his Maſter was very liberal
in calling for Wine, good Cheer and Tobacco, inſomuch that the Reckoning at
laſt amounted to thirty ſhillings; which the Maſter told the man, he was to
pay: Not I, ſays his man. Where­fore? why, did not you promiſe to do it, ſaid
the Lawyer, if I would tell you the chiefeſt point in the Law, which I did?
His man replyed, Where's your witneſs?

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=73)

### 1.271. A fair woman, a Heavenly Creature.

A Gentleman riding by, where many Gentlewomen ſat at a ſtreet-door; a Maſtiff
dog came running out, and flew up­on him: the Gentleman turning him a­bout,
ſaid to the Gentlewomen, This Cur is Hell, and all you Heaven.

### 1.272. The upſtart Gentleman.

AN upſtart Gentleman, who by his mony had purchaſed a flouriſhing Coat of
Arms, was mocking at the plain Coat of an Eſquires, of an ancient houſe: to
whom the Eſquire returned this anſwer, I wear the Coat which my great, great,
great, great, Grandfather left me; but had I been to have  [...]ought one as
you did, it ſhould have been guarded after the neweſt faſhion.

### 1.273. Of a vain boaſter.

A Talkative man, who took himſelf to be a grand Wit, was boaſting that in what
Company ſoever he came, he was the lea­der of the diſcourſe, and that none
durſt ſpeak in his preſence, if he held his peace: No marvail, ſaid one, for
they are all ſtruck dumb at the miracle of your ſilence.

[[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=74)

### 1.274. Another.

ANother fellow was boaſting himſelf to be a great Wit, ſaying, he was judged
to be all Wit: Is it poſſible, ſaid one, that people do think you to be all
Wit? if it b [...] ſo, then the Anagram of your name is Wit-All.

### 1.275. A chaſt Gentleman.

A Gentleman had been to ſee the Peak, and in his return at night in his Inne a
Wench ſtept into the Chamber, and pro­fer'd him her ſervice all night: to whom
the Gentleman anſwer'd, No, he would not enter the Peak twice in twelve hours.

### 1.276. Nothing without mony.

A Gentleman coming to Court in his Coach, as he was lighting out of it, asked
a Page that retained to ſome perſon therein, what it was a Clock: Sir, ſaid
the youth, what will you give me then? Why ſaid the Gentleman, muſt you have
mony given you to tell that? Sir (quoth the lad) I would not have you miſtake
your ſelf, we Courtiers do nothing without mony.

[[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=74)

### 1.277. The Traveller and Cobler.

A Conceited Traveller having his ſhooes torn, went to a Coblers to have them
mended, to whom he uſed theſe ex­preſſions, God ſave you Maſter mend-all, I
have brought you here a pair of Cram-a-Crees, beſeeching you of your
benevolence to fix me on four preſervatives againſt the cold evil of the
Indies. The Cobler think­ing coyned Silver was better then ſuch coyned
Language, returned him this an­ſwer, Sir, your Eloquence paſſes my
Intelli­gence; yet if you pleaſe, I will Cobble you on four pieces for ſix
pence.

### 1.278. On Mr. Prat.

SOme Thieves had ſtollen Sheep from one Mr. Prat, and killed them in a Wood;
at their departure they had writ­ten theſe lines, and fixed them in a Paper
[...]o the body of a Tree.

Maſter Prat,

Your Sheep were very fat,

We thank you for that.

Out of eleven

We took but ſeven,

Pray thank us for that.

[[Page 128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=75)

Amongſt the Bryers and Thorns

We have left you the head and the horns,

Pray thank us for that.

The wool with the skins

To buy your wife pins,

Pray thank us for that.

Mr. Prat found the Verſes, but could ne­ver after that hear of his Sheep.

### 1.279. On John Brown.

THere was a Univerſity-Capper in Ox­ford, named John Brown, who whilſt he was
ringing in one of the Belfries of the ſaid City, the Clapper of the Bell fell
up­on his head, and almoſt kill'd him: at arch wag ſeeing this miſchance, and
con­ceiving it mortal, writ over the place where this miſchance hapned, theſe
lines:

Here lies John Brown the Ʋniverſity-Capper,

That liv'd by the Bell, and dy'd by the Clapper

But John Brown afterwards recovering, an [...] ſeeing the Verſes, writ this
underneath.

John Brown is alive, and liveth in hope

To live by the Bell, when thou dy'ſt by the Rope.

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=75)

### 1.280. The Gentleman and Muſitian.

A Muſitian to bid a Gentleman good morrow, was ſinging under his win­dow, ‘The
fair wife prov'd a Shrew.’

The Gentleman hearing him, riſe out of his bed, and ſaid, The fair wife you
ſpeak of, you muſt look ſomewhere elſe, but the Shrew is abed with me.

### 1.281. The gra [...]eless Son.

ONe was complaining that no man ever had ſuch an undutifull Son as he had.
Yes, ſaid his Son, (with leſs grace then truth) my Grandfather had.

### 1.282. The modeſt Captain.

A Captain going to viſit a Knight, he before many Gueſts commended the
Captain, for many wonderfull acts, which he did at the Siege of St. Quintins.
The company much admiring thereat, the Captain anſwer'd, that what the Knight
ſaid was not wonderful, for the Armour he then wore was as thick as betwixt
London and St. Quintins. Why, ſaid the Knight, were you not there then? No
indeed, ſaid the Captain. [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=76) No matter,
quoth the Knight, but if you had been there, I am ſure you would have done as
much as I ſaid.

### 1.283. Fool-hardineſs.

ONe having received a deep cut in the head, in a Fooliſh fray, went to a
Chyrurgion to be dreſſed: who ſearching to ſee if his brains were not
periſhed, and not eaſily finding them; ſaid the wounded man, Trouble not your
ſelf to ſearch for my brains, for if I had had any, I ſhould not ſo raſhly
have enter'd in ſo an unluckie a brawl.

### 1.284. Of Lent.

A Pariſh in the Weſt-Country called Lent, happened to be on fire; one paſſing
by and bemoaning the ſadneſs of the accident, asking what was the name of the
Town; and being anſwer'd Lent; Lent? quoth he, I pray ye then in with Frydays
and Satur­days too, that the Fire may conſume them all together.

### 1.285. Dreams Fables.

ONe told King Henry the eighth that h [...] dreamed he would give him a bag of
Gold; but, ſaid the King, you are no good Chriſtian if that you believe dreams
to b [...] true.

[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=76)

### 1.286. Put always the Cart afore the Horſe.

AN old man with a long white beard, be­ing to take his Oath at a Tryal in Law,
the Judge asked him how old he was; My Lord, ſaid he, I am ſix and fourſcore:
And why not fourſcore and ſix? ſaid the Judge: Becauſe quoth he I was ſix
before I was fourſcore.

### 1.287. Of an old man.

AN old man complained that he had but one tooth left in his head, which was
fallen out lately with eating of a ripe Figg: to whom one ſaid, But your tooth
was more ripe.

### 1.288. A quick anſwer, to a vain Boaſter.

ONe boaſted that there was not any one of his name in all England, and yet he
himſelf was a Gentleman: to whom ſaid one, I am ſorry Sir you have ſuch a
name, that there is not one good of it.

### 1.289. Great bribes, do great matters.

A Controverſie in Law was at laſt referr'd to a Gentleman to decide, and both
Parties bound to ſtand to his award; the Plaintiff, to win him to his ſide,
preſented him with a new Coach: and the Defendant to gaine his favour gave him
four brave [[Page
132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=77) Horſes. The
Gentleman liking the Horſes better then the Coach, gave the verdict on the
Defendants ſide: whereupon the Plain­tiffe asked him how it came to paſs the
Coach went out of the right way: the Gentleman anſwer'd, he could not help it,
for it was the Horſes had drawn it ſo.

### 1.290. Nothing like money.

A Poor man in a Rightfull cauſe had ſued a rich man, ſo that at the laſt it
came to a Tryal: the rich man knowing his cauſe bad, bribed the Judge with a
dozen of A­poſtle ſpoons, which at the time of tryal al­moſt turned the Scales
on his ſide; the poor man perceiving how the matter went, down on his knees in
the middle of the Court, and holding up his hands, ſaid; Now the Lord Jeſus be
on my ſide, or my cauſe is loſt, for the twelve Apoſtles are againſt mee.

### 1.291. The Serving-man and Mr. Jordan.

A Servingman being ſent of an errand to one Mr. Jordan, to tell him that his
Maſter would ſpeak with him, meeting him by the way, with more haſt then
man­ners ſaid thus to him: Mr. Piſs-pot, my Ma­ſter muſt needs ſpeak with you
preſently. The Gentleman angry to be thus abuſed, ſaid, [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=77) Sirrah do not
you know that my name is Jordan? Why (quoth the Servingman) pray what
difference is there betwixt a Piſs-pot and a Jordan?

### 1.292. Of dying in Debt.

ONe that had often asked an old Debt, was ſtill put off with words, that he
would pay him ere it were long; which made him to ſay, I ſuppoſe at laſt you
will die in my Debt; to which the other anſwer'd, I have lived now this forty
years, and am ſure I never died in any ones Debt yet.

### 1.293. Of telling a Lye.

ONe ſeeing his Friend looking out at a Priſon-window, asked him why he came
there: who anſwered, that it was for telling a Lye: at which the other
marvail­ing, he explained his meaning, ſaying, that owing ſuch a one a ſum of
money, and not paying him at the time promiſed, he arreſt­ed me for the ſame,
and put me in Priſon, by which meanes I am here for telling a Lye.

### 1.294. Of a Calves head.

SOme Gentlemen being ſet at dinner, where amongſt other diſhes was a Calves-
head, one of them was very much commending it: and amongſt other good [[Page
134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=78) properties, for
the clearneſs thereof; to which he was anſwered by one, that it was very clear
indeed, yea ſo clear that he might ſee his own face therein.

### 1.295. The Country-fellow and Ship.

A Country-fellow new come to London that had never ſeen a Ship in his life,
coming to Tower-wharfe, he there had the view of ſeveral; wondring what they
ſhould be, he asked one of the Ship-boys what that great thing was called in
which he was; who told him it was a Ship. Then asked he him how old it was;
who anſwer'd him, Two years old. Good Lord, ſaid the Country­man, but two
years old? what a great thing it will be by that time it comes to my age!

### 1.296. The Drunkards cauſe of ſpewing.

SOme Gentlemen being a bowling, a drunken fellow was got into the Green, whoſe
Stomach being over-charged, he fell a ſpewing before them all; for which one
of the Gentlmen blaming him, Marry (ſaid he) it would make any man ſpew to ſee
how you bowle.

[[Page 135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=78)

### 1.297. Of greedy eating.

A Fellow being ſent of an errand to a Country-Gentlemans houſe, had Victuals
ſet before him, on which he fell ſo greedily, as made the Gentleman to ſtand
and admire at his teeth and ſtomack-ex­ploits; and therefore in a kinde of
Ironi­cal ſpeech he ſpake to him, and bid him to eat heartily. I thank you,
Sir, ſaid the fel­low, ſo I do, I think I eat like a man. Nay, quoth the
Gentleman, that thou doeſt not▪ for I never ſaw a man to eat ſo before, I
think thou doeſt rather eat like a Beaſt.

### 1.298. Woodcock and Swallow.

TWo Gentlemen were bowling together, whereof the one was named Woodcock▪ the
other Swallow. Mr. Swallow having thrown a good caſt, was boaſting thereof: to
whom the other ſaid, It is not one Swallow that makes a Summer. No, ſaid
Swallow to him again, neither is it one Woodcock that makes a winter.

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=79)

### 1.299. The Gentleman and Mare.

A Glowniſh Gentleman had ſo far pre­vailed upon the affections of a
Gen­tlemans Daughter, that the Marriage was a­greed upon; but he beſides the
Portion pro­miſed, would have into the Bargain a good­ly Mare which was
grazing in a Paſture be­fore the houſe; and ſo high he ſtood there­on, that
upon the refuſal thereof he told the Gentleman, that if he had not the Mare,
he would have none of his Daugh­ter; upon which the Marriage was quite broken
off. About a twelve-month after, this penurious wooer chanced to meet the
Gentlewoman at a Matket, and would needs have renewed old acquaintance with
her: but ſhe pretending ignorance, told him that ſhe did not know him. No,
ſaid he, do no [...] you know me? why I was once a Suiter to you. O cry you
mercy, ſaid ſhe, I think there was once ſuch a Gentleman a ſuiter to my
Fathers Mare, but I aſſure you never any ſuch a one a ſuiter to me.

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=79)

### 1.300. Of picking a bone.

SOme variance happening betwixt a Gen­tleman and his Wife, ſhe refuſed to ſit
down to dinner with him: whereupon to affront her, having eaten the meat off
of a bone, he ſent it to her by a Servant, bid­ding him to tell her, that
there was a bone for her to pick: to requite this frump, ſhe ſent him word
back again by the ſame Servant, that ſhe had three Children ſince they were
married together, whereof one of them was none of his; and bid him to tell
him, that that was a bone for him to pick.

### 1.301. The Gentleman and Butcher.

A Company being at Bowls, of which was a Butcher and a Fantaſtical gal­lant,
in their play they chanced to fall out, ſo that the Gallant up with a Bowl,
and ſtruck the Butcher ſuch a blow on his head, as laid him ſhaking of his
heels: whereupon one of the ſtanders by ſaid, I have ſeen ma­ny a Butcher
knock down a Calf, but I ne­ver before ſaw a Calf knock down a Butcher.

[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=80)

### 1.302. The Maſter and Maid.

A Maſter was once had before a Juſtice of the Peace for getting his Maid with
Childe; the Maſter pleaded that his Maid came into the bed to him: Why then,
ſaid the Juſtice, you ſhould have gone out of the Bed from her. Yea (ſaid the
Ma­ſter) would you have done ſo, if a handſome Maid had come to Bed to you? no
I'll warrant ye.

### 1.303. Another.

ANother Maid (who lay at her Maſters Beds feet) was by him gotten with Childe;
whereupon her Miſtriſs rated her ſoundly: the Wench to excuſe her ſelf, ſaid,
That her Maſter would do it: But then (quoth the Miſtreſs) you ſhould have
cryed out. Why (replyed the Wench) I have often heard my Maſter and you about
the ſame buſineſs, and I never heard you for to cry out.

### 1.304. An illiterate Church-warden.

ONe of great wealth, but no learning at all, was by the Veſtry choſen Church-
warden of the Pariſh; he to excuſe himſelf as being an illiterate man, deſired
them they would excuſe him therein, For (ſaid [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=80) he) that Office
requires a learned man, when I proteſt that I can write nor read no more then
the Pope of Rome.

### 1.305. Of Maſtery 'twixt man and wife.

A Man and his wife were ſtriving for ma­ſtery; or as we ſay, who ſhould wear
the Breeches; when in the interim one knocks at the door, which occaſioned a
ceſſation of blows for a time: whilſt the goodman ſteps to the door, and asks
the party who he would ſpeak withal? who told him, The Maſter of the houſe:
Stay friend, ſaid the goodman, but a little while, and I ſhall re­ſolve thee,
for as yet the caſe is doubtful; and ſo ſtepping in, his wife and he went to
it again, till at laſt ſhe yeilded him the Victory; which being obtained, he
goes again to the door, Now friend, ſaid he, thou muſt ſpeak with me, but I
could not tell thee ſo much be­fore, till my wife and I had decided the con­
[...]overſie.

### 1.306. A Bull.

A Tradeſman having accidentally ſtruck his wife a blow, whereof ſhe dyed;
[...]ne being told of it, ſaid, That being he did  [...]ot do it willingly,
the killing of that woman  [...]uld  [...]e found but Manſlaughter.

[[Page 140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=81)

### 1.307. A tale of a pack of Cards.

A Preciſe Gentleman kept a Serva [...] that was a great player at Cards, wh
[...] was complained thereof to his Maſter by one of his fellow-Servants. The
Gentle­man, who would not endure ſuch wicked­neſs as he thought to raign in
his Family, had his man in examination, charging hi [...] very deeply for a
great Gameſter: Sir, ſaid the Servant, I am ſo far from being a player at
Cards, that I know not what a pair of Cards means. No, ſaid the Gentleman to
the tell-tale, did not you ſay he was a great player at Cards? Yes and pleaſe
your Wor­ſhip, quoth he, he is ſo, and ſo addicted to them, that he ſeldom
goes without a pair in his pocket. Upon theſe words the Gentle­man commanded
his pockets to be ſearch­ed, wherein was a pair found indeed. What is this?
ſaid the Gentleman, did not you ſay you knew not Cards? then pray what things
are theſe? O that, quoth the man, is my Almanack, which I carry con­tinually
about with me. Pray, ſaid the Gentleman, make it appear how theſe Cards can be
an Almanack. Why thu [...] Sir, ſaid the man; there are in theſe thing [...]
you call Cards, as many ſuits as there are [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=81) [...]y! for
Heavens ſake! It is I, It is I, our di­  [...]treſſed Siſter, and unfortunate
Journey-man Ri­chard, who innocently ſporting together, have moſt unhappily
Twined our ſelve [...] in this manner; out of which it is impoſſible for us to
get free, without ſome Aſſiſtance from your helping hand: Therfore, I beſeech
you as a tender Brother, have ſome Compaſſion for your miſerable Siſter, and
her unhappy Companion, in the Condition we are now in, and our utmoſt
Endeavours ſhall be, for the future, to retaliate your kindneſs in the higheſt
manner we ſhall be ever capable of perfor­ming, (the Fellow groaning and
ſighing all the while, not ſpeaking one Word for himſelf, but expecting to be
ſent immediately into another World, for the affront put upon his Maſter, in
being ſo over familiar with his Siſter) her Bro­ther ſtarting to hear his
Siſter's Voice fancy'd himſelf to be in a Dream▪ by reaſon of ſome
Fa­miliarity that had paſſed between them, at other times; but her repeated
Importunities and crying out, ſoon convinc'd him of the reality of what he
before had but barely imagin'd. And conſidering withal, what an Odium their
Family would un­dergo, firſt turn'd his Siſter upon the Man, re­ſolving to pin
them both to the Ground with his Spit, and was juſt ready to pierce it through
their Bodies, had not another of the Family, who perceived now the worſt of
the danger, fortunate­ly  [...]topping his hand: prevented the fatal ſtroak,
and interceded for their Pardon. The Brother at firſt could not eaſily be
appeaſed, but his Paſſion a­bating, and conſidering the beſt way would be, to
keep it as private as they could from the Ears of their Neighbours, he
promiſed to unlooſe them: but with this proviſo, That they ſhould tye
them­ſelves faſter together by a Matrimonial Conjunct­ion, and by that means
prevent the Scandal which unavoidably would be brought upon their Family.
[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=82) To this
they very joyfully conſented, and loving­ly Kiſſing on the Ground, ſwore
Conſtancy and Fidelity to each other, and in a few days after, were marry'd
and liv'd very happily together.

### 1.308. 425.

A Conſtable carry'd a big belly'd Woman before a Juſtice, and ſaid, An't
pleaſe your Worſhip, I have brought you here a Maid with Child. The Wench call
[...]d him Fool and Knave; ſhe being re­proved, ſaid, he muſt needs be one of
'em, for ſaid ſhe, If I am a Maid, he is a Fool to think I am with Child, and
if I am not with Child, he is a Knave for ſaying I am.

### 1.309. 426.

A Perſon looking upon ſome Pictures, which hung up againſt a Wall, and among
the reſt there Was the Picture of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba, an old
Woman coming by, neſtles up cloſe to him; Pray Sir, ſays ſhe, what pretty
Pict­ure is that? Whereupon the Gentleman reſolved her, but ſhe pretended
Deafneſs two or three times, deſir'd him to ſpeak a little louder, and the
fourth time ſhe got his Watch out of his Pock­et, and dropping him a low
Courte [...]ie, told him ſhe was very well ſatisfied

### 1.310. 427.

A debauched Fellow was brought before a Juſt­ice of the Peace for Swearing,
the Juſtice com­manded him to pay his Fine, which was two Shil­lings▪ for two
Oaths, whereupon he pulls out half a Crown, and ask'd the Juſtice the Price of
a Curſe, who told him Sixpence: Then a Pox take you all for Knaves and Fools,
and there's half a Crown for you, who the Devil would ſtand changing of Money.

### 1.311. 428.

A Miſer having a Sheep ſtole from him by a poor Man, would needs ſend him to
Priſon, ſaying, There was not ſuch a damn'd Rogue in all the World: Pray Sir,
ſays he remember your ſelf, and judge not me

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=82)

### 1.312. 429.

A wiſe Mayor with his diſcreet Wife, went to  [...]e the Queen's Ape, as ſhe
came in the Ape catch'd  [...]t his Wife, and made Months at her, but the
Mayor told the Ape He was an unmannerly Gen­  [...]man, to mock an ancient
Woman as his Wife was  [...]d old enough to be his Mother.

### 1.313. 430.

One When the Hangman went to put the Hal­  [...]r about his Neck, deſired him
not to bring the  [...]ope too near his Throat: For, ſays he, I am ſo
[...]ckliſh about that Place, that I ſhall hurt my ſelf,  [...] with over-
laughing, that it will go near to throt­  [...] me.

### 1.314. 431.

One was ſtop'd, by the Conſtable, he ask'd him that was his Name? He told him
Adultery. [...]hen Sir I'll commit you; Sir, ſays he, If you do,  [...]ur Wife
will be angry, for committing Adultery  [...]on your Watch.

### 1.315. 432.

The Watch paſſing by, out of a Window one  [...]rew a Piſs-pot upon their
Heads; they being  [...]gry, he a [...]ked who they wore? They reply'd  [...]e
Watch. Why then, Harm watch, harm catch.

### 1.316. 433.

One came to the Tower-gate, juſt as it was ſhut,  [...]d the Wardens going in
with the Keys, Ho,  [...]llow, ſays he, open the Gates: None of your
[...]llow but a poor Knave; why then poor Knave.  [...]ay, no Knave neither
Sir; Why then ſays he,  [...] was a Knave that told me ſo.

### 1.317. 434.

A Horſe ſtealer was brought to be examin'd be­fore the Juſtice, who finding
the Fellony apparent,  [...]ell, Sirrah, ſays he, If thou art not hang'd for
[...]is, I'll be hang'd for you! I humbly thank your [...]orſhip, (replyed the
Thief,) and when the time  [...]es, I deſire you not to be out of the way.

### 1.318. 435.

A Welſh man arraigned and convicted, by Favour [[Page
144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=83) of the Bench,
had his Clergy granted him,  [...] when he was burnt in the Hand, they bid him
ſay Cot ſave the King: Nay, ſays the Welſh-M [...] Cot bleſs her good Father
and Mother, for  [...] they had not brought her up to Read and Write, her
might have been Hang'd for all hur King.

### 1.319. 436

A ſimple Fellow being arraigned at the B [...] ▪ the Judge was ſo favourable
to him as to give hi [...] his Clergy, and they bid him Read: Read▪ Truly my
Lord, ſays he, I can Read no more than the Pope of Rome.

### 1.320. 437

Another Fellow had the Favour of his Clergy alſo, and being illiterate, a
Scholar ſtood behind him to inſtruct him, and the Words were Lord have mercy
upon us; ſo the fellow held the Book, and the Scholar bid him ſay after him O
Lord, ſays the Scholar, O Lord, ſays the Fellow, and hi [...] Thumb being upon
the other part of it, the Scholar ſaid, Take away thy Thumb: Then ſays the
Fellow, O Lord, take away thy Thumb. Then ſays the Judge, Legit aut n [...]
Clerice? Non Legit, ſays he, Then the Judge ſaid, Take him away Goaler.

### 1.321. 438

A new married Man being in bed with  [...] Wife, and thinking her a Virgin
told her he  [...] afraid he ſhould hurt her, and therefore wou [...] riſe and
fetch an inſtrument to order affairs  [...] eaſier Way; but ſhe ſpeaking
ſimply, and to e [...] him, ſaid, Good Husband don't trouble your ſe [...] for
my Father's Journey-man hath ſaved you the Labour a Twelve Month ago.

### 1.322. 439

A Man and his Wife being in Bed together, toward Morning pretended ſome
uneaſineſs deſired to Lye in her Husbands Place, ſo Good Man being Willing to
pleaſe Her, came  [...] Her, making ſome ſhort ſtay in his Paſſage: [[Page
145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=83) had not lain
long there, but ſhe deſir'd him to change places, and ask'd him to come over
her again: Nay, nay, ſays he, ſtay there, I had rather go a mile about firſt.

### 1.323. 444.

A Citizen more tender of his Wife than himſelf, us'd to make her go to bed
firſt in the Winter­time, and lye in his place to warm it, and the [...]
call'd her his Warming pa [...], which ſhe not well re­liſhing, went according
to her uſual cuſtom to war [...] his bed, and left ſomething ſmoaking in the
place: He ſuddenly leap'd into it, and findin [...] himſelf in a ſtinking
pickle, Wife, ſays he, I'm be­ſhit: No, Husband, ſays ſhe, it is but a Coal
dropt out of your warming-pan.

### 1.324. 445.

A Country fellow came to a Turner's Shop to buy a Mat; many were ſhew'd him,
but he lik'd none: Then to jeer the Bompkin he call'd his Wife and Daughter
Mat, and told him, there was all the Mats he h [...]d: No, ſays he, they will
not do, for I muſt have one that has not been lai [...] upon.

### 1.325. 446.

A Man having married an old Woman, he told her, he had let ſomething wherein
he ſhould be a great loſer: with that ſhe let a luſty Fa [...]t; O now, ſays
he, I muſt confeſs you have made me a great Savour.

### 1.326. 447.

One hearing of the Story of St. George that kill'd the Dragon, ſaid ſure 'twas
a Lye, nay ſome be­lieve, there was never a St. George nor a Dragon. I, ſays a
ſimple fellow, Pray God there be a Maid.

### 1.327. 448.

Some Gentlemen being a drinking, a Wench came up to attend them: ſhe being not
enough, in anger they knock'd for more, the Maſter com­ing up, ask'd what they
call'd for: Said they, muſt we be thus attended? Have you no more whores in
[[Page 146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=84) the Houſ
[...] but this? Yes, Sir, pray be patient, I'll ſend up my own Wife
immediateley.

### 1.328. 449.

Two Widows ſitting by the fire, were chatting together of their dead Husbands,
ſays one, let us have another Candle, for my poor Husband lov'd Light, God
ſend him Light everlaſting; and ſays the other, my Husband lov'd a good Fire,
I wiſh him Fire everlaſting.

### 1.329. 450.

Sir Thomas Moor had many Daughters but no Sons, ſo that his Wife did often
wiſh for a boy, which at laſt ſhe had, which was very ſimple; A [...] Wife
ſays he, thou haſt often wiſh'd for a Boy, and this will be a Boy ſo long as
he lives.

### 1.330. 451.

A Maid that had more Beauty than wit, ſtood viewing herſelf naked in a glaſs,
at laſt ſhe ſets the Glaſs a pretty diſtance off from her, ſo that ſcrew­ing
her Body, ſhe ſaw the reflection of ſomething in the Glaſs; whereupon ſhe
ſaid, well, 'tis no matter, tho' the ſhadow be Wry-Mouth'd, yet the Subſtance
is as right as my Leg.

### 1.331. 452.

A Country man told his Wife, 'twas her Fault his Daughter play'd the Whore,
for ſhe ſhould have lock'd her up: Lock me no Locks ſays ſhe, for the Devil
take that Key that can't unlock it.

### 1.332. 453.

A Fellow wooing a Wench, ſhe ſat ſo long be­tween his Legs that he fell faſt
aſleep: She roſe up and put the Churm between his Legs, h [...] wak­ing hug'd
it and ſaid, Well, and how dye now? Th [...]ing the Wench had been there.

### 1.333. 454.

A Gentleman had o't ſolicited his Wife's Maid for a little of that which Harry
gave Doll, but ſhe deny'd it ſtill, ſaying, he'd hurt her, and then  [...]
ſhould cry out; after all was done, Look ye no [...] ſays be, did I hurt you?
Well, ſays ſhe, or did cry out then?

[[Page 147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=84)

### 1.334. 456.

A Wench was got with Child, and her Miſtreſs would know who got it, ſhe ſaid,
no Body; ſays her Miſtreſs, you Whore, do you think any Wo­man can be with
Child without a man? Why, ſays ſhe, may not I have a Child without a Ma [...],
as well as a Hen lays Eggs without a Cock.

### 1.335. 457.

A married man having got a Wench with Child, was told by the Juſtice, that he
thought ſuch a man as he, would not have defil'd his Bed ſo: You mi­ſtake,
Sir, ſays he, there was no defiling of the bed in the caſe, for it was done in
the Field.

### 1.336. 458.

Another was accuſed for getting his Maid with Child, and that he went into the
Maid's Bed to do it. He to excuſe it, ſwore, he never went into his Maid's
Bed, for the Bed was his own.

### 1.337. 459.

One ask'd his Trading Wife, what was the rea [...]on he muſt have his Life
burden'd ſo by her ill Cour­ſes? Pray Husband, ſays ſhe, let not that trouble
you, for you know that I bear more Burden  [...] you every day, and yet I am
contented.

### 1.338. 460.

A virtuous Lady being once in a muſing vein, ſat with her Legs Pretty wide;
ſays her Husband, Sweet heart, your Cabinet ſtands open; ſay you ſo, ſays ſhe,
why do not you lock it then? For I am ſure, none keeps the Key but your ſelf.

### 1.339. 461.

A Gallant eſpying a handſome Maid, ſays he, Swe [...]t heart, give me leave to
kiſs your Hands an [...] Feet: O lack, Sir, ſays ſhe, you are in extreams to
aim both high and low at once, for I have o [...] heard there's vertue in the
middle, and there you may kiſs, if you won't you may let it alone.

### 1.340. 462.

A Lawyer would not only conte [...] himſelf with a ſ [...]fficient Doſe of the
Juice of the  [...]pe, but af­ter [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=85) he came home,
(which was generally late, and when his Wife was a bed) would ſlip into Bed in
the dark to his Maid, and ſteal the forbidden plea­ſures of Adultery. This he
continued to do often, uſing when he roſe from her to go to his Wife's Bed, to
give her half a Crown. At length, his Wife finding it out, watch'd his coming
home one Night, and privately order'd the Maid a Lodging up one pair of Stairs
higher, and went her ſelf in­to the Maid's Bed: When her Husband came home as
uſual, without a Light, he goes ſoftly to the Bed, and there without any
words, falls to work very hard with his Wife, and when he had done, gives her
half a Crown, and riſes to go down Stairs to cool himſelf, before he went to
his wife: In the mean time ſhe riſes and goes to her own bed, and falls faſt a
ſleep. But in the morning before her Husband was up, ſhe calls the Wench, pays
her her Wages, and bids her be gone. The Husband hearing a noiſe below, riſes,
and comes down, juſt as the Wench was going out of Doors, and asking what was
the matter? Was anſwer'd by his Wife without any reaſon, that ſhe had pay'd
her off and ſhe was going away. But ſhe had not gone out of Sight, before the
Miſtreſs call'd after her, and ſaid, ‘Ah Lack-a-day! Huſ [...]y, I'd like
t'ave forgot the Half-Crown I earn'd for you laſt Night, but here it is;’ and
ſo gave it her before her Husband, who, you may imagine, gueſs'd then the
meaning of her going away.

### 1.341. 463.

A French man who having liv'd a ſingle Life too long as he thought to his
advantage, was re­ſolved to marry a Wife to dreſs his Vict [...]ls, or­der his
Houſhould Affairs, and take care of other neceſſaries, &c. At l [...]ſt he
pitches upon one, but ſhe being a proud fin [...]ky▪ Creature, car'd to do
little or nothing: So that a [...]ter he had been mar­ried a Month, and the
Honey-moon was over, he deſires ſhe would dreſs the meat he had bought [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=85) for Dinner: At
which ſhe mumbl'd, and look'd like the Devil over Lincoln, ſaying, Truly ſhe
expected to have a Maid to do that for her, for ſhe was never bred up to ſuch
ſlavery: At which the contented Husband ſeem'd very well ſatisfy'd, and
replyed, very well, my Dear. If dat you vil not do't par me, begar, me vil
do't par you. So did it accordingly. The next day the Bed wan­ted to be made,
and ſhe would not do't, however he would do it for her: When Saturdy came, the
Houſe wanted to be clean'd, then ſhe would not do it, but he was forc'd to do
it himſelf. A little time after, he takes his Wife abroad in the Fields as
u­ſual, and ſitting down pretty tyr'd under a hedge, Monſieur ſpyes a pretty C
[...]abſtick; at which he drew his Knife, and deſired his Wif [...] to cut it
for him, but ſhe complain'd of being weary, and ſaid ſhe would not riſe, not
ſhe; Ve [...], Madam, ſays he, I'll do it for ye; ſo riſes, and cuts the ſtick
and trims it fit for uſe; when coming to her, he, ſaid, ſee my dear vat pretty
Stick is dis; take i [...], do take it, and beat your ſelf with it; No no crys
ſhe in a Paſſion, what d'ye think I'm a Fool, or mad? Well den ſays he, I'll
do it for you, and ſo he belabour'd her to ſome purpoſe, that ever afterwards
ſhe became a good Wife, and was wil­ling to do what ought to be done her ſelf,
without putting her Husband to the trouble of doing it for her.

### 1.342. 464.

An Attorney's Man having got a Wench with Child, who being brought to Bed of a
Son, he was puzl'd to contrive for its maintenance: But at laſt he found out a
way, which was thus; He with four more of his Companions were at a Tavern, and
an old Woman comes up, ſaying, [[Page
150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=36894&page=86) will you buy
any Ribbon, Gentlemen? Aye, ſays our Spark, and buys ſome, giving her half a
crown to go down and change, inſtead of which, ſhe left her Basket behind,
wherein they found a Child, which they obliged themſelves equally to
main­tain, and put to Nurſe.

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1667  

