---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The art of pronuntiation digested into two parts. Vox audienda, & vox
videnda. In the first of which are set foorth the elements and seuerall parts
of the voice: in the second are described diuers characters, by which euery
part of the voice may be aptly known and seuerall distinguished. Very
necessary as well thereby to know the naturall structure of the voice, as
speedily to learne the exact touch of pronuntiation of any forraine language
whatsoeuer. Newly inuented by Robert Robinson Londoner.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=1)

THE Art of Pronuntiation, Digeſted into two parts. Vox audienda, & Vox
videnda.

In the firſt of which are ſet foorth the Elements and ſeuerall parts of the
voice: In the ſecond are deſcribed diuers Characters, by which euery part of
the voice may be aptly known and ſeuerally diſtinguiſhed.

Very neceſſary as well thereby to know the naturall ſtructure of the voice, as
ſpeedily to learne the Exact touch of pronuntiation of any forraine language
whatſoeuer.

Newly inuented by ROBERT ROBINSON Londoner.

Organa naturae tribuit Deus, are docet vſus.

London printed by Nicholas Okes. 1617.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=2)

## To his Booke.

If that thou chance to come to Zoilus view,

Feare not my booke, though thy in­uention's new:

Tell them, whoſe want of skill ſhall thee deride,

To iudge things they not know, 'tis fooliſh pride:

But if men skild in thee a fault eſpie,

Craue their beſt helpe, beare not thy ſelfe too high.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=2)

## A Preface declaring the great benefit of Speech and wri­ting, and the order
of this Treatiſe.

GOD (who hath ſo well diſpoſed and ordered the courſe of nature in all his
creatures,) as hee hath made man his chiefeſt and ſet him ouer all the reſt of
his creaturs of the earth, hauing endued him with ma­ny graces aboue the reſt,
as wiſedome, knowledge, reaſon, vnderſtanding, and the like; euen as ſo many
ſprings and riuers iſſuing from the Ocean of his infinit wiſe­dome: So alſo
that nothing might be wan­ting, nothing ſuperfluous in ſuch a worthy creature,
hath giuen him diuers outward
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=3) meanes and
ſences ſo excellent, meete and conuenient, not onely for the nouriſhment and
preſeruation of his owne body (as they are likewiſe to other creatures) but
alſo as well for the maintenance and increaſe of thoſe inward graces wherewith
hee is ſo adorned, as for the imployment of them and ſhewing and ſetting them
foorth to other men to whom he hath not giuen the ſame meaſure; whereby he may
be glorified of all men as their gracious and glorious Creator, all men may be
glorified in him as his chiefeſt creatures: And to that end as he hath giuen
man a reaſonable ſoule to iudge and diſcerne, ſo alſo that all his knowledge,
all his graces might not lie hid and ſmothered in his owne breaſt, he hath
giuen him a voice compoſed with more rareneſſe then in any other of his
crea­tures, wherby he may expreſſe the thoughts of his heart, may praiſe and
pray to his God, may teach and inſtruct others in that which hee knoweth aboue
other men, may aske aduiſe & councell of others in that he knoweth not, and
generally all may com­municate and confer together, as well tou­ching
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=3) ſpirituall
matters fit for the ſoule, as concerning all other things neceſſary in our
worldly affaires: yet although the voice of man be of ſuch needfull vſe, that
without it mans mind were but as in a dungeon, and in perpetuall thraldome of
the body for the time of its being in this earthly habitati­on, if there were
no other helpe then tht voice to expreſſe the mind: man could not be the
better for any thing that ſhould bee taught or ſpoken of no longer then the
very words were ſpeaking, or at the longeſt, but whileſt our weake memories
could retaine the very matter ſpoken of, and ſo it might eaſily be foreſeene
how ſoone all the labors of vs and our forefathers would periſh, how quickly
the wiſe councells, witty and graue ſayings of the learned would be forgotten.
The Princes in euery age (though in one and the ſame kingdome) would haue a
dif­ferent kind of ruling, the ſubiects a diffe­rent courſe of liuing, both
the Princes and people a different and new courſe of reli­gion. All our
doings, all our ſayings, all our cuſtomes, and all our manners would be buried
in obliuion.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=4) Then how
vncertaine our eſtates would be, how vncomfortable our ſelues, how dangerous
and pernicious it would be for the ſtate of euery common-wealth, all men may
eaſily iudge, yet God to preuent theſe inconueniences, for the further benefit
of mankind, as hee hath giuen vs a voice to expreſſe the minde vnto the eare,
ſo hee hath giuen vs hands to frame letters or markes for the voice to
expreſſe the minde vnto the eyes. So that the eyes and eares are as it were
the receiuers of meſſage ſent vnto the heart, the hands and voice as
deliuerers of meſſage ſent from the heart: And though the voice be a more
liuely kind of ſpeech, yet in reſpect it is but onely a ſleight accident made
of ſo light a ſub­ſtance as the ayre, it is no ſooner vttered but it is
diſſolued, euery ſimple ſound doth expell and extinguiſh the ſound going
be­fore it, ſo that the eare can haue but one touch of the ayre beating vpon
it to declare the ſpeech vnto the mind: but the hand though it giue a dumbe
and a more dull kind of ſpeech, yet it giues a more dura­ble. A letter is a
groſſer ſubstance, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=4) therefore is
of more continuance then a ſound: what is once written ſtill continu­eth
though the hand ceaſeth. If the eyes haue not ſatisfied the mind at one view,
they may looke on it againe, yea till they haue ſatisfied it's deſire: And by
this meanes of noting and charactring of the voice, all things worthy of
memory are de­fended from the iniury of forgetfulneſſe; whereby is left vnto
vs from moſt ancient times of our forefathers the moſt holy will of God,
beſides many neceſſary doctrines of godly and religious men, many excellent
ſayings both diuine and morrall, many hu­mane policies, counſells, and
inſtructions, written by wiſe and learned men, together with diuers
behoofefull arts and worthy ſciences, which are hereby as in a ſure treaſury
preſerued, maintained and daily increaſed to the glory of almighty God, and
continuall benefit and comfort of vs and our poſterity. Of theſe two excellent
be­nefits the firſt being naturall, is by nature of euery man with a little
vſe eaſily pro­nounced, the other being artificiall cannot be perfectly framed
vntill the true reaſon,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=5) order, and
diſtinct parts of the former be firſt found out and knowne; the want of
knowledge whereof, hath cauſed both in ſpeech and writing, many imperfections
and errors, as ſometimes taking one ſimple ſound of mans voice to be two, at
other times taking two, three, or fower ſimple ſounds to be but one, and
according to that miſtaken order fitting letters for them, whereby writing is
thereby in ſome part made defectiue, beſides by many other er­rors vſed
therein, as by miſplacing of let­ters, contrary to the order wherein they are
pronounced, inſerting of ſuperfluous let­ters, where there is no need, nor any
ſound at all expreſſed for them, making one let­ter ſerue for two different
ſounds, ſome­times for one and ſometimes for another; and contrariwiſe, vſing
for one and the ſame ſound at ſometimes one letter, at other times another
letter, not proper ther­unto, but to ſome other different ſound in mans voice:
by which confuſed order the ſpeech is ſo darkely ſet downe, that our words in
ſpeaking ſeeme as a different kind of language to the ſame in writing. So that
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=5) though by a
common vſe and beaten pra­ctice euery particular nation can explaine
themſelues and pronounce their owne pro­per ſpeech by their owne manner of
wri­ting, yet it is ſo intricate to a ſtranger of another country, that he can
neither pro­nounce their ſpeech by their writing, nor write their ſpeech
according to their man­ner by hearing of it ſpoken, whereby no per­fect
Dictionary or Grammer hath hither­to been made, that the true order of
pro­nunciation might be taught, either to ſuch as are deſirous of the skill of
languages, or to children, or ſuch as are altogether igno­rant in reading and
writing of their owne mother tongue. Beſides a great inconueni­ence which by
ſome I haue vnderſtood (and doubtleſſe it is likely) to haue happened in the
ancient learned tongues, Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine, which though they are
written and imprinted in all parts, wherein they are in vſe, by one and the
ſame order of letters, yet in vtterance of them in ſpeech, they are ſo
diuerſly pro­nounced, that men of different nations (though therein very
learned) cannot
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=6) one ſuddenly
vnderſtand the other in any argument, or conference had betweene them in any
of thoſe languages, euery one of them inclining to the manner of
pro­nunciation of their owne country ſpeech. Hence alſo it hath come to paſſe,
that not­withstanding all nations of the earth came from one root, our firſt
father Adam, and that God had giuen them all the ſame forme of body, the like
ſences, and for their voyce all inſtruments alike: (howſoeuer he had disperſed
them into ſeuer all parts and habitations) yet the people of one kingdom in
their learning of the language of any other nation haue not in many yeers, yea
ſome in the whole courſe of their life haue not attained to ſuch exact and
perfect pro­nuntiation therein, nor ſo framed their mouthes in ſpeaking but
that they might eaſily be diſcerned and diſcouered to be ſtrangers of another
Country: Now there­fore ſeeing in other ſciences leſſe vſefull, the profeſſors
of them haue ſet them downe in exact propoſitions; I cannot ſee (eſpeci­ally
conſidering how neceſſary a thing true pronuntiation is both for the grace of
the [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=6) ſpeech, as
for the commodity and aduan­tage it may beget to the common-wealth as well at
home, as in commerce and traf­fique had in forraine parts with other na­tions
by conferring with them in their own languages) how in this it can be
accounted vnneceſſary to ſeeke a meanes whereby to remedy theſe manifold
abuſes and imper­fections in ſpeech and writing, which are the grounds by
which all other knowledges are taught and maintained, That by ſome ruled arte
the true pronuntiation of lan­guages might be learned, which hitherto is
taught either by roat, or written in ſuch a confuſed manner as cannot but
ſeeme vnreaſonable to any mans vnderſtanding, howſoeuer allowed of and
approued by con­tinuance of cuſtome. But here perchance I may be charged with
preſumption both in reſpect of my ſelfe, and in reſpect of my yeers, in that I
profeſſe to be a teacher of a ſcience to others, hauing as it were but newly
learned my letters my ſelfe: Where­unto I anſwer, that I learned not this my
arte out of the books and workes of lear­ned men, neither would my ſmall
meanes [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=7) afford
me to be acquainted with their great volumes, only out of a volume of Gods
owne guift and making did I take this ſmall Manuſcript, euen to all men hath
he giuen one of the ſame impreſſion, whereby the truth hereof may be examined:
yet certainly the vnripeneſſe of my yeeres, and want of other learning, had
wholly with­held me from the publiſhing thereof, ſo that it might haue died
with my ſelfe and haue benefited no man, had I not cōſidered that euery one
of what eſtate, degree, or condi­tion ſoeuer, is bound in ducty to reueale
whatſoeuer may be beneficiall to his coun­try; aſſuring my-ſelfe that God doth
not giue either knowledge or riches to any pri­uate perſon meerly for his owne
particular vſe, but imploieth thoſe on whom he be­ſtoweth ſuch guifts, as
Ciſternes and con­duits to conuey and impart them likewiſe to others. Yet he
therein ſo prouideth that themſelues alſo be neuer empty. This con­ſideration
therefore cauſed me to thinke it were far better, though with boldneſſe to ſet
foorth that portion of knowledge which God had giuen me, then with a di­ſtard-
like [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=7) feare for
the cauſes afore re­membred to conceale the benefit; Hauing therefore laboured
to finde out the true ground of the ſpeech, that the manifold errors therein
might be made manifeſt, and ſo auoided. To the intent I might in ſuch ſort as
God had enabled me, doe ſome-what for the common good of my Country, and adde
ſomething to my pro­feſſion, I haue framed this ſmall treatiſe of
pronuntiation, and digested it into two parts. In the firſt by certaine
propoſitions applying my ſelfe to ſet foorth the elements and parts of the
voice: In the ſecond part appointing for euery ſimple ſound in mans voice
ſundry letters and characters, that the voice being thereunto once committed
may by any (who ſhall know the vſe of them) without any other expoſitor or
in­ſtructor be aptly and truly pronounced vp­on view of the writing, how
ſtrange ſoeuer the language be: yet ſeeing my intent and purpoſe herein is
not, that I would any waies goe about, or deſire to alter the order of
letters, which of ſo long time hath been vſed and allowed of, wherein ſo many
wor­thy [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=8) works
haue been imprinted, knowing that could not be brought to paſſe without much
difficulty, and greater preiudice then my ſimple iudgement can diſcerne. I
would not therefore that any man ſhould ſo much looke into or reſpect the
characters which I herein vſe, or the manner of the new pla­cing, diſpoſing,
or naming of them, as the mateer and ſcope whereto I intend them, which is,
that I might with the eaſieſt way and meeteſt order, ſo paint out euery part
of mans voice, that euery one might be ſe­uerally diſcerned from other, and
that the pronunciation of euery different language which hitherto is chiefly
taught by word of mouth, might in a more certain māner be dedeciphered with
the pen, wherby any that are deſirous that way, may not only the ſooner learne
the experience of any for­raine language, but may alſo with more eaſe, and in
a ſhorter time attaine to the true pronuntiation thereof. For albeit any man
in teaching of his owne country lan­guage, doth by his owne ſpeech giue the
ve­ry true and abſolute touch of pronuntiati­on, yet by reaſon of the
ſwiftneſſe of the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=8) voice,
vnwonted compoſition of the parts thereof and dull apprehenſion of the eares,
the ſame is not eaſily and read ly perceiued to a ſtranger: but the ſimple and
diſtinct parts, and members of the whole voice (which are the grounds of all
languages) being once certainly knowne, and caſt into viſible letters,
(howſoeuer the order of an vnknown language doth diuerſly diſperſe and mix
them together) the eye by it's quicke and ſharpe ſight doth ſuddenly
ap­prehend them, and thereby teach the mouth of one altogether ignorant, &
vnacquain­ted with ſuch language as aptly and truly to pronounce it, as any
one to whom the ſame is naturally the ſpeech, wherein he hath been alwayes
trained and inſtructed, from the very time of his infancy, (this only
excepted, that the vnaccuſtomed mixture of the ſounds of the voice may at
firſt cauſe a more ſlow vtterance.) And, for that cauſe hauing gathered
together diuers letters and characters of ſundry ſorts and formes, I found
none ſo meet (in reſpect of the accents which are neceſſarily to be placed
ouer them) as thoſe which
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=9) were ſhorteſt,
and of an equall length, and ſo hauing my ſelfe framed ſome few, I took the
reſt to make vp my number, and as the beſt for my purpoſe out of the Roman and
Secretary letters, but haue not ſo vſed, and placed them in the ſame ſence and
order as they were formerly in their owne Alpha­bets; but haue diuerſly
diſpoſed of them ac­cordingly as ſeemed fitteſt for my vſe, and the order of
the worke did beſt require; And touching ſuch places wherein I haue bin
compelled in reſpect of the order of the worke to ſpeak of matters incident to
mu­ſick, for that they are not much pertinent to this art of pronuntiation, I
haue there­fore but lightly and briefly touched them, referring ſuch matters
to the teachers and profeſſors of that ſcience.

And thus hauing ſhewed the occaſion order, and intent of this my treatiſe,
being the fruit of wearied times between other labors, I cōmit it to the view
& practiſe of thoſe, that ſhall think it meet for their vſe or experience,
leauing theſe few verſes to plead my excuſe, if any errors haue hapned by
reaſon of my great want of learning.

ROBERT ROBINSON.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=9)

Candide des veniam, placidū nec contra [...]e frontem,

Inficiat chartas, ſi qua litura meas:

Nec mihi ſollucem, nec praebuit aura calorē

Me tenebris cinctum frigida zona premit:

Sin redeat mihi fauſta dies, ſi deni (que) Phoebus

Lumine, percutiat lumina noſtra, ſuo:

Tum nitar meliora ſequi, tū menda viciſſim

Tot mihi lux a biget, quot mihi lux aperit.

## Table of contents

  * To his Booke.
  * A Preface declaring the great benefit of Speech and writing, and the order of this Treatiſe.
  * 1\. Vox Audienda, Or THE ELEMENTS OF MANS Voice.
    * 1.1. What the Voice is.
    * 1.2. What a ſimple ſound is?
    * 1.3. What a ſound is, and of the efficient thereof.
    * 1.4. Of the efficient cauſes of this motion and reſtraint.
    * 1.5. Of the primary and ſpirituall cauſe of this motion and reſtraint.
    * 1.6. Of the inſtrumentall cauſes of this motion.
    * 1.7. Of the inſtrumentall cauſes of the reſtraint of this motion.
    * 1.8. How the diuerſity of ſounds vſed in mans voice happen.
    * 1.9. Of the generall parts of the ſounds in mans voice ſo occaſioned.
    * 1.10. Of the number of ſounds of different quantity.
    * 1.11. Of two ſeuerall orders wherein theſe ſounds are different in quantity.
    * 1.12. Of the place of framing of the ſounds, different in quantity, and the cauſe of their different heights.
    * 1.13. Of the reaſon of their different meaſure of time.
    * 1.14. Of the number of ſounds of different quality whereof the ſpeech is framed.
    * 1.15. Of the framing of the speeche by the ſaid ſounds of different quality.
    * 1.16. What a ſyllable is.
    * 1.17. What a word is.
    * 1.18. What the speech is.
    * 1.19. Of the generall diuiſion of the ſimple ſounds of different quality.
    * 1.20. Of the nature, place and office of the vitall ſound.
    * 1.21. Of vowels, what they are and of their nature.
    * 1.22. Of the number of vowells.
    * 1.23. Of their different manner of framing.
    * 1.24. Of the generall framing of the ſhort vowells.
    * 1.25. Of the generall framing of the long vowells.
    * 1.26. Of the number of places wherein the vowells are framed.
    * 1.27. Of the framing of the firſt ſhort vowell.
    * 1.28. Of the framing of the firſt long vowell.
    * 1.29. Of the framing of the ſecond ſhort vowell.
    * 1.30. Of the ſecond long vowell.
    * 1.31. Of the third ſhort vowell.
    * 1.32. Of the third long vowell.
    * 1.33. Of the fourth ſhort vowell.
    * 1.34. Of the fourth long vowell.
    * 1.35. Of the fift ſhort vowell.
    * 1.36. Of the fift long vowell.
    * 1.37. Of Conſonants. What are Conſonants.
    * 1.38. Of the number of Conſonants.
    * 1.39. Of the ſeuerall orders of framing of the conſonants in the mouth.
    * 1.40. Of the particular number of each ſort.
    * 1.41. Of the number of places wherein theſe thirteen conſonants in the mouth are framed.
    * 1.42. Of the firſt place.
    * 1.43. Of the ſecond place.
    * 1.44. Of the third place.
    * 1.45. What are mutes? of the order of their framing, and of their property.
    * 1.46. Of the ſemimutes.
    * 1.47. Of the greater obſtricts.
    * 1.48. Of the leſſer obſtricts.
    * 1.49. Of the peculiar.
    * 1.50. Of the manner of framing, and of the nature of the conſonant in the breaſt.
  * 2\. Vox Videnda. Which is writing, or the Characters of Mans voice.
    * 2.1. What is writing.
    * 2.2. Of the generall diſtinction and naming of the Characters of the voyce.
    * 2.3. Of the particular naming and diſtinction of cliffes.
    * 2.4. Of the particular naming and diſtinction of notes.
    * 2.5. Of the particular naming and diſtinction of letters.
    * 2.6. Of the order and ſeuerall formes of the characters for the parts of mans voice.
    * 2.7. Of the formes of the letters wherewith I haue noted the vowels according to the order of their places.
    * 2.8. The ſcale of vowells.
    * 2.9. Of the formes of the letters which I haue obſerued for the conſonants in the mouth, according to the order of their places.
    * 2.10. Of the forme of the letter for the aſpirate.
    * 2.11. Of the diſtinguiſhing of ſillables.
    * 2.12. Of the manner of placing of the aſpirate.
    * 2.13. Of Tones.
    * 2.14. Kinds of vtterance of each ſillable.
    * 2.15. Of the figuring of the tones.
  * 3\. Breue de voce poema Latinum in nouo ordine literarum ante edocto, iuxta Anglicanam noſtram pronuntiationem conſcriptum.
  * 4\. Idem poema in ordine literarum modò vſitato.
  * Appendix A Epilogus.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=10)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=10)

## 1\. Vox Audienda, Or THE ELEMENTS OF MANS Voice.

### 1.1. What the Voice is.

THE Voice is a compo­ſition of diuers ſimple ſounds intermixed to­gether.

### 1.2. What a ſimple ſound is?

A ſimple ſound is the leaſt part or member of the voice, framed in one only
place, and by one only manner proper to it ſelfe.

### 1.3. What a ſound is, and of the efficient thereof.

A ſound is an accident effected by
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=11) the
oppoſition of theſe two contra­ries, namely motion and reſtraint: motion of
the ayre out of the inward parts of the body, and reſtraint of it in its
motion.

### 1.4. Of the efficient cauſes of this motion and reſtraint.

The cauſes of this motion and re­ſtraint are primary and ſecondary: the
primary is ſpirituall, the ſeconda­ry is inſtrumentall, the ſpiritual cauſe is
alike to both: the inſtrumentall cauſes are different, ſome proper to motion,
and others proper to re­ſtraint.

### 1.5. Of the primary and ſpirituall cauſe of this motion and reſtraint.

The ſpirituall cauſe is the minde, which God hauing made it moſt like to his
glorious image, hath placed in this Microcoſmos of mans body, as a principall
ruler thereof vnder him,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=11) giuing it
ſuch power ouer all the parts of the body, that as God him­ſelfe is the firſt
mouer of the whole vniuerſall world, who only by his in­finit power appointeth
both an or­derly courſe and limitation in the motion of all his workes, ſo
himſelfe hath granted and ordained: that the minde of man ſhould bee the firſt
moouer of this little world of the bo­dy, wherein it is incloſed, and of
eue­ry member and particle of it made fit for motion, and hath giuen it a
liber­ty, to be accompted for to order, re­ſtraine, and limit thoſe motions as
it ſelfe liſteth.

### 1.6. Of the inſtrumentall cauſes of this motion.

They are the lungs and hollow parts of the body, wherein the ayre is
contained, which being drawne to­gether by the motion, or rather the will of
the mind, doe thereby expell the ayre, and cauſe it to be mooued
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=12) through
diuers paſſages, as the throat, mouth, and noſtrils.

### 1.7. Of the inſtrumentall cauſes of the reſtraint of this motion.

They are the breaſt, throat, pallat, gums, tongue, lips and noſtrils,
ſtop­ping or hindering the free paſſage of the ayre in it's motion.

### 1.8. How the diuerſity of ſounds vſed in mans voice happen.

They happen vpon theſe three occa­ſions.

  * Firſt by the diuerſity of the inſtruments of reſtraint.
  * Secondly, by reaſon of the diuers places of reſtraint.
  * And thirdly in re­ſpect of the different manner of reſtraint, both by the ſeuerall inſtruments, and in the ſeuerall places.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=12)

### 1.9. Of the generall parts of the ſounds in mans voice ſo occaſioned.

There are two generall partes, ſome different only in quantity, and are moſt
pertinēt to Muſique, others only in quality, which are moſt ne­ceſſary for
ſpeech.

### 1.10. Of the number of ſounds of different quantity.

They are in number vncertaine, to wit, in ſome men more, and in ſome men
leſſe.

### 1.11. Of two ſeuerall orders wherein theſe ſounds are different in
quantity.

The ſounds of different quantity are two-fold: firſt, in reſpect of their
different height of ſound, ſecondly by reaſon of their different meaſure of
time, wherein they are ſounded.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=13)

### 1.12. Of the place of framing of the ſounds, different in quantity, and
the cauſe of their different heights.

They are cauſed by the inſtrument of the throat, which according to the
greater or leſſer reſtraining of the ayre, paſſing through in one and the ſame
place, doth cauſe ſometimes a more ſhrill and lowd noiſe, ſomtimes a more baſe
and deep ſound, but ne­uer differeth the quality more or leſſe.

### 1.13. Of the reaſon of their different meaſure of time.

It is becauſe they are ſounded by a different continuance of the moti­on of
the breath, ſometimes beeing finiſhed in a ſhorter time, and ſome­times
continued to a longer.

### 1.14. Of the number of ſounds of different quality whereof the ſpeech is
framed.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=13) They are in
number certaine, to wit fiue and twenty, and by their ſe­uerall inſtruments
and places are di­uerſly framed in ſuch ſort as after­wards ſhall be ſpoken
of.

### 1.15. Of the framing of the speeche by the ſaid ſounds of different
quality.

Of the ſimple ſounds aforeſaid, of different quality are framed ſillables, of
ſillables, words, and of words the whole order of ſpeech.

### 1.16. What a ſyllable is.

A ſillable is the pronouncing of one of the ſimple ſounds of different quality
by it ſelfe alone, or of two or more of them orderly framed and knit together,
without any inter­miſſion of time put between them.

### 1.17. What a word is.

A word is either one ſillable alone,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=14) or els two or
mo ſillables hauing a very ſmall intermiſſion of time and ſtay of the breath
between euery of them, by which any one thing con­ceiued in the minde, or
perceiued through the ſences is diſtinctly na­med and knowne from others.

### 1.18. What the speech is.

The ſpeech is an orderly knitting together of diuers words, whereby any thing
forethought of in the mind is ſenſibly expreſſed to the eare.

### 1.19. Of the generall diuiſion of the ſimple ſounds of different quality.

They are of three generall kindes, which for diſtinction ſake I haue na­med by
ſeuerall names, one of which in reſpect of its office I call a vitall ſound,
the others in reſpect of their ſeuerall natures, ſome vowels, and ſome
conſonants, as they haue been anciently termed: of which in order ſhall be
ſpoken.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=14)

### 1.20. Of the nature, place and office of the vitall ſound.

The vitall ſound is that which was ſpoken of before, whereof all the ſounds of
different quantitie doe ariſe, and it is framed in the paſſage of the throat,
and it is to be noted, that this ſound is onely vſed in com­poſition, with the
others of different qualities to expreſſe them more liue­ly to the eares of
the auditors: for without the helpe of this vitall ſound all the other parts
of the voice would be but as a ſoft whiſpering, and as this ſound is ſo
helpfull to the others of different quality, ſo are they of dif­ferent quality
alſo no leſſe excellent and helpfull to the ſounds of diffe­rent quantities,
which are ſo framed of that vitall ſound bredde in the throat, ſo that by the
compoſition of both ſorts together, the one is made a liuely helper to the
other, whereby that part of the voyce appertaining
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=15) to ſpeech is
made moſt apt for the ſame, and the other appertaining to melody is made moſt
pleaſing, and thereby it commeth to paſſe, that the voice of man is worthily
accompted more excellent, then any artificiall muſicke hitherto inuented.

### 1.21. Of vowels, what they are and of their nature.

The vowells in reſpect of the re­ſtraint of the motion of the ayre, are the
leaſt extreame of all the other ſounds, they hauing a more freer paſſage of
the ayre then the reſt, ſo that in them the breath is moſt light­ly hindred,
and their nature is ſuch that they cannot be ioyned in a ſilla­ble with
themſelues, but with conſo­nants they may, ſo that if two or mo vowells come
together, they of ne­ceſſity are all different ſillables, ex­cept onely
certaine ſillables ariſing of them, which are called dipthongs, and are cauſed
by a continuance of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=15) the breath
from any of the former, vntill it finiſh it motion in the place of the laſt
long vowel, and not other­wiſe.

### 1.22. Of the number of vowells.

They are in number ten, and are euery one of different quality, both in
reſpect of their different manner of framing, and of their diuers places
wherein they are ſo framed.

### 1.23. Of their different manner of framing.

They are framed in two ſorts, which are diſtinguiſhed by ſhort and long
vowels, both in reſpect of the diffe­rence of the time wherein they are
vttered, as alſo becauſe of the diffe­rent organes through which they paſſe,
being in ſome ſhorter and in ſome longer.

### 1.24. Of the generall framing of the ſhort vowells.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=16) The ſhort
vowels haue their paſſage through certaine ſhort organes, fra­med by the
placing of the tongue in ſundry partes of the roofe of the mouth.

### 1.25. Of the generall framing of the long vowells.

They are framed by the breath paſſing through ſomewhat longer organes, made
alſo by the help of the tongue, by placing of it in ſeuerall parts of the
roofe of the mouth.

### 1.26. Of the number of places wherein the vowells are framed.

They are fiue: the firſt taking its beginning in the innermoſt part of the
roofe or pallat, and ſo the reſt continuing forward, each one order­ly in his
degree to the laſt place, being more neere to the outmoſt part of the roofe,
and in euery one of theſe fiue places are framed, one ſhort and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=16) one long
vowell, the particular or­der of framing of which vowells in their diſtinct
places hereafter enſueth.

### 1.27. Of the framing of the firſt ſhort vowell.

It is framed in the innermoſt part of the roofe of the mouth by the help of
the tongue, making of ſmall organe for the paſſage of the ayre.

### 1.28. Of the framing of the firſt long vowell.

It is framed in the ſame place by the helpe of the tongue, extending &
lengthning of the organe through which the breath paſſeth almoſt to the place
of the next ſhort vowell.

### 1.29. Of the framing of the ſecond ſhort vowell.

It is framed ſomewhat forwarder in the roofe by the help of the tongue making
alſo a ſmall organe for the paſſage of the ayre.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=17)

### 1.30. Of the ſecond long vowell.

It is framed in the place of the ſhort, but paſſeth through a longer organe
almoſt extended to the place of the next ſhort vowell.

### 1.31. Of the third ſhort vowell.

It is framed ſomewhat forwarder in the roofe by the helpe of a ſmall organe
framed by the tongue.

### 1.32. Of the third long vowell.

It is framed in the place of 'its ſhort, but by the helpe of a longer organe
extended almoſt to the place of the next ſhort vowell.

### 1.33. Of the fourth ſhort vowell.

It is framed alſo ſomewhat for­warder and neerer to the outmoſt part of the
roofe paſſing through a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=17) ſhort or
ſmall organe framed by the tongue.

### 1.34. Of the fourth long vowell.

It is framed alſo in the place of 'tis ſhort, but by the helpe oa longer
organe framed by the tongue, and ex­tended almoſt to the place of the next
ſhort vowell.

### 1.35. Of the fift ſhort vowell.

It is framed in a ſmall organe made by the helpe of the tongue in a place alſo
ſomewhat neerer to the outmoſt part of the roofe.

### 1.36. Of the fift long vowell.

It is framed in a longer organe, made in the ſame place by the helpe of the
tongue, almoſt extended to the inward place of the conſonants, which are
framed in the mouth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=18)

### 1.37. Of Conſonants. What are Conſonants.

The breath in them is more ſtrict­ly hindered, and they be ſuch as may be
ioyned two or more in one ſilla­ble, either by themſelues, or with a vowell or
dip-thong.

### 1.38. Of the number of Conſonants.

They are in number fourteen, and euery of them of different quality, in
reſpect of their different manner of framing, and of their different places,
wherein they are ſo framed; thirteene of which conſonants are framed in the
mouth, and one onely in the breaſt. And firſt of thoſe in the mouth.

### 1.39. Of the ſeuerall orders of framing of the conſonants in the mouth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=18) They are
framed in fiue ſorts, which I haue named by ſeuerall names, as mutes,
ſeminutes, greater obſtricts, leſſer obſtricts and a peculiar.

### 1.40. Of the particular number of each ſort.

Of mutes there are three, of ſemi­nutes three: of the greater obſtricts three;
of the leſſer obſtricts three, and one only peculiar.

### 1.41. Of the number of places wherein theſe thirteen conſonants in the
mouth are framed.

They are framed in three places or regions which may be called the out­ward,
middle, and inward regions, and in euery of theſe places are ſeue­rally framed
one mute, one ſemmiute, one greater obſtrict and one leſſer obſtrict, and in
the middle region the peculiar alſo is partly framed.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=19)

### 1.42. Of the firſt place.

The firſt or outmoſt region is the outmoſt part of the mouth, namely the lips,
wherein are framed fower conſonants, to wit, one mute, one ſe­mimute, one
greater obſtrict, and one leſſer obſtrict.

### 1.43. Of the ſecond place.

The ſecond or middle region is the vpper gummes or outmoſt part of the roofe
of the mouth, encloſed by the helpe of the tippe and edges of the tongue,
wherein are framed fiue conſonants; namely one mute, one ſe­mimute, one
greater obſtrict, one leſſer obſtrict, and the peculiar.

### 1.44. Of the third place.

The third or inward region is a more inward part of the mouth in­cloſed with
the flat of the tongue, ve­ry neer vnto the laſt place of vowels, wherein are
likewiſe framed fower conſonants: that is, one mute, one ſe­minute,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=19) one greater
obſtrict, and one leſſer obſtrict.

### 1.45. What are mutes? of the order of their framing, and of their
property.

The mutes, in reſpect of the re­ſtraint of the motion of the ayre, are the
greateſt extreame of all the other ſounds, the ayre in them being more
ſtrictly hindered, then in the reſt: and they are framed by the quite
ſtop­ping and cutting off of the breath from 'its motion, which cauſeth a kind
of dumbe ſound to be vttered, and they are made three differents, in reſpect
of the three different places wherein they are ſtopped. And theſe dumbe ſounds
cannot well bee vtte­red, vnles they be ioyned with ſome other ſounds to
expreſſe themſelues by.

### 1.46. Of the ſemimutes.

The ſemimutes are: cauſed by the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=20) quite
ſtopping of the breath from the paſſage of it through the mouth, ſo that in
their owne proper places of reſtraint they giue no ſound at all, but by a
contrary courſe, hauing a re­ſtrictiue paſſage through the noſtrils, they
thereby admit of a ſound, And they are made three differents alſo, by the
three places of their ſtopping.

### 1.47. Of the greater obſtricts.

They are framed by the ſtopping of the breath not with a full reſtraint, but
leauing ſome ſmall paſſage for it, whereby it may bee breathed out at the
mouth, And they being not ſo much reſtrained as the mutes, nor hauing ſo free
a paſſage as the leſſer obſtricts, are as a meane to thoſe two extreames, and
they are alſo three differents, by reaſon of their three ſe­uerall places of
conſtruction.

### 1.48. Of the leſſer obſtricts.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=20) They are
framed after the ſame manner as the greater, onely differ in this, that
ſomewhat greater and freer paſſage is admitted to them; yet they haue not ſo
free a paſſage as the vowells, but are as a meane betweene the vowells and
greater obſtricts, and they are alſo three differents, in reſpect of their
three ſeuerall places of conſtruction.

### 1.49. Of the peculiar.

It is framed by a ſpeciall manner onely proper to it ſelfe, by the ſtop­ping
of the breath with the tip of the tongue in the outermoſt part of the roofe or
middle region of conſonāts, yet leauing it two ſeuerall paſſages between the
edges of the inward gums, and both the edges and ſides of the tongue, through
which the breath paſſing, and beating againſt the cheekes, from thence iſſueth
out at the mouth.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=21)

### 1.50. Of the manner of framing, and of the nature of the conſonant in the
breaſt.

This ſound in reſpect of the order of framing of it, differeth not from a
mute, but to diſtinguiſh it from the other mutes framed in the mouth, I haue
named it (as heretofore it hath been called) an aſpirate, and it is cau­ſed by
a reſtraint and ſuddain ſtay of the motion of the breath in the breaſt, before
it comes to the paſſage of the throat, which giueth ſo ſmall a noiſe, as it
can ſcarce ſenſibly be diſ­cerned. And it being vſed before or after any of
the other conſonants ſcarce ſheweth foorth it ſelfe, but cauſeth thoſe with
whom it is ioy­ned, to ſeeme different ſounds from their true quality, yet
with ſome kind of reſemblance thereunto.

Finis de voce audienda.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=21)

## 2\. Vox Videnda. Which is writing, or the Cha­racters of Mans voice.

### 2.1. What is writing.

VVRiting is an artificiall fra­ming of certaine markes and Characters
different in forme and ſhape for euery ſeuerall ſound in mans voice, whereby
each ſimple ſound hauing a proper mark appoin­ted to it ſelfe, may by the ſame
be as apparantly ſeene to the eye, as the ſound it ſelfe is ſenſibly diſcerned
by the eares.

### 2.2. Of the generall diſtinction and naming of the Characters of the
voyce.

They are generally diſtinct, and named by cliffes, notes, and letters.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=22) The cliffes
and notes for the ſounds of different quantity pertinent to muſique, that is,
the cliffes to expreſſe their ſeuerall heights, the notes to expreſſe their
different meaſures of time, and the letters for the expreſ­ſing of the ſounds
of different quali­ty pertinent to ſpeech.

### 2.3. Of the particular naming and di­ſtinction of cliffes.

They are particularly named ac­cordingly as is ſet downe in the ſcale of
muſique, as gamut, are, and the reſt.

### 2.4. Of the particular naming and diſtin­ction of notes.

They are called of muſitions by ſeuerall names, as crotchets, quauers, minoms,
ſemi-briefes, and ſuch like, ac­cording to the different meaſure of time,
wherein their ſounds are con­tinued.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=22)

### 2.5. Of the particular naming and diſtinction of letters.

All Letters are in ſome ſort di­ſtinctly named by their owne ſimple sounds,
except onely thoſe appointed for the aſpirate & mutes, which can­not wel be
vttered vnles they be ioy­ned in a compoſed sillable with ſome other ſoūd;
yet for the better expreſ­ſing of them, in reſpect that the ſhort vowells by
reaſon of their ſlender and vnſteady organe giue but a wa­uering and
vncertaine ſound, and of the consonants, the aſpirate and mutes of themſelues,
by reaſon of the quite ſtopping of the breath in them, giue ſcarce any ſound
at all, and the reſt by reaſon of the ſtreight paſſage of the breath but a
dull & muttering kind of ſound. It will therefore bee requiſite in the naming
of them to ioyne the ſhort Vowells in a ſillable ending with ſome ſetled
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=23) conſonant,
and the conſonants in a ſillable beginning or ending with ſome of the vowells,
hauing a more clerer paſſage, that by the cōtrarieties of each ſort being
ioyned and placed together, both may bee made the more perſpicuous and
ſenſible to the eare, euen as contrary colours layd together ſeeme more
apparant, and are better diſcerned to the eye; that therefore euery letter
might haue a certaine and perfect name, I haue diſ­poſed and ordered them as
follow­eth: The ſhort vowells, to expreſſe the names of their ſeuerall
letters, to be ſeuerally ioyned with the aſpirate and to enioy the firſt part
of the ſil­lable, the long vowells being very perfect ſounds, to be themſelues
the names of their owne letters. Of con­ſonants, the aſpirat to be ſet before,
and ioyned to the firſt long vowell. The mutes to bee ioyned in this or­der,
that in the inward region to the ſecond long vowell, that in the mid­dle
region, to the third long vowell;
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=23) and that in
the outward region to the fourth long vowell. In which compoſed ſillables the
mutes to be firſt pronounced, and according to this order both the greater &
leſſer obſtricts to be alſo ioyned to the ſame three laſt mentioned long
vow­ells. But the ſemimutes to be put af­ter, and ioyned to certaine ſhort
vowells, that in the inward region to the ſecond ſhort vowell, that in the
middle region to the third ſhort vowell, and that in the outward re­gion to
the fourth ſhort vowell: And laſtly, the peculiar to be ioyned in the latter
part of a ſillable compoſed of it ſelfe, and the third ſhort vowell to
expreſſe alſo the names of their ſe­uerall letters, which are heereafter
formed.

### 2.6. Of the order and ſeuerall formes of the characters for the parts of
mans voice.

For the ſound in the throat, ſeeing
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=24) it is
neceſſarily in continuall com­poſition with the reſt, to vſe any let­ter or
marke for it, would but make writing extraordinary tedious, and worke little
or no effect, and for that cauſe I haue appointed it no chara­cter at all. But
for the ſounds of different quantity ariſing of the ſame, they haue
excellently of long time been obſerued of Muſitians, by placing higher or
lower (as the caſe doth require) of ſundry formed cliffes, as 𝄢 𝄡 𝄞
ſignifying thereby the faut, C: ſolfavt, and G ſolrevt cliffes, that are
chiefly in vſe, vpon certaine parralell lynes drawne one aboue a­nother to
expres the height or depth of their ſounds, in ſuch and the like ſort, as is
ſet downe in the three firſt ſections of the enſuing dyagram, and by ſundry
notes thus figured, 톼텮 톺텥 톹텥 𝆹 with diuers others, framed for the quauers,
Crotchets, Mynoms, Semi­briefes, and the like, to expreſſe the length or
ſhortneſſe of the time,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=24) wherein their
ſounds are to be con­tinued, which after the placing of any of the cliffes to
guide the taking of their true heights, they alſo ſet high­er or lower, and
ſeuerally diſperſe vpon and between the ſame lines, accordingly as the ayre of
the mu­ſique doth require, in ſuch and other like manner, as in the fourth and
laſt ſection of the ſame diagram they are hereafter placed.

[...]

### 2.7. Of the formes of the letters wherewith I haue noted the vowels
accor­ding to the order of their places.

In the firſt place.

  * The ſhort vowell I haue figured thus.— [...]
  * The long vowell.— [...]

In the ſecond place.

  * The ſhort vowell.— [...]
  * The long vowell.— [...]

In the third place.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=25)The ſhort vowell.— [...]
  * The long vowell.— [...]

In the fourth place.

  * The ſhort vowell.— [...]
  * The long vowell.— [...]

In the fift place.

  * The ſhort vowell.— [...]
  * The long vowell.— [...]

For the more manifeſt demonſtra­tion of the conſtruction of the vow­ells, I
haue here deuiſed and placed this enſuing figure.

### 2.8. The ſcale of vowells.

_[figure]_

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=25) By the
archlyne A B, is repreſen­ted the roofe of the mouth, by the point C, from
whence the fiue ſeue­rall lynes are drawne, is ſuppoſed the roote of the
tongue, by euery of thoſe lynes the tongue it ſelfe, and by the ſeuerall
angles of the ſame lynes vn­der  [...] are ſuppoſed certaine eleuations &
bendings of the tongue, which cauſe the fiue ſeuerall ſounds called ſhort
vowells, for which the ſame characters  [...] are framed, and by the ſeuerall
points vnder  [...] are ſuppoſed alſo ſeuerall eleuations of the tongue from
any one of the ſaid angles or places of the ſhort vowells, to the ſaide
ſeuerall points, whereby are made certaine longer organes, in which are framed
the fiue ſeuerall ſounds called long vowells, for which the ſaid charact­ers
[...] are appointed, and by the circle in which O is inſcribed, is to be
vnderſtood the pipe or paſſage in the throat, through which the breath
paſſeth, before it commeth to
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=26) be faſhioned
by any of the organes of the tongue, placed in the roofe of the mouth, which
in the ſaid figure are afore deſcribed.

### 2.9. Of the formes of the letters which I haue obſerued for the conſonants
in the mouth, according to the order of their places.

In the firſt or outward region.

  * For the mute I haue put this chara­cter.— [...]
  * For the ſemimute this.— [...]
  * For the greater obſtrict.— [...]
  * For the leſſer obſtrict.— [...]

In the middle region.

  * For the mute this.— [...]
  * For the ſemi-mute.— [...]
  * For the greater obſtrict.— [...]
  * For the leſſer obſtrict.— [...]
  * For the peculiar.— [...]

In the inward region.

  * For the mute this.— [...]
  * For the ſemi-mute.— [...]
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=26) For the greater obſtrict.— [...]
  * For the leſſer obſtrict.— [...]

### 2.10. Of the forme of the letter for the aſpirate.

The aſpirate I haue noted by this ſmall oblique ſtroake.— [...]

The pronuntiation of theſe three letters in this order as they heere are
placed xox by reaſon of the vicini ty of the places of conſtruction is ſo
ſpeedily performed, as that it ſeemes to be but one ſimple conſonant ſound,
nor indeed can it be diſcerned to be otherwiſe, vnleſſe by a very di­ligent
obſeruation; and becauſe the ſame is very frequent in ſpeeche, to write it ſo
often at length would be troubleſome: Therefore for breuity ſake in writing, I
haue contracted thoſe three letters falling out in that order into one
Character thus. xx

### 2.11. Of the diſtinguiſhing of ſillables.

That euery ſillable might be aptly and ſeuerally diſtinguiſhed, it is here
meet to deuiſe ſome certaine accent
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=27) or marke to
bee placed ouer the firſt letter of the ſillable, to ſignifie where it takes
beginning. For that accent therefore I haue appointed onely a little point
thus (.) where there is no note of aſpiration in any part of the ſillable,
otherwiſe I haue expreſſed it with a ſmall ſtroake parralell to the heads of
the letters thus (-) where the ſillable hath an aſpired note.

### 2.12. Of the manner of placing of the aſpirate.

The aſpirate note being for the leaſt of all the ſimple ſounds, is as it were
too ſmall to bee accompted or placed amongſt the other letters, yet too big to
be tearmed an accent. Ne­uertheleſſe for that it is of ſo frequent vſe amongſt
the other letters, to a­uoid tediouſnes in writing, and for eaſe of worke, I
haue appointed it (as aforeſaid) this ſmall Character ( [...]) to be fixed to
either or both ends of the long accent, as the caſe ſhall require in this
order, to wit, if a ſillable be­gin with an aſpirat, and end not with it
(which I call former aſpired) then
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=27) to fix it at
the hither end of the accent towards the left hand thus ( [...]) if a ſillable
begin without an aſpirate, and end aſpired (which I call latter aſpired) thē
to fix at it the further end of the accent next vnto the right hād thus (
[...]) and if both beginning and ending of a ſillable be aſpired, which I call
double aſpired, then to fix it at both ends of the accent thus. ( [...])

### 2.13. Of Tones.

There is yet one thing more, very neceſſary to be known and carefully to be
obſerued in pronuntiation, to wit, the eleuation and depreſſion of the voyce
vſed in ſpeech, being in manner different from the riſing and falling of the
voyce in the ſounds of different quantity ſpoken of before, and this kind of
lifting vp and de­preſſing of the voyce is cauſed by a contraction of the
lungs and hollow parts of the body, wherein the ayre is incloſed, ſometimes
being more ſpee­dy ſending foorth the ayre through 'its paſſages with a ſwift
motion, [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=28)
whereby the ſound of the ſpeech is made more forceable to be heard, and
ſometimes being more ſlow, & more weakly preſſing forth the ayre, wher­by the
ſound of the ſpeech is ſome­what leſſened, and by this different motion and
expulſion of the ayre, three kinds of vtterances vſuall in the pronuntiation
of words doe ariſe all differing in proportion, which Grammarians generally
doe call toni, and particularly diſtinguiſh them,

  * Acutus being the higheſt,
  * Grauis being the loweſt,
  * Circumflexus being the meane.

### 2.14. Kinds of vtterance of each ſillable.

And in the continued courſe of the ſpeeche two ſillables following together
are neuer pronounced both in one tone, but each ſillable is al­wayes vttered
either higher or lower then the laſt preceding in the word or ſentence.

### 2.15. Of the figuring of the tones.

They are thus figured by Gramma­rians, namely the acute or higheſt tone
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=28) by an oblique
ſtroke aſcending to­wards the right hand in this manner, (´) the loweſt tone
by an oblike ſtroke deſcending towards the right hand thus (`) and the
circumflex being the meane between the other two by both the ſtrokes ioyned
together with the points downward thus, (^) which tones it is moſt conuenient
to place ſo neer as may be at the begin­ning of each ſillable; but this
circum­flex note I wholly omit, and for eaſe of worke onely vſe the other two,
ſo that any ſillable hauing no tone mar­ked ouer it may be taken for the
cir­cumflex or mean between the higheſt & loweſt. And if either of theſe two
tones happen to fall out in a ſillable wholly vnaſpired, then that ſo hap­ning
being placed ouer the firſt letter of the ſillable may ſerue to ſhew the
beginning of the ſillable, in ſtead of this litle point of diſtinction (.)
which before I thought meet to obſerue, and in ſuch caſe that point is to be
omit­tde.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=29)

## 3\. Breue de voce poema Latinum in nouo ordine li­terarum ante edocto,
iuxta Anglicanam noſtram pronuntiationem conſcriptum.

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=29) [...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[...]

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=30)

## 4\. Idem poema in ordine literarum modò vſitato.

PArua licet, tenuiſ (que) licet, mihi magna poteſtas:

Per terram victrix per mare ſum domina,

Quem calor & frigus cingant, mihi ſub­iacet  [...]er,

Aequè vt participem, ſic Deus inſtituit.

Non mihi magna cohors, mea ſi quadrata caterua,

Quin (que) tibi ſolùm praeſtat vbi (que) latus,

Quos ſi dux ſapiens nectat ſimùl ordine recto.

Sunt facileſ (que) boni, ſunt rigidi (que) boni:

Hos ducit ſi quandò expers ratione, re­miſſi.

Barbari, & inſulſi terribileſ (que) forent:

Qualis ego, tantae cui vires? nomina cunctis

Impoſui, nomen VOX quo (que) fingo mihi;

Mentis ego interpres, artis cunctaeque Magiſtra,

Expoſitrix velox diſcriminis varij.

Doctrinae radix caelos & tartara ram [...]i.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=30) Tangunt &
fructus mors modo, vita modo;

Me famam Latium (que) ſagax, me Graecia docta,

Me tenuit primum, ſancta Iudaea decus.

Et (Ioue propitio) me magna Britannia Romam

Concuſſit tetram, pandit & inſcitiam:

Hoc tantum reliquis, liceat mihi dicere miſſis:

Non mihi ſit rector, qui ſibi non dominus.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=31)

## Appendix A Epilogus.

VImina non vltravolucris, nec vincta catenam

It canis, & fraenum triſte reducit equum.

Mens infauſta nimis triplici quae carcere clauſa eſt.

Quid videt vt diſcat, quid videt vt doceat

En ego protulerim ſubiecta haec, proxima menti.

Ah, me plus miſerum diſcere vincla vetunt

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=2728&page=31)

[Home](/)

Robinson, Robert, Londoner.. Date: 1617  

