---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# A moral methode of ciuile policie contayninge a learned and fruictful
discourse of the institution, state and gouernment of a common weale. Abridged
oute of the co[m]mentaries of the reuerende and famous clerke, Franciscus
Patricius, Byshop of Caieta in Italye. Done out of Latine into Englishe, by
Rycharde Robinson, citizen of London. Seene and allowed. [et]c. Anno Domini
1576. — De institutione reipublicae. English. Abridgments

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=1)

A MORAL ME­thode of ciuile Policie▪ CONTAYNINGE A learned and fruictful
diſcourſe of the inſtitution, ſtate and gouernment of a common Weale. Abridged
oute of the Cōmentaries of the Reuerende and famous clerke, Franciſcus
Pa­tricius, Byſhop of Caieta in Italye.

Done out of Latine into Eng­liſhe, by Rycharde Robinſon, Citizen of London.

Seene and allowed. &c.

Anno Domini. 157 [...]. Imprinted at London in Fleete­ſtreate neare to S.
Dunſtans Churche by Thomas Marſh.

Cum Priuilegio.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=2)

## TO THE RIGHT WOR­shipfull and his ſinguler good mai­ſter Sir VVilliam Allen
Knight, Aldermā of the City of London: Rychard Robinſon his humble ſeruant &
faithfull Oratour, wiſheth long lyfe, proſpe­rous health, encreaſe of worſhip,
and perpetuall felicitie.

SALOMON that pereles prince of prudēce (right Wor­ſhyppfull) amonge his
pithye Para­bles perſwading to the ſearchīg forth of wiſdom & her fruits,
ſayeth: The path of the Righteous ſhineth as the light, that is euer brighter
& brigh­ter, vnto the perfect daye: But the waye of the vngodlye is as the
darckneſſe, they knowe not where they fall. Doubtleſſe as euery Age hath
eyther had his integritie or imperfection, wherein aſwel the felicitie, as
indempnitie of humane eſtate hath appeared, more or leſſe, to be prayſed for
the worthyneſſe, or pitied for the wretchedneſſe: So is it a true teſtimonye
of the ineſtimable loue of Godlent towardes thoſe which beinge duely directed
in the path of perfection doe nothinge digreſſe there from, but perſiſt
conſtant vnto the ende, rather encrea­ſinge then empairing their felicitie:
And on the other part, where ſuche as eyther reiecte their calling, or
withſtande the wiſedome of God, doe walcke in bywayes, and wander in wilful
darckneſſe. Who hath not ſeene that the indignation of God hath bene
euidentlye poured vppon them, ſcattringe them, & ouerthrowing theym euen in
their own wickednes? the profe whereof approcheth euen vntill theſe preſent
dayes, in ſuche ſorte among Chriſtians, that if Heraclitus the heathen
phi­loſopher were now agayne liuing, and ſhould but once ſtep out at his
dores, to view the ſtate and condicion of the tyme pre­ſent (wheras in his
dayes he wept but hy fittes, to ſee the infe­licitie of that age) I verely
ſuppoſe he would now continually
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=3) ſhede teares
abundantly without ſtinting, to ſee the ruinous de­cay of Chriſtianitie in
this later age: and I doubt alſo, if De­mocritus were again liuing, & did
behold the doinges of bothe ſortes of people in the world, whether he wold
laughe for ioye in contemplating of the proſperous eſtate of the beſt
chriſtiās, or deride the froward fortune of the moſt wicked & vngodly at this
day. Albeit throughout Chriſtendom now, what king­dome, coūtrie or cōmon
weale appeareth altogether ſo peace­able and proſperous, which hath not bene
lately, or is not pre­ſently encōbred with obſcuritie and abſurditie of lyfe,
& ma­ners? as ſome walking in the righteous path, haue their lighte
emblemiſhed by others of the houſe of Iniquitie: ſome faine would walke the
true path, and with ciuil diſſention are ſepe­rated frō their godly purpoſes.
But the greater part no doubt, refuſing light for dirkneſſe, do ſo nuzzle
thēſelues in wickedneſſe, that they laboure with malignitie, to worcke a
confuſed Chaos of chriſtianitie in general. In the midſt of whom, behold
(right Worſhipful) greately to thadmiration of the reſt, about vs▪ but more to
our priuate conſolacion, and moſt of all to the glory of thimmortal God, the
vnſpeakeable loue and eternall good grace of his bleſſing, appeareth in moſt
bright beames of his bliſful bountie, ouerſhadowing this our natiue countrie
of England, with far more ſuperabundant felicities, then many other naciōs:
namely by ſo lōg, peaceable & proſperous courſe of Chriſtes Gospell, that
infallible lampe of light, directed and protected by ſo pereles & precious a
prīceſſe, ſo godly & grati­ous a gouerneſſe, our moſt chriſtian & deareſt
ſoueraigne La­die Quene Elizabeth, aſſiſted with ſo many chriſtal ſtarres of
ſtately light vnder her, garniſhing and ſauegarding the good gouernment of
this her maieſties Realme & dominions of the ſame, with moſt holſome, godly, &
politique lawes, and conſti­tutiōs, for the cōtinual cōſeruatiō of the
publique weale ther­of vniuerſally, free frō all priuate preiudice and
publique per­turbation. This then ſo ſurpaſſing felicitie dulye conſidered,
what ſubiect is not throughly enforced, freely to vtter & ex­preſſe the
receiued cōfort which he feeleth inwardly & ſeeth
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=3) ſo
apparauntly? Verely when I the meanest member of thou­ſandes, reuolue this
benefite in my mynde, and ſee how far be­yond the expectation and deſertes of
man, the prouidence of God dealeth with vs, thus ſtil preſeruing vs, &
ſufferig others to quayle in their froward fortunes & calamities: beinge
in­wardly lightened with a certayn ſecret conſolation in the one reſpect, &
outwardly with painful pen pitying & deploring the ſtate of the other: As duty
chiefly byndeth me, I haue at this preſēt enforced my ſtudye (thoughe as a
Pigmeian in ſimple power) to practiſe ſomewhat with Hercules, or as otherwiſe
deſirous to trauel with Vliſſes, to win (albeit with wearines) ſomwhat if it
were poſſible by any good meanes, to benefit this bulwarke of beatitude (this
my natiue coūtry I mean) which with ſuch multitude of worthy practiſioners
notwithſtanding, is alreadye made famous, yet ceaſſed I not with Syſiphus to
roule the ſtone, but in ſuch penury of power as, Architas the Philoſopher
attributinge to be the appropriate diſcommodi­tie to dexteritie of witte,
which I denie to be remaynīg in me, I haue hazarded my pore hap in ſuch
ſimple hādiworke (as I could, though not ſo wel as I would) in tranſlating
out of La­tine into Engliſh, nine Bookes of the Godly, reuerend and lear­ned
FRANCIS PATRICIVS Biſhoppe of Caie­ta in Italie: whoſe workes in the worthines
thereof reuiuinge the aucthor, deade three ſcore yeares agoe and vpwardes,
were in the Latine tongue by him left & intituled by the na­me of Commentaries
of the inſtitution, ſtate, and gouernmēt of a commō Weale. Whiche albeit it
conteine prophane prin­ciples of olde time, enterlaced with the actions,
opinions, exā ­ples, Counſels, Sentences, and Sayinges of Heathen Empe­rours,
Kinges, Princes, Captaynes, Oratours, Philoſophers, and ſuche lyke, for the
direction of Mundane matters, in Ciuyll gouernmente, with the Learned opinion
of the Auc­thour diſcourſing [...] vppon-euerye particularitye: Yet there­in
is Copie of matter worthye Memorye and Imitation for euery eſtate and member
of a good chriſtian cōmon weale at this daye. And becauſe it briefly ſo
toucheth good order, in mayntenaunce of a Monarchye, and the gouernment
thereof: [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=4) I
haue entituled it, A Morall Methode of ciuile Pollicie, prefixing the
particuler contentes before euerye booke, wyth annotatiōs in the Margin
[...], reducinge the ſame into one Ta­ble Alphabeticall, for the more direct
aſſertion of the particu­larities in euery ſeuerall booke. But this  [...]y my
raſhe attēpte at the firſt ſo boldely begon, in continuaunce ſo bluntlye done
and finiſhed, neyther beautified nor burniſhed with anye bux­omnes of apt &
eloquent Engliſh phraſe: fearing much mine owne imperfection therein, I
laboured not onelye, to haue the ſame ſurueig hed, but alſo ſupplied, with
more learned ſkille and aucthority, before I would hazard the publiſhing
therof. Whiche when I had obtayned, euen then bethinkinge mee on whō I might
beſt beſtow the benefite of this my ſimple trauel: beyonde the deſertes of all
others, conſideringe with my ſelfe the manifeſte benefites whiche I haue
receyued from tyme to tyme theſe twelue yeares at your worſhippes bountiful
hands: I deemed my ſelfe a debter euen in dutie to dedicate the ſa­me vnto
you, as a teſtimonie of my thanckefull, ſeruiſable, & well wiſhinge hart
towardes you, as a pledge of the faythefull zeale that I beare to this famous
Cittye of London, whereof you are an auncient Magiſtrate, and I your poore
ſeruaunt a ſimple member of the ſame: and conſequentlye, as an earneſte token
of my vnfayned good will and true meaninge towar­des this my natiue country.
Beſeeching your Worſhippe, and all other well meaning Magiſtrates to pardon my
bolde rude­neſſe herein, and to accepte well in woorth my poore good will, and
well meaning minde, as wiſhing vnto you especiallye that this my ſimple Myte,
were in value more worth thē Mi­das his golden Diademe, to bee throwen into
the treaſurye of your worthy deſerts: and as if this my pore preſent, were
more in price, then a purchaſed prize of precious Smaragdes from India (had
they ſo luckely light in my lot) I could willingly at this preſent voucheſafe
to thenriching of this my natiue coū ­trye: yet neuertheles (ſuch as it is)
pretending ſimply & ſyn­cerelye, wiſhinge herein to profite, & pleaſure all
men, & not [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=4) to
disprofite nor diſpleaſe anye, I yelde the ſame to bee ſhiel­ded vnder Gods
good pleaſure and youre worthie patronage. Cōcluding with dutiful and hartie
praier vnto the almighty, for the long and prosperous preſeruation of our moſt
gracious ſoueraigne Lady the Queenes maieſtie, and her honourable
Counſellours: for the floriſhinge eſtate of this oure Publique weale in euery
degree, where, including the welfare and feli­citye of this honourable Cittie:
by duetifull remembraunce I praye especially amongeſt all others, that your
Worſhippe, my good Lady & Miſtres, your louing wife, and al your Childrē, may
enioye longe and happie dayes on earth, and in fine, the moſt aſſured
habitacle of perdurable felicities. Amen.

Your worſhippes moſt humble ſeruāt and faythfull Oratour. Rycharde Robinſon.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=5)

## Thomas Newtonus.

Quantas Patritio debet Reſpublica grates,

Cui ſuus hoc ſtudio vindice conſtat honos,

Aureus hic monſtrat (vel me reticente) libellus,

Ingenio, genio, diuite et arte ſcatens.

Hinc morum ſpecies, hinc dogmata pura petuntur,

Hinc vitae elicitur ciuica norma piae.

Hiſtoriae quicquid Latiae, memorántue Pelaſgae

Vtile, Patritius ſedulus expoſuit.

Dia celebratur dignis Concordia phthongis,

Diſſidij hic (que) lues pingitur atra trucis.

Hic bene perſpicimus veſtigia trita Sophorum,

Quam (que) malèa priſcis degeneramus auis.

Qui praeſunt ſummae rerum, et moderantur habenas,

Ex iſto exugent cōmoda magna libro.

Primates Regni, Symmiſtae, bella gerentes,

Artificeſ (que) etiam hic quo doceantur, habent.

Deni (que) Rex et Grex, populus, promiſcua plebſ (que)

Permagnum hinc poſſunt conciliare decus.

Ifoelix Liber, i, dextra contexte Minerua,

Digne teri à cunctis clima per omne viris.

Thomas Newton, Ceſtreſhyrius.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=5)

## ❧ Certaine notes ſelected oute of the Preface of Franciſcus Patritius
Senenſis, Byſhop of Caieta, into his Boke of the Inſtitution, State and
Gouernment of a Commonweale.

THe pleaſauntnes of the Soyle wherein the City Caieta ſtādeth, the merueilous
fruict­fulnes of that countrye, and the wonderful holſomnes of the ayre,
foſtereth and nouri­ſheth men long and many yeares in health: Therfore the
wordes of Scipio Affricanꝰ are the leſſe to bee merueyled at, in ſayinge, that
he became yonge & waxed (as it were) a chylde againe, when he together with
his frend Laelius gathered & picked vp little round ſmoth ſtones at Caieta.

Nothing better ſheweth what a man is, then his ſpeache: for it openeth the
ſence or meaning of his mynde, and expreſſeth the de­uiſes of the ſame, which
both is deuine, & is alſo cōfeſſed & know­en to be the beſt & chiefeſt parte
of man. Hereunto tendeth y• wyſe ſaying of Socrates, whē as he ſayd theſe
wordes vnto a youngman that helde his peace: ſpeake (ſayde hee) that I may ſee
what thou art. Meaning hereby that a man is not to be conſidered and dee­med
by the outwarde lineamentes and feacture of his bodye and face, but by the
inwarde diſpoſition and qualitie of his mynde.

As it is gladſome & acceptable for wayfaringe men to treade in their ſteppes
which haue walked well afore theym: ſo is it vnto a good gouernour to direct
his courſe that way, whereby many afore haue eaſely arriued to the hauen of
their deſires.

We ſee al y• beſt writers in euery excellēt Art haue be [...]e as it were
ſpighted, il reported & torne in pieces by backebſters: And namelȳ Homer who
notwtſtāding he was ye father of al Poets & the graūd capitayn of all
diſciplines, yet had he many enemies, and ſpightful carpers, eſpecially one
Zoylus of Macedonia, who preſuming to prefer his owne ruſtie wyt before the
golden vayne of that deuine Poete, ſaucelye inueighed by wryting againſt the
Iliades & Odiſſe­as, of the ſame Homer: affecting thereby the ſyrname to be
tea [...]med Homeromaſtix, Homers whippe.

It is the cuſtome of all writers almoſt, to enterlace other mens doings into
their own: both becauſe they may wryte thinges more
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=6) certaine, and
alſo becauſe their writinges ſhould be y• more accepta­ble and pleaſaūt vnto
the Reader. And as Flauius Albinus ſayth, this is one kinde of fruit gotten by
readinge, that a man may imi­tate that which he lyketh and alloweth in others:
and ſuch ſpeciall poyntes and ſayinges, as hee is eſpecially delighted & in
loue with­all, by apt and fitte deriuation maye wreſt to ſerue his owne turne
and purpoſe.

Afranius alſo an excellent wryter of Comedies, in the aunſwere that he made to
them which layde to his charge that hee had taken many thinges out of
Menander: I confeſſe (ſayth hee) I haue not onely receyued and taken out of
him, but alſo out of euery other, as they ſeemed to haue any thinge that made
for my purpoſe: Yea out of Latine alſo haue I excerpted & gathered whatſoeuer
I thought my ſelfe coulde not do better. Quintilian geeueth vs in precept,
(which Macrobius alſo aduoucheth & laboureth to perſwade), that we ſhould
imitate ye little Bees, which do wāder  [...]fly abroad to ſeke their hony
out of many flowers, & then diſpoſe they in order, what­ſoeuer they bring home
and couche the ſame in their Combes and hyues, and conuert the diuers iuyce
therof, with the breath of their mouthes, vnto a moſt ſurpaſſinge ſweete
honie, the pleaſaūt reliſhe whereof ſurmounteth all other. Neyther may this
ſeeme newe or ſtraunge, when we ſee y• al Authours both Greeke and Latine doe
vſually enterlarde their owne workes, wyth other mens doinges. For from Homer
not onely all Poetes, haue recourſe euen as all Riuers from the Ocean ſea, but
alſo the wryters of all other mat­ters: for wee ſee that Strabo of Crete is
altogether Homerical: and Cicero alſo, who for a great part deriueth and
fetcheth his matter from Plato and Demoſthenes, & tranſlated into the Latine
phraſe the vertues of all the Grekes y• he lyked. And ſo did Quintiliā iſ­ſue
frō Cicero, and all that haue ſince his days ſtudied eloquence and purity of
the Latine tongue. Virgil alſo was not aſhamed to tranſlate into his workes,
thouſands of Homers verſes, and liuely to imitate his affectiōs. So alſo
borowed he many thinges out of Heſiodus Apollonius & Theocritus. He tooke alſo
much out of La­tine writers, and when hee miſlyked and diſallowed of ſome, &
was aſked why he read them and noted any thing out of theym, hee aun­ſwered,
That he gathered Precious ſtones out of the myre.

Notwithſtanding I thincke it the parte of a thanckfull mynde, franckly to
profeſſe their names whom wer do imitate, and of whō we haue borowed any
thing: for as Plini ſayth, it is an honeſt thāk­fulnes to confeſſe by whom a
man hath profited, and thys recom­pence
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=6) (as it were
an hyre) is payable vnto the Aucthour by good right: leaſt otherwiſe we ſhould
ſeeme to be vniuſte or deceiptfull in our dealinges. Which thing alſo Thales
Mileſius hath taughte vs, for when as hee beinge very olde, had deuiſed a
wonderfull reaſon concerning the Sunne, and had taught the ſame vnto Mandritus
a Philoſopher of Cyrene, the ſayd Mandritus being greatly deligh­ted with the
noueltie and ſtraungenes of thinuencion (after greate thanckes firſt geuen to
Thales therfore) wylled him to chooſe what rewarde, he would haue in
recompence of that ſo worthye a leſſon▪ I ſhall thincke my ſelfe well and
ſufficiently recompenſed (ſayth he to Mādritus) if whēſoeuer thou vttereſt
this knowledge that thou haſt learned at my handes, thou do not arrogate &
chalenge the in­uention thereof to thy ſelfe, but declare and reporte me to be
the in­uentour and deuiſer thereof, rather then any other man.

## Table of contents

  * TO THE RIGHT WORshipfull and his ſinguler good maiſter Sir VVilliam Allen Knight, Aldermā of the City of London: Rychard Robinſon his humble ſeruant & faithfull Oratour, wiſheth long lyfe, proſperous health, encreaſe of worſhip, and perpetuall felicitie.
  * Thomas Newtonus.
  * ❧ Certaine notes ſelected oute of the Preface of Franciſcus Patritius Senenſis, Byſhop of Caieta, into his Boke of the Inſtitution, State and Gouernment of a Commonweale.
  * 1\. Whereof this fyrſte Booke entreateth: Of the Royall and prayſeworthie gouernmente of one ſole Prynce. Of originall conſeruation of Humane ſocietie. Of preſcribing politicke lawes and ordynaunces. Of maintayning huſbandry, trades of marchandize, and handycraftesmen.
  * 2\. THE SECOND BOKE entreatinge of carefull regarde for the ſupportation of learning, the neceſſarie vfilitie of liberal Artes and Scyences, and ex amples perſwading to the vſe of other exerciſes corporall profitable to a weale publique.
  * 3\. THE THIRDE BOOKE entreateth of the election, & choiſe of Magiſtrates, in a cōmon weale: of moral examples in furderinge their offices and duties in ſeuerall: Of diſcuſſing and redreſſing cauſes in variance: of reforming enormities and controuerſies: of needeful ordinaunces: of accuſtomed watches for defēce & ſaue garde, of the citty or countrye: of carefull prouiſion for corne and victualles, needfull aſwell in peace as in warres for the publiqueſuſtentation.
  * 4\. THE FOVRTH BOKE entreatinge of mutuall Societye in Mariage: mayntenaunce of houſekeeping: ordering of a houſholde, wyth morall examples of neceſſary duties in eache degree.
  * 5\. THE FIFTH BOOKE EFfectuallye diſcourſinge vppon the ENDEVOVRS, TRADES, OFFICES, DVEties, and ſeuerall vocations: aſwell of the ciuill cittizen as of the vplandiſh countreyman: alſo the diſcouerye of vices, with the daūgers that in euery realme and countrye thereby enſueth.
  * 6\. THE SIX T BOOKE ENtreatinge of Nobilitie defined by the opinion of Philoſophers, the commendation of their bountifulnes, liberalitie, and franckneſſe towardes all men: how ſome are thoughte meete to ſupplye functions, by reaſon of their Aunceſtors before time aucthoriſed to beare like offices: of good prouiſiō for the ſuſtētation of the cōmons: Of ſuch as hauing houſes in the citye, and alſo in the country, cannot be ſo carefull, for the common vtilitye of both places. The diſcription of the venemous vyce Enuie: of ſeuere Iuſtice vppon male factors, iniurious to the ſtate of the common weale.
  * 7\. THE VII. BOOKE DEſcribinge the Natures, Vſes, Profites, & choyſes, of all ſortes of groundes▪ The ſundrye diſpoſitions and inclinations of Perſons, accordinge to the quality of the ſoyle where they be bredde. The commoditye of woodes, and the orderinge thereof. The greate neceſſitie and benefite of Waters, Fountaynes, and Springs, with the ſtraunge vertues of ſūdry VVelles in forrein Countries.
  * 8\. THE VIII. BOOKE, DIScourſinge of Buyldings, VValles, Gates, Caſtles, Fortreſſes, Garriſons, Lybraries, Churches, & other Monumentes of a Cittye.
  * 9\. THE NINTHE BOOKE entreating of warres, and Martiall diſcipline, Of Municions, Ordenaunce, Artillerie, Victuals, Muſters, Lieutenantes, Generalles, Captaynes and Souldiers: Of peace and Warre with the circūſtances therof.
  * Appendix A The Table.

# [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=7) [[Page
1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=7)A MORAL METHODE of
ciuill Pollicye.

## 1\. Whereof this fyrſte Booke entreateth: Of the Royall and prayſeworthie
gouernmente of one ſole Prynce. Of originall conſeruation of Humane ſocietie.
Of pre­ſcribing politicke lawes and ordynaunces. Of main­tayning huſbandry,
trades of marchandize, and handycraftesmen.

IT hath bene a very olde and publiſhed argument diſputed vpon amongeſt
excellente writers in Philoſo­phie: whether it were better to liue wel, and
ſafelye to bee gouerned by a good Prince, and to obey him rulinge in Iu­ſtice
and equitie, or elles to liue in a free cittie and Com­munaltye eſtabliſhed by
good lawes & traditions. For vn­to ſome it ſeemeth moore meete to obeye one
man rulinge iuſtly, & lawfully, then many & almoſt infinite perſons, & (as for
the moſt parte it falleth out) vnſkilful in handling affaires, and matters of
gouernmente. For it chaunceth I know not how, yt thoſe ſeuerall perſons, whō
as it were workmē or porters we haue had in contēpt, being lincked or knit
together in vnitie of mynd, the ſame afterwardes hardly can we in aſſemblies
reuerence. For they confirme this Sentence by the teſtimony of Homer, who (in
his ſe­cond Rhapſodie) ſaith.

A matter cannot well handled bee,

UUhere as commaunders are manye.

MOreouer vnto this hapneth the imitacion of nature,Imitacion of Nature vnto
Obedience of one Supe [...]io [...] for as wee ſee and beholde one God the
creator and faſhioner of all thinges, by whoſe rule and commaunde­ment all
thinges are gouerned: So ſeemeth it meete and conuenient vnto vs al, to
encline vnto and regard the cō ­maundemente of one moſt excellent Prince, and
to obaye [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=8) the
ſame. We ſee the Sun in his nature, is as it were the onely Lorde of the day,
and the Moone to be the Ladye of the nighte, whome wee beholde to rule and
raigne in the ſkies amōg the planets & ſtarres, & the greater that their
light is, the darcker do they make the leſſer Starres.

But that we may deſcend vnto leſſe matters, are there not ſome brute beaſtes
which lyue ſubiectes to the rule of ſome one kinge, they diſdayne not their
obedience nor to do their duties and commaundemente enioyned them, and fighte
as it were vnder a Generall. Who doubte the that the Bees haue their Kinge
whych Gouerneth his people, and bringeth the other Bees to doe their du­tye
and to gather honye. For there can be nothinge more ſweeter or better to bee
wyſhed vnto mortall men, then to leade a priuate lyfe vnder a good kinge or
prince without iniurie or ambicion of the people. But becauſe nature hath ſo
ordayned, that Princes are not immortall or im­mutable perſons, but ſome
beinge brought vp verye deli­cately, geuing eare to flattering paraſites do
for the moſt parte proue worſe and worſe in their gouerning: There­fore I
iudge, that the lyfe of a Ciuill and well inſtituted common weale is to be
thought far more ſafer, then of e­uerye Prince, for that is a continuall and
almoſte an im­mortall ſtate of lyfe. But this is finiſhed in a ſmall courſe by
olde age and death.

Uerye ſeldome it hath hapned that a Prince gouerned and ruled ſtill his common
weale, in that minde as he did when he began firſt to take the gouernment in
hande. For of ſo greate and almoſte infinite multitude of Caeſars, Hee meaneth
of ſuch as are careles for the cōmon vveale. whiche were all made worſe by
their continuall raignes, onlye Vespaſianus of al the Princes that were there
before his tyme, was chaunged better and better, as Cornelius Tacitus maketh
mētion. For their beginnings were eaſie and gentle vntill ſuche time as they
had gott vnto theym­ſelues the loue of their people, but when they had
obtei­ned their purpoſe, they made hauocke of all thynges by [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=8) their crueltie and
luſt. No feare of god, no religion could reſtrayn thē, neyther ceaſed they to
rage vntill they were ſubdued and ſubuerted, yea euen by their owne ſubiectes.

Thales Mileſius who was called the chiefeſte of all theVVhat thinge moſt
difficulte in the life of man. Sages, being aſked of a certayne familier
freende of hys what thinge he had ſeene to bee moſte difficult or harde in his
lyfe tyme: Sayth he, a Tyraunt, an olde man. And in good fayth, not without a
cauſe did hee ſaye ſo, for there is no rule or gouernmente exerciſed more
harde then vppon men, as Xenophon maketh mention.

Undoubtedlye there is no brute beaſt ſo ſedicious or re­belling againſt his
keeper or feeder, that he will not obay him, or refuſe to yelde his cōmoditie
vnto him. But (alas) mā is grudging alwaies at thē which ſeeke to haue
domi­nation ouer him, deuiſeth deceiptes and inuenteth newe matters or cauſes
of diſobedience. One Prince whycheThe prayſe of a Prynce. embraceth all
vertues (or hath all good qualities in hym) is not at all to be founde lyuinge
vppon the earth. Some one is commended for his Iuſtice, ſome other for his
for­titude, or magnanimitie, ſome other for his liberality or gentlenes of
nature: but when there are manye in a com­mon weale, euerye one of theim hath
ſome parte of vertue and wiſedome. Wherfore the Citizens beinge gathered
together into one ſocietye doe make as it were one man,Society of Ci­tiſens.
whiche with diuerſitie of wytte and memorie doth excell, with many eyes ſeeth,
with manye handes wor [...]keth, and with almoſte infinite feete endeuoureth
himſelfe in his af­fayres. Xenophon when hee wolde prayſe the ciuill ſoci­etie
of the Perſians, affirmed that euen their children amonge theym did ſo learne
iuſtice, that they both attay­ned vnto good letters & alſo vnto the ſtudies of
good artes and ſciences.

It ſeemeth vnto Plato a harde thing to be done, to per­ſwade thoſe Cittizens
to Iuſtice, which were not from their tender infancie, as it were trayned vp
in the same. And vndoubtedlye if the iuſte and perfect volumes of the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=9) lawyers were
extant and abroade to bee hadde, and that they were not ſo broken and mangled
as they bee, they woulde geeue vs moſte cleare and ample lighte not onlye how
to kepe and preſerue this ciuill ſocietie, but alſo they woulde teache vs
morall wiſedome, and howe to attayne vnto the vſe of the greateſt affayres in
a common weale.

Man is a Creature farre more fellowlye and ſociable, then Bees, Antes, or
Cranes, and ſuch kinde of creatures whiche are foſtered and nouriſhed by
flockes and doe de­fend theym ſelues by troupes and companies. The firſte
ſocietie is of the Male and Female for procreacion ſake: which cannot be,
except they bee both together: and ſcarceSocietie hu­mane profita­ble by
procre­ation. is the one withdrawen from the other except by the ordi­naunce
of nature: for the pledges of the younglinges doe ſo greatlye cauſe mutuall
Loue, that they are carefull to lyue together, and are affectioned towardes
their fruict, as they be vnto themſelues. For it hapneth not vnto man and
woman as it doth almoſte vnto all other liuinge crea­tures, amongeſte whom the
female ſexe do take on theym the charge to feede and foſter their younge
children, and for a ſmall tyme it is that they ſtande in neede of the
mo­thersExample of ſocietie in birds. helpe. For we ſee that birds do bring vp
their yonge ones ſo longe as they bee vnfeathered, and not able to flye: But
ſo ſone as they perceue them able to vſe their wings, ſtraightwayes they
bringe them forth of their neſtes and goe before their younge ones, which
flicker rounde about theym, vntill ſuch tyme as with a ſtronger endeuour they
be better able to ſhift for them ſelues, which when the old ones do ſee, they
geeue thoſe their yong ones libertie, at theyr aduenture to haunt the free
ſcope of the ayre, neyther haue they afterwardes anye furder care ouer theym,
or at any tyme thēce foorth do acknowledge them as their own, but doe take
their flight to ſeeke after the male birde, and geue their endeuour vnto a
newe encreaſe or breede.

But man when he ſeeth his chyldren borne and comen into this worlde, is
affected towardes theym with ſuche [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=9) loue that hee
ſtudieth or careth for nothinge more then to get lyuinge for them and ſuche
large patrimonie & Inhe­ritance,Humaine care for his poſteriti that for euer
there be no lacke of any thing to thē and their poſterities. Of this did
procede and riſe the plē ­tifulnes & frutefulnes of Cities inhabited, becauſe
when man and wife had edified for them ſelues a dwelling houſe and repleniſhed
the ſame with encreaſe of children and ne­phewes, they were dryuen to make
other houſes, becauſe one houſe coulde not holde one lynage or ofſpringe: and
ſo they began to erect villages in the countrie and to eſta­bliſhe ſocietie by
meanes of many houſes.

And when they did playnly ſee what commoditie was in the ſocietie of man and
woman: and howe more eaſlye and better verye manye liued together, then a
fewe: yea more ſafer from the inuaſion of wilde beaſtes: they began to ioyne
Lordſhippe to Lordſhippe, and laye Familye toThe firſt reaſō of Societie
inſtituted. Familye, and alſo to ioyne in neighbourhoode for their owne common
vtilitie. The firſt reaſō of thē which inſti­tuted ciuil ſocietie, or
eſtabliſhed cities, was yt they might liue ſafely, & that they might be
defended frō violence & aſ­ſaultes. For tranquillitie or peaceablenes was a
guide of their lyfe, to finde out innumerable cōmodities. And yt is credible
that mannes ſpeache or language, wherein ſurelye he doth excell other liuing
creatures, was not di­ſtinct & ſeuered, before humane ſocietie was firſt
founded.

Certainlye wee haue a common voyce, aſwell as other lyuinge creatures haue,
whiche doth eyther ſpeciallye de­monſtrate and ſhewe forth ioye or ſadnes,
eyther els ſome­tymes deſire, and ſometimes feare, whiche is in vs. But for to
know and diſcerne thinges by their proper na­mes by plaine and perfecte
ſpeache, to finiſhe or conclude aſwell our cogitations as our effectes and
meaninges, that for certaine could not be but inuented by ciuill
ſocietyStudies of ver­tues and diſci­plines. of men. Mooreouer the ſtudies of
vertues and diſcipli­nes, or rudimentes of good Artes, and ſciences, was not
found out nor inuented by men which liued in ſolitarines,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=10) and of them
whiche after the manner of ſauage beaſtes led their lyues in the wooddes: but
by the ciuil man, whiche was conuerſant in companye of men whiche hearde many
thinges, which diſcuſſed many thinges, and by whom they were inuented and
firſt had in vſe. For in ſuch Citties as were well inſtructed and ordered:
there were Rewardes beſtowed on them which excelled in any manner of vertue
and ſuch as were alſo therby preferred to high promocion and adorned or made
famous, with praiſe and commenda­tion for their excellence. For honour as
Cicero ſayth, doth foſter and mainteyne Artes and ſciences, and we allHonos
alit artes. are inflamed to endeuour our ſelues for prefermente and
prerogatiue by praiſe and commendatiō in our trauailes. Finally what
excellent exploite ſo euer mortall men haue by their ſtudie and diligence in
this life put in vre, it either had firſte iſſue and originall practize from
the Citties, or elles tooke the vfe and grace thereof, in the ſame cytties.

Man which is brought vp or trayned in cōmon ſociety, differeth verye muche
from him that lyueth in a rude cot­tage, eyther elles in a hilly wilderneſſe,
or wood: for thisDifference of Societie hu­mane. man ſeemeth to be borne as it
were vnto crueltie, amonge wilde and brute beaſtes, but the other ſeemeth to
be borne amongeſt men vnto Iuſtice and humanitie. For it is true that
Ariſtotle ſaith.

He is a beaſt and not a man whiche forſaketh ciuill ſocietie: and he that
refuſeth to be any parte or mem­ber of a cittie, he muſt needes be a wicked
and vngod­lye perſon.

For he ſhunneth the companie of men becauſe he would not be compelled to obaye
the lawes and Iudgement, and to obaye him that is a rightfull Ruler: then the
whyche thinge ſurelye there can bee nothinge more pernicious or hurtfull. For
of all good ciuill order the chiefe thinge is Iuſtice, whiche no doubt layeth
the foundacion and groūd worke of humane ſocietie and withoute the whiche
there [[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=10) can
bee no ciuill congregation. For as the ſaide Philoſo­pher ſayth, as man is the
beſt liuing creature of all others whiche liueth perfectlye. ſo is he worſte
and naughtieſt of all liuinge creatures, which is ſequeſtred from the lawe and
iudgementes.

The Lawes of the Perſians, (as Xenophon writeth) doe eſpecially ordayne
thobedience due to Iuſtice, and in ſuchObedience vn to Iuſtice. manner euen
from their Childehoode, (as we haue ſaide) the Cittizens did learne to deſire
nothinge that was fyl­thye or vnlawful for man to do, whiche perſwaſion ſurely
me thincketh is the beſt of all others. And if it might by any meanes be
brought to paſſe, that all men mighte lyue inſtructed in this doctrine, wee
ſhould be exonerated and diſcharged of a great parte of our labour otherwiſe.
For if euerye man woulde preſcribe what were nedefull to bee done, and beinge
ſo lincked and ioyned together were not affected or moued wythe couetouſnes,
nor other per­turbations of the mynde: they ſhoulde doe rightewell. Ambicion
ſhoulde not catche holde vpon anye man, coue­touſnes ſhoulde not ſnare anye
man, diſſencion or mutine ſhoulde not entrappe anye man, neyther ſhoulde enuie
circumuente anye manne, to withdrawe hym from the reaſon of that wherein
truthe and equitie conſiſteth: ney­ther ſhould hee purſue and ſeeke for his
priuate proffyte or inordinate pleaſure, rather then a publique weale, or that
reaſon order, truthe, and equitie requireth.

Anacharſis when he had heard ſay that Solon had geuen himſelfe to the ſtudie
of publyſhynge Lawes at Athens, exceedinglye deryded and ſcorned his induſtrie
and dili­gence, affirminge that thoſe lawes ſhoulde in tyme toThis is meant of
lavvs made and not obſer­ued. come be like vnto Spiders webbes, whiche did
catch and keepe faſte the ſmall flyes, but were broken and burſte in ſonder of
the greate flyes: whiche ſentence alſo Solon hym ſelfe would vſe and not
without a cauſe: for oftentimes in great Citties (and wherein the ſtudies of
good artes and ſcienees do floriſhe) we ſe there are very manye which liue
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=11) worſe, then
as if they had beene brought vp in the woods, and w [...]elde countries. Dion
in his bookes which are in­tituled, Of the ſtate of a Kingedome, did ſaye that
weightie matters were farre better handled by the councel of a few perſons
then withe multitude and power of moſt ſtronge and luſtye younge men: whiche
in deede is ratified by the ſentence of Homer, where as hee broughte in
Agamem­non as pertinent to his purpoſe, affirminge that hee could farre moore
eaſlye deſtroye the Troianes common weale, if he had ten ſuch as Neſtor, or
Vliſſes were, then if hee had ſo manye ſuche as Aiax, and Achilles were,
fyghtinge ſtoutly and valiauntlye.

That ſtate of a Common weale wherein fewe doe go­uerne, differeth verye little
at all from the ſtate of Ty­rannye, for by their wealthe and their riches, the
magi­ſtratesOligarchia. are choſen, and onelye wealth beareth ſwaye. Neyther
doth this preſcribe libertie or ende of vertue, but onelye how to gette
ryches, whiche Cicero affirmeth: Are the ſubſedies of warfare and the
ornaments of peace. But the matter goes ill with the rich men, when no place
is reſerued for vertue, and the common people bee as it were altogether
brought vnder foote & ſubiection. And it coms to paſſe now & then that in ſom
cities, onely hādy­crafteſmen & huſbandmen do beare a ſway, which becauſe
thei are moore in number, they doe decaye thoſe that bee more noble of birth
and callinge, yea and haue ſuche in de­riſion and contempt which are zealous
in any kind of ver­tue and learned in good artes or ſciences. It maye bee
brought to paſſe by fortune that ſuch a Cittye which is ſo gouerned, may ſtand
in ſafetye and quietnes for a certayn tyme, but fortune frowning on them, it
is ſone perceiued, how hard a matter it will be to lyue well amongeſt ſuche
manner of men. For they that are broughte vp in fieldes, or in ſhoppes are
voyde of experience in all thinges, and do beare aucthoritie with a ſeruile
mynde, neyther are they furthered or furniſhed wt doctrine, noblenes of race
[[Page 5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=11) or with
thexperience of waighty affaires. And whyle they ſtande in feare of the nobler
ſort, they doe all thinges ey­ther raſhlye withoute aduiſemente, or cruellye
withoute meaſure: for euery cōmunaltie eyther ſerues in obedience with
humilitie, or ruleth with great crueltie.

Furthermore it ſeemeth contrary to equitie ye wheras the citie cannot conſiſt
of Nobles onelye, but farre grea­ter muſte bee the reſte of the multitude, or
communaltie, that onelye the Noble men ſhoulde bearerule, and all theNoble men
ruling, the reſi due duly obeyinge cauſe the citty to floriſhe. reſte obaye.

For tillage of ground & huſbandrie bringeth vnto vs, natural nouriſhement, and
marchandize doth bringe vnto vs; all other thinges neceſſarie for our vſe:
Whereby it comes to paſſe that neither without huſbandmē nor with­out
marchauntes, can ciuill ſocietie bee amongeſte men.

They therfore are not to be exempted away frō publike offices, whoſe ſeruice
is ſeene to bee neceſſary in a Com­mon weale, leaſte they thinkinge
theymſelues to bee had in contempte, ſhrincke awaye and withdrawe theymſel­ues
from the Rulers and Gouernours. For ſo often as the people of Rome did
ſeperate theymſelues from the Senatours, they were neuer withoute greate
peryll and daunger eftſones renued.

Surelye the meane ſorte of men, which are neyther to much abiect or baſe,
neither yet boaſte theymſelues in the wealth of their nobilitye, doe farre
more modeſtlye beare rule. But if it muſt needes  [...]ee that either the
nobilitie, or communalty onelye, ſhoulde beare auctority, I thinke it farre
more ſafely ſhould the matter be handled, by go­uernment of the Nobles, then
of the commons: for ſeel­dome againſte comlynes or honeſtye dothe  [...]ee any
thing, whiche ſeeth that by his doings he ſhall hazard the prayſe of his
aunceſtors with hymſelfe, but he that being of hym­ſelfe baſe and obſcure
hathe hys aunceſtors farre more obſcure, ſeemeth to make vnto hymſelfe a very
ſmal loſſe if ſometimes he do any thing amiſſe: And if ther wante no
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=12) examples of
ruſticall perſons, and men vnknowen which haue fought valiantly for their
coūtry.

For wee reade, that ſome haue beene called from the plowe, other ſome from the
flocke of ſhepe or other hear­des, which haue obtained great victories vnto yt
Romaines. But I am one of that nōber which account that to be the beſt cōmon
weale which is intermixt wt al kind of people.

That is counted the beſte common weale wherein notThe beſt common vveale.
euery man that liſteth or the more parte doe beare aucto­ritye, at ye Becke
and Checke of wyll, but that Com­mon weale wherein the Lawe onelye ſhall beare
a ſwaye: for equality of iuſtice amongeſt citizens maketh a ſtable & fyrme
ſociety, which euen then greatly floriſheth when as all thinges are iudged and
ordered with equall ryght and Iuſtice. For it chaunceth for the moſt parte,
that affecti­ons doe trouble the iudgementes of men: ſome one, feare
appaulleth: ſome others, hatred: ſome hope: ſome other, awe and dread: and
ſome other, ambicion or couetouſnes cōpelleth to iudge thoſe thigs which are
not only cōtrary to equity: but alſo contrary to yt mind of him which
iudg­eth. For we ſee oftentymes, the Iudge moued wyth a cer­teyn affectiō,
doth determin thoſe things whych wythin a ſhort ſpace after he would willingly
alter and chaunge.

Equality amongſt Cytyzens cauſeth concord, without the whych, ciuyll ſocietye
is ſeene to be neyther firme norAequalitie in a Cytty cauſeth concorde. ſtable
at al. For no force or ſtrēgth can ſufficiēily preuail, no ſauegard, no
riches, no reuen [...]es can ſuffice thoſe cities which are diſquieted or
troubled wt inteſtine warres. And agayn alſo, neyther ſhal that  [...]yty be
ſclender in power nor of ſmal cōtinuance which is enuyroned & fortified with
cō ­corde of the Citizens. Therefore there muſte bee great forecaſte had, yt
the Citizens may liue with equal Iuſtyce & that ſome do not alwayes beare
rule, & that other ſome do not remain alwais as inferiours, for al ſociety is
vnſta­ble there, where all men doe not lyue in indifferencye of Iuſtice.

[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=12)Man
(foraſmuche as he loueth and fauoureth his owne kynne, and is congregable or
geeuen to companye, & ſoci­able or geuen to felowſhip more then other lyuing
creatu­res: and ſeing no ſociety can be firme or ſtable without iu­ſtice)
appeareth to be thereunto eſpecially born, whych he fauoreth and is affected
moſt vnto.

And the firſt duty of Iuſtice is Piety or godly zeale towar­des God: pertaker
of which vertue doubtles ther is no li­uynge creature elles ſeene to be, but
onely man. For mā onely doth acknowledge God, and hym as the aucthour &The
firſt dutye of Iuſtice creator of the worlde, & worckmaiſter of all thinges
doth renerence & worſhip, by whom ſurely he acknowledgeth himſelf to be made
pertaker of reaſon, in whom he ſeinge that Iuſtice is all in all, it behoueth
that he ſhow himſelf a folower of Iuſtice, if he would haue himſelfe to be
coun­ted lyke vnto himſelf.

It bredeth great diſſētiō, wher, amōgſt thē which are foūd guilty in
cryme alyke, ſom are greuouſly puniſhed, & other ſom eſcape vntouched
altogether: it ſhould bee otherwiſe if thoffences were not a lyke. For far
more greuouſly is that gouernour or ſhypmaiſter to be puniſhed, which
ouer­whelmeth the ſame being laden with golde and ſiluer, thē hee whiche
hathe loſte or periſhed a Shyppe laden withe Sande [...]or Potcers claye, and
yet eyther of theſe hathe neglected hys duty. For thyngs of more value ſemes
iuſt­lye to require more diligence. For there can bee no better perſwaſion in
ciuil ſocietie, then yt which toucheth the fre­dom of the city, whereunto the
mind of euery Cytizen is to be dyrected, whiche ſurely ſhalbe an eaſy matter
to bee done if in maner all men wil hope and truſt wel that ſom­tyme they maye
ſupplye the function of a magiſtrate: for euery man laboureth for renowme,
which when he ſhal ſe hymſelfe preuented of, and that hee is fruſtrate of
hope, he is neuer at quiet in hys mynde, and eyther ſhall he bee the more
negligent in a common weale, or appeare altogether euill affected towardes the
ſame. Hereupon do ſedi­cions
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=13) growe
amongeſt Cittyzens, from hence do alſo riſe factions and Enimities, which
things ſurely do weaken the ſtate of a publique weale: therfore a magiſtrate
ought to haue a determinate & prefixed tyme apointed for ye go­uernment &
exerciſe of his office. For, to beare aucthoritie continuallye in a free
cittie is hatefull: it muſte alſo bee wiſely forſene yt the Cytyzens be found
iuſte amonge thē ſelues, directyng all their doinges vnto vertue, and y•
be­inge contente withe their owne goodes that they doe not deſire other
mennes.

Let there be no place for ydle perſonsin a common we­ale,No place for
loyterers in a comon vveale. for, ſurely by meanes of ſlowth and ſluggiſhnes,
they do commit all wickednes: wherupon true is that Oracle of Marcus Cato,

By ſlouth and doinge nothinge at all,

Men learne to do euill: great and ſmall.

They doe alwayes enuie at the paynfull trauell of the good cityzens, vnto whom
when they can not be like, they labour with hartburning and hatred how to
weaken and diſturbe their eſtate. Such therefore as lyue ydlye muſte bee
excluded from publique offices, becauſe neyther can they rule worthely, & alſo
do withdraw their duty frō obe­dience. In which matters all ciull ſocietie is
conteyned.

Their opinion is not to bee commended whiche ſaye that by the faulte or
offence of the parents, their po­ſteritie ſhoulde bee for euer excluded oute
of the publique weale, for in ſo doinge thei ſhall diſpayre altogether of
fe­licitie when they ſee that all hope of pardon is debarred: and that they
cannot redeme themſelelues by any vertue, or worthynes. For it oftentimes
chanceth yt their mindes are moſt ready and prone, to innouation, and
deſperation ſometime is turned into mighty courage: for they whiche are in any
extremitie, do eaſelye take hold vppon the ſen­tence [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=13) of the moſt
learned Poet Maro,

Una ſalus victis, nullam sperare ſalutem.

It is onely compted a ſafety vnto thoſe which bee van­quiſhed or conuinced,
not to hope for any ſafetye at all.

Of al thinges, (as Cicero writeth) wherof there is a­nyHuſbandry profitable-
commoditie to bee gotten, nothinge can bee better or more commodious then
huſbandry or tillage of grounde. Then this, nothing is more plentifull,
nothinge ſweeter, neyther yet more worthye for the ſtate of a fr [...]man in a
cō ­mon weale: for onely huſbandrye is ſuch as vnto whome gentlemen & others
ought to ſet to their hands, both for y• neceſſity of ſuſtentacion vnto our
lyfe, (foraſmuch as with out the ſame we cannot lyue) and agayn becauſe it
yeldes vs a moſte honeſt gayne wythout deceipt or ſyinge.

Surely yonge men are made ſtronge wt the exerciſe of til­lage of y• groūd,
and be far more healthy then ſuch as are trayned vp in Cytyes, where as they
vſinge ſleepe and luſtes of the bodye, are enfebled and vnhealthie.

Yt is not therefore to bee meruayled, yf the Romaynes brought forth youngmen
hardened in the fieldes, when they conquered the whoole worlde, not by Idlenes
and ſlouth, but wyth ſtength and fortitude.

But we in theſedayes do ſhonne the trade of huſban­dry as a fylthy lucre, yea
and haue the huſbandmen in de­riſion, and do diſpyſe them as ſlaues or
bondmen, and ſu­che as are borne to perpetuall drudginge, and do eſteme
Brokers, Pedlers, Cookes, and Coblers, more then wee doe of a good huſbandman,
whoſe induſtrye we then do ſaye excedeth the induſtrye of al other worckemen,
when the common people ready to ſterue for hunger earneſtlye craueth their
helpe and nouriſhement, and when they be­inge hungerſterued and pynched wythe
Famyne becom­meth vnrulye and paſte all feare: For huſbandrye only yeldes vnto
vs nouriſhemente, it helpeth and furthereth buildinge, and almoſt findeth
ſufficiency alſo of apparell: onlye the Huſbandman is a breeder of Cattle:
whiche [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=14) thing
was of ſuch eſtimation among the auncient people that Cato being demaunded, in
what thing doyng a man myghte bee quickely made ryche: yf (ſayth hee) a manne
feede well. And beynge agayne demaunded what thynge elles? (ſaythe hee) yf hee
feede well. By the whyche aunſwere he ſheweth vs, that euen a meane dyly­gence
of the maiſter in feedinge his Cattell excede the other profytes. For in dede
there is no Arte or Scyence nor any induſtrye of men ſooner maketh a man
ryche, then huſbandrye.

Heſiodus and Homer, dyd more allow of the inſtrumen­tes, and neceſſaries
pertayninge to huſbandrye and of huſ­bandmen, then of warryors or warlyke
affayres: for the one promyſeth vnto menne lyfe and felycicye, the other death
and myſerye.

Good houſholders oughte to take accompte of theyr Sernauntes and Familyes
Idlenes, rather then of theyr buſines: and the moſte learned of the aunciente
fathersGood houſe­holders vvhat they ought to doe. iudged that there was
nothinge more odyous and hate­full then ſlouthe and drowſiues of the mynde:
wherefore before they ſhoulde eate theyr meate, they called the yong men and
ſeruaunes to the table, and tooke accompt of thē what duety or what buſines
they had done that daye: and before theym onlye they ſet meate: whoſe
dylygence they lyked & allowed, & thoſe they thruſt out of the place
accu­ſtomed to ſuppe in, whyche by theyr ſlouthe and ſluggiſh­nes had done
nothing: & cōmaunded that they ſhould la­bour hard in ſom dutiful buſines to
earn theyr own foode. Let thoſe take vpon them thys charge whych (eſpecially,
in a common weale doe beare rule: to ſee that youngeGood artes or ſcyences to
be cared for. men do applye their myndes vnto the ſtudie of good artes or
Scyences. For in euery free Cytye there ought to bee a ſpeciall care for the
mayntenaunce of good artes & ſcy­ences. For Plato ſayde: Bleſſed are thoſe
common weales which of wyſe and learned men are gouerned.

[[Page 8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=14)Or at the
leaſt (ſythens we all cannot proue learned) wherein Marchaundiʒe, ſeafaring
trade, and other Scien­tes profytable vnto ciuill ſocietye were frequented and
vſed.

Euery man ought to labour aſmuch as he may, to pro­fyte himſelfe, his famylye,
and other Cytyʒens. For a­mongeſte thoſe moſt ſtreite Lawes whyche DRACO made,
there was eſpecially one, that, they whyche were condempned for Ydleneſſe,
ſhoulde bee puniſhed withe deathe.

DIOD ORVS wrytethe that there was a Lawe a­mongeA lavv amōg the Egiptians for
due knovvledge in order of lyuinge. the Egiptiaus, whereby all men were
compelled to declare their names vnto their rulers, and to ſhow by what arte,
or by what manner of gayne they lyued. And yf anye man lyed or lyued by
vniuſte Lucre or gayne, the ſame was adiudged to dye: and truelye not withoute
a cauſe: for thoſe that bee ydle and ſlouthful youngmen, are the poyſon of the
cyttye: they are apte and proue to luſte and pleaſure, they doe enuye thoſe
that bee good, they cauet and deſire other mennes goodes, and finallye they
proue ſedicious and troubleſ me, inſomuche as the grea­teſt troubles ryſe vpon
them.

Marcus Cato wrote verye well in his bookes of Man­ners, that mannes lyfe was
as Iron, whyche if a manExerciſe of mannes lyfe vvhat it is do exercyſe and
putte in vſe, is in wearinge made bryghte, but beinge vnexercyſed and not put
in vſe, is withe Ruſte conſumed and canckered. So men with honeſt exerciſe are
in like caſe tryed and worne and yf they bee not exer­cyſed, ſlouthe and
drowſines doth brynge to theym more detrymente and dammage, then dylygence or
paynes ta­king, doth good.

For very well doth Cato touche the ſame in hys Ora­tion made at Numantia to
the Horſemen. ſayinge: You Souldiours, conſyder in youre myndes yf you ſhall
doe anye thynge well by Laboure or Trauayle, the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=15) [...] [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=15) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=16) labour and
trauail doth quickly departe but the good that you doe in the ſame laboure and
traueil, ſtil doth remayn for euer: but if you take any pleaſure in doinge
euill, the pleaſure quickly departeth, but the euill that you doe, re­mainethe
for euer: whiche ſentences declare that there is nothinge worſe then ydlenes,
neyther anye thinge more prayſeworthy then induſtry and traueil. Merchants and
handicrafteſmen are to be fauored, which wt their labourMerchaunts & vvorkmen
in a citty. and induſtry get their liuinge, and do make the cyties far more
abundant in thinges which may profite al men: for, merchaunts are neceſſary
which do carye awaye from vs ſuch things as we haue ſuperfluous or to much
ſtore of, & by exchaunge, and ſales of their commodities do bringe vs thoſe
thinges whiche ſhalbee neceſſarye for vs.

The cuſtome of the Belgians and lowe countryemen, doth ſeme▪ to me verye
allowable, becauſe they wyll▪ not ſuffer Merchauntes to come and traffyque
with thē Vayne traf­fiques. whiche ſhall brynge vnto theym thoſe thinges that
maye cauſe them to be effeminately mynded. For it chaunceth in oure tymes that
the prouocations of venery and luſtes, as entyſementes to vayne pleaſures, on
euerye ſyde are brought vs from the furtheſt part of the Ocean ſea. Cer­taynly
ſuch manner of nauigation or trafyque cannot be neceſſarye, and as I iudge
muſte needes be leſſe commen­dable, but onely that whiche makethe exchaunge
with ſuperfluous thinges for ſuch kind of commoditie, as may bee moſte for our
proffyte.

A certeyn Laconian did ſay (as it is reported) yt there is anA meaſure & meane
in mer­chants gayne. end or meaſure to be preſcribed vnto lucre or gayne, for
& in cōſideracion of the diuers chances of fortune: leaſt yt in a ſmall
momente of tyme the merchaunte doe looſe and let ſlyppe that whyche in all hys
lyfe tyme he hath gay­ned and be compelled of neceſſitye to conſume and waſte,
the ſame in expences, whych thinge vndoubtedlye, can­not come to paſſe
withoute reproche and diſhoneſtye, al­thoughe the partye be nothynge faultye.
[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=16) Therefore
to the ende that Merchauntes maye liue with­out ſutch reproche, let them
preſcribe vnto them ſelues a meaſure and ende in their couetous attemptes,
leaſte they bee compelled to ſuffer pouerty in their oulde age, with deriſion
alſo.

And yet notwithſtandinge, Socrates iudgeth them that buye of thoſe greate
Merchauntes to thintent to ſell the ſame again, to be worthy of diſprayſe,
except by weaknes of age or by reaſon of their vnhealthfulnes of bodye they
cannot put in practiſe any other kinde of trade to liue vppon.

The lawe of Solon is prayſed eſpecially wherin hée or­dayned, that, that
chylde was not bounden vnto his fa­ther, in any neceſſary duety of life, of
whom he had recea­ued no Arte, Science or Trade, to get his liuinge withal.

Handy craftes men or worckemen which prouide thoſe thinges that are profitable
vnto vs, and without whomeCertayne han dicraftesmen neceſſary in a commonvveal
we may leſſe commodiouſly liue, are not onely to be borne withall: but alſo
are to be taken and reputed amongeſt the moſt honeſt Citizens. Smithes,
Foūders, Caruers, Engrauers, Printers, Potters, Glaſiers, Shoomakers,
Curriours, Taylers, Weauers, Ioyners, Maſons, Clo­thiers, Pargeters,
roughmaſōs, Ironmōgers, & verye many other ſuch like faculties are to be
admitted, partly becauſ they prouid ſuch thīgs as be neceſſary. Partly
be­cauſ thei make their citie more noble wt diuers ornamēts.

The Lacedemonians, to the ende they might withdraw their Cittezens from all
filthy gaine, and prouoke them vnto Huſbandrye, Huntinge and warrefare. did
caſte out of their Citty as well their Golde as their Siluer: coumptinge it a
peſtilence or plague vnto the Cittezens. And ordained to be made a certaine
coyne of Iron which was more weighty, to the ende they might be extruded &
ſequeſtred frō al company of their neighbours, and liue witheout the
tradinge, to or with any forrayne Coun­tryes. They which trade in Merchaundice
with modeſty [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=17)
and do take no vſury (which thinge Marcus Cato declared was the next poinct to
a murderer? for to one that demaū ­ded of him, what it ſeemed vnto him, to be
an vſerer, heeVſury forbid­den. aunſwered, what is it to kill a man▪ And they
which doe not lye, neither deceaue others, with periury, orlyinge I deeme them
worthy to be enryched wyth the benefittes of of a commonwealth.

Worckemen giuen to fylthye gayne and which are the miniſters of pleaſures, and
do prouide for the prouocati­ons of gluttony, & lechery, are not only not to
be admitted, into a common weale, but alſo to be thruſt out of a Citty: for
wythe their typling houſes and places of ryot, they do hurt vnto many, and
profyt to no man.

And thoſe that exerciſe or vſe light arts and faculties, whereby riſeth no
profite, are to bee neglected and had in contempte and rather to bee derided
then eſteemed or re­warded.

The fyrſte reſpecte or regarde of geuinge our voyces is to be had of honeſty,
and vertue. And the ſeconde of ly­berall ſciences which in a Citty bringe with
them moſte plentifull profit. The thirde conſideration is to bee had of
Nobilitye, for they whoſe aunceſtours haue floriſhed fa­mousReaſons of
re­garde in a common vveale. with ſome kinde of prayſe, their children and
poſte­rity are not to be neglected, except by their reproch or ig­nominye,
they do darken & emblemiſh the prayſe and cō ­mendation of their aunceſtours.
And the fourth conſide­ration, ought to be had of them, which profet the
Citizens by trade of Merchaundice, worckmanſhip and induſtrye, makynge the
Citye therebye more wealthye and renow­med.

Uulcane who was moſt ſkilfull in the arte of Aſtrono­mie, & which was alſo the
ſucceſſour of Mercury in the kingdome dyd inuent the mines of ſiluer, gold,
and iron. The Grecians holde opinion that he fyrſt made and deui­ſed the fier
tonges of braſſe or copper, & other neceſſaryes touchinge huſbandry.

[[Page 10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=17)And they
ſaye that in the Arte of warre he could do ve­rye muche: and that hee was,
made lame, by reaſon of a wounde whiche he receyued in his foote: he alſo
helde o­pinion, that the Planets and ſtarres were fyery, and that all thinges
were made and created of fyre.

It ſhal therfore behoue them (which beare rule in a cō ­mon weale, to be
careful yt there want no deuiſers or chiefWorkmayſtero and deuiſers of Workes.
worckmaiſters in a citty: for when the ſacred or publique buildinges, are by
euill meaſure & proportion framed, yt miniſtreth occaſion to ſtraungers to
thinke, that the chief princes and rulers of that common weale are cleane voyd
of elegancy: but pryuate mens houſes being euil tymbred, vnhandſomely ſeuered
withe windowes and lightes, and beautified vncomely, are for habitacion
nothing handſom and expedient. Let the chiefe maſter of the worke therfore
reſpect and loke wel to the forme and faſhion of houſes in the city, & to the
cōmoditye of the buyldings & houſes, in time of peace and quietnes: but in
time of warres an Ar­chitecte or chiefe deuiſer of workes ſhall ſtande in ſo
good ſteede for engines, gonnes and other municions, that hee cannot but he
worthy of great prefermēt, honour, & pub­lique offices: for we reade of ſome
cittyes that haue bene delyuered frō the ſiege of their enemies, only by the
ſkil­full dylygence of the chiefe deuiſer or workemaiſter.

Amongſt other ſpectacles which throughout al y• worldThebes aſpec­tacle are
prayſed: the city of Thebes in Egipt was coūpted for the greatnes therof, for
the walles and for building, moſt worthieſt of admiration: for it had. C.
gates by ſituation diſtinct & ſeuered one from another, wt notable and
artifi­cial workmanſhip, wherupon it had ſo glorious a name, & was of ſuch
excellency, yt al the whole prouince there was called by the name of the
Citizens of Thebes: and yet the ſame was ſubuerted before the Empyre of Rome.

The brick walles of Babylon which Semiramis builded,Babilon. contayned in
compaſſe. 385. f [...] longs in height: betwene the towers fyfty cubites, and
in bredth thirty foote.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=18)The Art of
payntyng ſhe weth in it ſelfe greate  [...]rudici­on & learning & much
reſembleth poetry: For Sextus Em­piricus (after the opiniō of Symonides the
poet) ſaid yt a pic­ture is a ſtil or ſilēt Poeſie, & the poeſie to be a
talking pic­ture: And certaynlye it is an arte of great wyſdome andThe arte of
paintinge. doth touche neare vnto deuine knowledge ſo to conceyue in mynd the
dyuers formes oflyuing creatures and other things, ſo to expreſſe them with
pencill, and dyuers coul­lours that there ſeemes nothinge wantinge vnto theym,
but lyfe and breathe.

For wee reade that an Oxe dyd lowe at the beholding of a certayn pyctured Oxe:
and that not a fewe haue ben deceyued wyth the ſighte of grapes pictured. And
that byrdes haue alſo bene ſtyrred vp to reioyce at the paynted proportion or
ſimilitude of their kynde.

For a pycture hath not onely a grace with it, and gee­ueth wonderfull
delectacion: but alſo reſerueth the me­mory of thinges that are done and paſt,
and ſhoweth per­petually before our eyes, the byſtorye of thinges that are
done. And moreouer in reading of paynted ſtories wher­in notable exploytes are
expreſſed, wee are excited vnto the ſtudies of prayſe, and to the endeuour of
accompliſh­inge weighty and great matters. Wherfore it ſhal not be feared
leaſt yt the hands of young men be ſtayned, or ſpot­ted wythe coullors,
ſythens payntinge commethe neareſt vnto learninge it ſelfe.

Iulius Caeſar being ſent as Oueſtor or Threaſurer into Spayne, when he came to
Gades, marking well and behol­dyngeThe noble mynde of Iuli us Caeſar. the
Image of Alexander the great in the Temple of Hercules, ſighed, & as it were
bewayled his own ſlouth & negligence, that as yet in thoſe yeares of his, he
had not done any thinge worthye prayſe: whereas Alexander be­fore hee attayned
to that age, had conquered the greateſte parte of the worlde.

He required of the Senate that he might haue free ly­hertye [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=18) to eaſe hymſelfe
of thoſe their affayres: and beinge pricked forward wt memoriall of ſuch like
prayſe, wythin a ſmall tyme hee excelled and ſurmounted, the deedes & prowes
of Alexander of Macedonie,

Cato Cenſorius ſeemed ſcarce quiet in mynde becauſe there was no Image erected
for hym: and vnto one that demaunded hym why he had not hys picture or ymage
aſ­well as a greate ſort of others: he aunſwered, I had ra­ther that good men
ſhould muſe and doubte, why I haue it not, then (whyche is worſe) to mur­mure
in their mynds, why I ſhould haue it.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=19)

## 2\. THE SECOND BOKE entreatinge of carefull regarde for the ſupportation of
learning, the neceſſarie vfi­litie of liberal Artes and Scyences, and ex
amples perſwading to the vſe of other exerciſes cor­porall profitable to a
weale publique.

THE kynges of Egipte,Kinges of Ae­gipt only bent to learninge & knovvledge.
farre more eſteemed the prayſe of good diſciplines, & Sciences, then of
War­fare. And therefore they all with a wō ­derfull dylygence bent
theymſelues to the ſtudies of wiſdome, neyther dyd any of theym thincke
hymſelfe able or ſufficiente enoughe to beare rule, vnleſſe hee ſurm
[...]unted and excelled the reſi­due in ſome kynde of doctryne or learninge,
and employed hys whole indeuour to the furtheraunce and profitinge of many
others.

Wyth thys induſtrye Ptolomeus beinge incited, furni­ſhedThe Lybrarye of
Ptolomeus. and made that famous Library at Alexandria, to the ende he mighte
therby ſow the ſeede of wiſdome vnto his Poſteritye, and profite bothe the
Cyttizens, and alſo ſtraungers.

Hee alſo inſtituted playes vnto the Muſes and vnto A­pollo: and ordayned vnto
Poetes and Dratours at theyr diſputations, as vnto Champions in their
Combattes, greate rewardes and hyghe dignities, that they myghte the more
diligently take paynes in the ſtudies and exerci­ſes of learning.

Learninge (doubtleſſe) was moſt auncient among the Egiptians, whoſe prieſtes
whiche were conuerſaunte a­bout their Kinges and rulers, were accompted the
firſte of all others that were notable in the Mathematicall ſci­ences, and
vnto them alſo did reſort thick and threfolde,Egiptian lore. ſcholars out of
all nacions of y• world to learne: neyther was any man thought ſufficiētly
learned, which was not ſkilful in the Egiptian lore or diſcipline, to the
attayning [[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=19)
whereof (as Diodorus Siculus maketh mention) Orpheus Muſaeus, Melampus,
Daedalus, Homerus, Lycurgus, Solon, Pythagoras, Plato, Eudoxus, Democritus,
Euripides, and ma­ny others went thyther, who haue made famous al diſci­plines
of all other nations.

I deeme it beſt firſt & eſpecially: that al men (if it were poſſible) ſhould
be learned, neyther am I of their opinion which ſaye that learning is the
plague and deſtruction of wyt & memory, amongſt whom was Plato, who affirmed
that the vſe of letters was a hinderaunce vnto memorye, becauſe thoſe thinges
(which we haue layd vp in wryting) we (as it were) ceaſe to kepe in memory:
euen as thoſe thinges which we haue layd vp in ſtrong cheſtes, vnder locke and
key we thinke to be ſure ynough, & take no more care therfore: notwithſtanding
amongſt al the deuiſes of mē, I doubt whether euer any thinge were deuiſed or
vttered more excellent: for it ſeemeth a thing ſtraunge and mira­culous howe
in a fewe notes or Letters, ſo infinite ſpeches of men, & innumerable words, &
ſētences ſhould be cōpriſed & cōprehended: for al kynd of doctrine &
lear­ning ſhould be mortall & ſubiect vnto decay, yea the acts & geſtes of men
ſhould be ſone buried in obliuiō, if they wer not regiſtred and reſerued in
monumentes of learninge: which haue bene ſo highely accompted of, that many
both people, and moſte excellente perſonages doe challenge to them ſelues, the
inuention thereof.

Thoſe letters, therefore doe I deeme not onelye to beeNo Wytty Ci­tizen
vvithout learninge. throughly learned: but alſo ſcarcely can I thinke any mā
in a free cytty can or may deſerue the name of a witty Ci­tizen withoute the
knowledge of learninge: for how without learning can we attaine not only vnto
the high know­ledge of liberall ſciences, but alſo thereby learne manye ſmall
artes or faculties neither can merchandize it ſelfe or huſbādry, be in
ſufficient ſauety without them: for theſe do keepe the memory of things paſt,
they inſtruct poſtery­tye: they annexe and compare thinges done and paſt,
vn­to [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=20)
thinges yet to come, and do keepe a perpetuall recko­ninge of all our whole
lyfe.

The beſt waye here in to bee done therefore, is to trayne yong childrē
herunto before they apply any other maters: if in tyme to come wee deſire to
haue them proue men, or to be reputed and taken in the nomber of Cytyzens: for
ſurelye the Greeke prouerbe is:

A man voyde of ſkill and wantinge learned lore,

To a tree vnprofitable, comparde is euermore.

Gouernours therfore of common weales oughte to beCare for ſcholemaſters
carefull & diligently to foreſee yt for euery liberall Art or good learning,
ther may be aſſigned y• beſt ſcholemaiſters to be mayntayned wyth a publique
ſtipend, whyche maye teache openlye: for euery priuate perſon cannot maintein
lyuing for their Chyldren, and recompence their Schole­maiſters wyth
conuenient ſtypende▪ and ordynary ſalary. And eſpeciallye let the
Scholemaiſters teaching Gram­mer be excellent and notable, yea not onely in
learninge but in manners alſo moſte approued: for it is moſt daun­gerous as it
is ſpoken in the Prouerbe: To betake a ſheepe into the cuſtodye of a wolfe.
And to fynde hym whom thou putteſt in truſt as ſcholemaiſter to thy cihldren,
a corrup­ter and marrer of them, For the vices wherewithe Chyl­dren at that
age are polluted, do eyther remayne perpetually, or elles wyth greate
diffycultie are they withdrawn from them.

The Romaynes ſo greatly eſteemed Grammer, that by decree, they ordayned the
ſame to be taught wyth a cō ­monGrammer. ſalary, in the open ſtreetes or high
ways, by meanes whereof it was called long time the cōmon Science: ma­nye
affirme that this Art was firſt deuiſed, and inuented at Memphis, a cyttye in
Egipt.

Pythagoras, the Prince of Italian Philoſophie (whom Plato doth in all pointes
for moſt parte imitate) thinketh [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=20) the ſcyences
Mathematicall to be moſte neceſſarye for the ciuill man: In vayne (as he
iudgeth) ſhall a man ſtudye Philoſophy, which hath not taſted of the ſame▪ not
as they ſaye ſuperficially, but euen throughly and effectually.

Lucius Columella would haue euery day to be obſerued by the rules of
Aſtronomie, bothe for profite in huſban­drye, and agayn, for the auoyding of
manyfold daungers whereof we may be warned to take hede by them that be
ſkylfull.

Anaximander Mileſius forewarned the Lacedaemonians that they ſhoulde looke
well to their Cyttye and houſes: for he foreſawe by this Science, that there
was an earth­quake at hand, whych thynge doubtleſſe came ſo to paſſe: and a
greate parte of that Cytty and of the hyll Taygetus fell flatte to the
grounde.

So Hyppocrates did foreſhewe a plague or peſtilence whiche ſhoulde come from
the Illyrians, and diſperſed his Scholars round about the Cytties of Greece,
to ſuccourAſtronomie. and relieue them that ſhould be diſeaſed.

Pericles generall of the Athenians, when as his hoſte was aſtonied at the
Eclipſe of the Sunne, and ready to yelde the victorye to their enemies, whom
they thought y• gods more fauoured, deliured thē: from their perplexity,
diſcloſing the cauſe namely that it was the natural order of the Sunne, and
that it came not to paſſe by any diſplea­ſure of god or anye vnnaturall euent.

In the diſcipline or doctrine of Aſtronomie, & in other ſciences Mathematical,
Publius Nigidius did very great­lye excel amonge the Romaines: to whome was
attribu­ted for a Sirname, Potter, by reaſon of his excellent de­uiſe and
inuention of that knowledge: for when it was propoſed & argued, why two
Twinnes both borne at one byrth ſhoulde haue diuerſitie of deſtenie, ſeinge
they were both begotten and borne vnder one Planet, and be defen­ding his Art,
denied, y• yt could not be, by reaſon of y• ſwift mouinge of Celeſtiall Orbes,
ſhewinge the ſame by this
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=21) meanes, he
ſtyrred about the wheele, that bare about the Potters Claye, withe greate
force, and vppon the ſame did caſte two droppes of Incke, and after a pawſe
madeExample of deſ [...]eny in tvvo Tvvynnes. from turning the wheele, the
droppes were found a good waye a ſonder, in the vttermoſte partes of the
Wheele: how now (ſaythe he) can they thincke that Twynnes be a lyke deſtenied,
and borne vnder one planet, when as the heauens are moued and whirled with ſo
ſwift mouinge & turning: ſeing the wheele of a Potter being turned about with
a ſmall courſe, doth manifeſt before your Eyes, the two drops of yncke at one
time to be ſhaken and ſprinkled into two ſeuerall places: ſurelye this deuiſe
was ſo well lyked of the Audience, that it yelded vnto the Aucthoure the palme
and vyctorye of the diſputacion, and a perpetu­all Syrname.

Lycurgus dyd ſo allowe, and eſteeme the Scyence of Muſicke: that hee affirmed
the ſame to bee geeuen vntoMuſicke. men by nature, to the more eaſie bearing
and tolleration of their laboures and trauayles: and be ordayned the vſe of
playinge on the ſhalmes in warfare, whereuppon they ſhould playe both at theyr
marchynge forwardes, and at their retyre alſo: and ſo ſtyrre vp and encourage
the myn­des of the Souldiers that euen the moſte cowardly per­ſon beinge
pricked forth with y• ſounde therof, dyd ſome­tymes proue the moſte valiaunte,
and atchieued the vyctorye for their countrye. The people of Creta alſo, when
they were about to aſſault theyr enemies, wer excyted and encouraged to
fyghte, by the noyſe of the Harpe. The Argiues wyth Shaulmes as the Latines
wyth Trumpettes, and the Frenchemen wythe Cornet­tes, were encouraged and
anymated.

Tymotheus the moſte excellent Muſician when he was diſpoſed to aduaunce
hymſelfe any tyme before Alexander the Kynge, tuned his inſtrumentes ſo
cunningly and mu­ſicallye, that the Kynge hauinge mynde of none other thynge
but that onelye, and beynge therewyth pearced [[Page
14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=21) and penetrated
to the harte, as it were by ſom deuyne ad­miration would ſtreight lay hand on
his weapō and take thereby occaſion to ouercome his enemies.

Muſicke in a free Cytty is to be allowed, yea although it brought no other
thinge ells then pleaſure and delyte: for wee cannot alwayes bee buſied in
affayres: and thys kynd of oblectation euen in oure buſines and dealings ys
moſte honeſt: for as CICERO ſaythe very well: It is the parte of a free manne
ſometymes to doe nothinge, and to wythdrawe bys wearyed mynde from long care
otherwyſe. Whyche thynge eſpecially muſicke bringeth to paſſe, ma­king vs
thereby to forget our Laboures, Trauayles, and myſeries.

Plato deuiſed three ſortes of Muſicke, the one he ſayde was manifeſte,
conſiſtinge onelye in voyce: as wee ſee ys vſed when men ſynge: the Seconde
aſwell wythe the voyce, as wythe the hande: as when wyth the ſtrykinge vppon
the ſtrynges, we vſe to ſynge to the Inſtrumentes: and the thirde (ſaythe hee)
is onelye fynyſhed withe the hands & fingers: as when the voyce being ſylent
and ſtyl, we ſtryke and playe vppon an Inſtrument.

PYTHAGORAS thincketh that Muſicke was not the inuention of men but of the
fyrſt worckemaiſter of theThe inuention of muſicke af­ter the opiniō of
Pythagoras. vniuerſall worlde, whyche made the Celeſtiall Orbes, to yeld and
make a certayn harmonie in their diſtinct mo­tions, whereout procedeth the
fyrſt inuention of humane muſicke: whiche muſicke doubtleſſe is profitable
vnto a cyuyll perſon, and doth not onely delighte the mynde, but alſo nouriſhe
the wytte, makynge men more promp­te and couragious, not onelye in warlyke
affayres, but alſo to atchieue euery waightye matter.

And moreouer wee reade of PAEON and dyuers other Phyſytians, whoſe Pacientes
almoſt diſpayrynge of recouerye, haue beene healed and recouered by the
delyghtes and pleaſures taken in Muſycke and that
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=22) certayne mad
men haue bene brought to their right wits agayne, by the ſame meane.

If wee will haue anye regarde of the health of our bo­dies and tranquillitie
of lyfe (whych without proſperousPhiſicke. healthe can ſcarcelye be had, we
ſhall confeſſe y• Phyſycke is the moſt excellent and neceſſary Arte
pertayninge vn­to mortall men: For as Cornelius Celſus maketh mentiō, who
hath written moſt excellent bokes of this diſcipline: Huſbandrye afoordeth
nouriſhement to our bodyes when they bee healthfull, and Phiſicke promiſeth
healthe vnto perſons diſeaſed: and therfore we ought to render thanc­kes to
the lyuing god, who hath graunted vs lyfe: next of all vnto the Phiſician who
dothe conſerue the ſame vnto vs, and maketh it healthfaller & of longer
continuaunce. For to proue that this Arte of all other Sciences is moſte
auncient, y• beſt learned Greeke Authours do teſtifye: for the inuenter bereof
was Apis the ſonne of Phoroneus, and Pytho king of Egipt.

The auncient wryters deuided Phiſick into three par­tes,Dyet, medicin, and
manula cure. the one to conſiſte in dyet, another in remedies or me­dicines,
and the thirde in artificall cure of the hand: and vnto this parte, did the
inuentions of Alcmaeon Crotoniata ſcholar to Pythagoras the Phiſician much
helpe, who ſear­chinge euery member of mannes bodye, and cuttinge vpp all and
euery ioynte and inwarde article, of all the vytall partes, was the firſte
that deuiſed and inuented the diſſec­tion or Anatomie of mannes body.

If medicine for the body be neceſſary in a good commō weale, for the ſondrye
kyndes of diſeaſes, whiche chaunce dayly vnto mortall men, to thend with
ſtrong & ſound bo­dies we may lyue well: how much more neceſſarye ſhall y•
phiſicke of the ſoule and mynde bee, without the whyche the bodies themſelues
cānot be in good health or lyking? For man is ſubiect vnto manye diſeaſes, by
reaſon of the dyuers kyndes of meates whereof  [...]e feedeth, as Homer ſayth:
yet notwithſtanding the diſeaſes of the mynde are [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=22) not fewer, then
the diſeaſes of the bodye, and wherewyth we be far more vexed and indaungered:
what diſeaſe ſee­meth anger to be, wherwith when we bee throughlye cha­fed,
lytle or nothinge do we differ from mad and furious franticke perſons? What
diſeaſe ſeemeth couetouſnes to bee? wherewith when we be throughly enflamed,
we can­not be gratefull vnto our owne Countrye, not to our Pa­rentes nor
chyldren, neyther yet vnto oure ſelues: What doth feare? what doth tremblinge?
what doth ſlouth and ſluggiſhenes worke, and bryng to paſſe in vs? and other
perturbations of the mynde innumerable, whyche when they ſeyſe vpon vs, we are
not onely in mynde-but alſo in bodye diſquieted: but the Medicine or Phyſicke
for the mind is ſpecially Eloquence, which by the reaſons and ar­guments of
Philoſophy repreſſeth or keepeth vnder, ſuch perſons as wold be to much puffed
vp with vyces, lyftingEloquence. vp thoſe that are caſt downe, and makinge
very daſterdes to become valiant perſons: for what other force or power can
there be better, then by the force of eloquence, to bry­dle the raginge and
furyous common people, when their courage fayleth theim for feare, & to ſtyrre
them afreſhe to valiauntnes.

Auncient wryters ſaye that Eloquence was the ladye and Miſtris of matters,
nether is it only accoumpted pro­fitable in peace and quietnes, but alſo in
warres and tu­multes excellethe all other ſtrengthe and force: whyche thinge
to be true Pyrrhus king of the Epyrot [...]s affyrmed. For when he did make
warres in Italye, hee retayned as his compaygnion of his exploites Cyneas the
Theſſalian an Orator and diſciple of Demoſthenes, vſinge his helpe and
ſeruice, at eche pyyche moſt earneſtlye: for vnto the cy­ties whiche he coulde
not ſubdue by force and armour, he ſent Cyneas his Orator: which Cyties for
the moſte parte he perſwaded to ſurrender, euen as he deſired: inſomuch that
Pyrrhus vſed often times to ſaye that m [...] citties were wonne and brought
vnder his power and ſubiectiō by the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=23) Eloquence of
Cyneas, then were by himſelfe vanquiſhed by force of armes.

The Arte of Oratorye conſiſtethe in three Sortes of cauſes: Whereof the fyrſte
conteyneth Perſwaſion, and Dyſſwaſion: for what thynges ſoeuer are in a common
weale aduiſed or deliberated vppon, they haue neede of perſwaſion and
diſſwaſion, to the intente the truth maye be boulted oute: Wherfore an
Oratoure, that is to ſaye a good man, ſkilfull and flowinge in vtteraunce,
ſhal per­ſwade ſuche thinges as ſhalbe thoughte profytable, leaſte the People
ſlyde or fall awaye by a ſinyſter and falſe opi­nion, and allowe well of that
which within a little ſpace after, they ſhall eyther be compelled to alter and
chaunge or wyth repentaunt mindes, beare and ſuffer the ſame vn­paciently
[...]. The ſeconde is called the kynde Demon­ſtratiue, conſiſtinge eyther in
prayſe or diſprayſe: And the thyrde kynde is that whiche in Iudgementes is
exer­cyſed, and this fallethe oute into Accuſacion and de­fence.

But many cities now a days are noſeled in an ill error, becauſe eyther Lawyers
are altogether ignoraunte of pleadīg cauſes, or rather becauſe light diſpoſed
brab [...]ers, as the auncient wryters dyd cal them, do pleade and han­dle
matters onelye for lucre ſake bablingly, and therevp­pon delayinge Suites,
make the ſame to hange in ſtrife and varyaunce very longe, whiche thinge in
Cities is ve­rye daungerous: for pryuye grudges and hatred bredeth diſcorde
amonge Cityzens.

Amonge the Venetians, whoſe common wealthe is forThe noble perſonnes among the
Venetians do pleade cau­ſes. Iuſtice, Gouernment, Wealth, and nobilitie of the
Cyt­tizens, accoumpted not onelye throughout all Italye, but alſo throughe out
all the worlde moſte famous and excel­lent: the moſt learned perſons of all
others, in the arte of oratorie, & ſuch as by come of a noble race, do pleade,
& handle theyre cauſes: by whyche meanes throughe con­tynuall exerciſe, they
doe attayne to that perfection [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=23) that verye manye
of theym proue cunninge and eloquente men in their common weale.

Poetes are to bee mayntayned in a Cyttye, and to bee made famous aſwell wyth
honour, as wyth prayſe: whi­che Perſons ſurelye oughte to bee moſte cheryſhed
andPoetes neceſſarye in a comō Weale. welcomed vnto all men, aſwell for the
rarytye of theym, (for nothing in all ages of man can bee ſounde more rare,
then a good Poet) as alſo for the abundaunce of their wit, and theyr deuine
Nature, neyther ſhall Poetes be exiled from a good Cyttye, whatſoeuer Plato
ſhall ſaye, ſithens they are well knowen to bee verye profytable vnto theyr
Countrye: For, what learninge hathe Grammar in yt contayned, wythout the
pertractation of Poetes? The Elegancye or Fyneneſſe of words, the proprietye
of the Tounge, the ſweete tranſlations or Metaphors, the ly­bertye of Speache
and Sentences, whyche doe beauty­fye the Oracions, as it were with certayne
Starres werr they not inuented onelye by Poetes, and aptlye pla­ced and
dyſtynguyſhed by theym, in theyr ryghte places.

Socrates the Phyloſopher was wont to ſaye, it ſmallie fancied or lyked hym, to
beholde the ſecretes of Nature, and to neglecte the reaſon and order of mannes
lyfe: for what profiteth it vs to ſearche oute certayne hydden Se­cretes of
Nature, to meaſure the ſtarres and ſkyes in our myndes, yf wee knowe not oure
ſelues, and neglecte the reaſon or order whyche oughte to gouerne oure
appetyte, and whereby wee dyffer frome bruite Bea­ſtes.

What maye bee more vyle or fylthye then to ſee a man that is well learned, to
bee with Luſt enflamed, furyous, or Angry, Couetous, or vnſaciable withoute
Meaſure inſomuche the more he hath, the more he ſeemes to lacke, ſurelye vnto
ſuche a man that hapneth, whych vnto Tha­les y• philoſppher, one of y• ſeuen
ſages, hapned: for he on a
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=24) tyme in the
night ſeaſon walking abroade dyd behold the heauens very earneſtly, by meanes
whereof he fell into a dytche, or pytte that was in hys waye where hee went,
whereat he cryed out: a certayne olde wife lookinge out at her wyndowe, and
hearinge him cry, aſked hym what he went about to doe, that he ſo fell into
the pytte, where vppon he aunſwered, that hys meaninge was to beholde the
heauenly planets: but the old woman ſmyling ſayde, thou ſeeſt not thoſe
thinges whych are before thyne eyes, and yet wilt thou ſeeke to knowe heauenly
matters?

The Oracle at Delphos (whych they ſaye was fixed be­fore the dores of the
Temple) ought to be prefixed before all mennes eyes, which deſire to be right
wiſe: whiche is Knowe thy ſelfe: for he knoweth not himſelfe which dothe not
knowe how to vſe the vertue of his mynde, whiche is broken or ſhaken with
feare, which doth aduaunce himſelf beyonde meaſure in reioyſinge, who is
inflamed wyth co­uetouſnes, tormented with luſtes: agaynſt whych euylles
Philoſophie armeth vs, and doth not onely plucke vp the rootes, but alſo
euerye little ſtring or fibre of perturbati­ons. To this philoſophie will
euery good Cytizen ende­uour himſelfe, that deſireth to profite not onlye
himſelfe and his, but hys natiue countrye alſo.

Philoſophy teacheth vs throughlye that Iuſtice is it,Philoſophye. whiche
contayneth and keepeth together humane ſociety: wythout the whych there can
neyther cytty, neyther yet a­ny houſe be rightly gouerned: For ſhee perſwadeth
vs to vſe and enioy our owne right, and not to iniury any man, to lyue
contente with our own goods, and to abſtayn, not onelye oure handes, but alſo
our eyes from other mennes goodes.

The knowledge of Philoſophye is not onely pleaſaunt vnto Cytizens, but alſo to
Kynges, Princes, and gouer­nours, and doth much auayle in thenterpriſe of
greate or waighty matters: for Philip of Macedonie when newes was brought hym,
that his ſonne Alexander was borne, [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=24) hee dyrected hys
letters vnto Ariſtotle ſayinge: that hee gaue hartye thanckes to the Godds,
not only for that hee had a Sonne borne, but becauſe yt was his fortune to be
borne in the tyme of Ariſtotle, of whome vndoubtedlye he hoped hee ſhoulde bee
inſtructed, & that hee ſhould proue a Sonne bothe worthye for hym, and the
ſucceſſion of hys Crowne: and therefore ſo ſone as thys hys Sonne could
ſpeake, he gaue charge that hee ſhoulde be brought vppe at the becke or
commaundement of Ariſtotle, committing him in his luſtye greene age vnto his
charge to be further trayned in diſciplines, & learning: and when hys maiſter
Ariſtotle by reaſon of ſickneſſe, could not well attende & followe hym in hys
warres, he reſigned hys rowme vnto Calyſthenes hys ſcholar, that he might euer
bee at hand & readye with the Kynge, and further him in the ſtudyes of
Philoſophye.

Pericles who had done ſo manye famous Exploytes a­mongſt the Atheniens, had
for his Scholemaiſter Anax­agoras, whoſe precepts he is reported verye often
to haue put in vſe, not onelye in cyuill and domeſticall, but alſo in forreyne
and warlike affayres, wherein hee beinge ſtudiouſlye bent to take paynes, and
hearinge that Anax­agoras beinge weary of hys longe lyfe wente about to
fa­myſh hymſelfe to death, wyth all expedicion came to him and as a peticioner
wythe prayer and teares deſired hym, that if he had no mynde or ioye to liue
vnto hymſelfe: that yet at leaſt hee would liue for Pericles ſake, whoſe
confe­rence and Counſell in matters tendinge to the Common weale, hee greatly
wyſhed to haue.

Iulius Caeſar was a man moſte exquiſite in all kinde ofPrayſe of Iuli­us
Caeſar his bountie to vvardes lear­ning and lear­ned men. learninge, and
enriched all the beſt learned men in hys tyme wyth rewardes, and promotions:
By whoſe exam­ple alſo, Octauius Auguſtus retayned Athenodorus as▪ hys
Scholemaiſter in Philoſophie, a man as learned as anye in his time.

The Frenchemen which are called Celtae affyrme that
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=25) they whom
they called in their mother tongue Druydes, The firſt inuention of philoſophy
amōg the Frenchmen. were the fyrſt inuentors of philoſophie: for theſe
perſons, inhabiting the woodes: not onelye in contemplation, but alſo in life
ſhewed themſelues preciſe philoſophers, & diſ­puted many things of vertue, and
of the immortall God, verye godlye: and belde opinion, that death was no other
thinge, then a certayne flittinge vnto a better & more laſt­inge lyfe: who
being induced with that perſwaſiō, fought valiantly and without feare againſt
their enemies, thinc­kinge that man altogether a daſterde and foole, whyche
feared death: ſithens euen forthwith they ſhould by death paſſe into a farre
better lyfe.

Wee haue alreadye tolde that firſte eſpeciallye the cy­uyll man muſt laboure
to furniſhe his mynde withe diſci­plines, and ſtudies of good Artes: for the
excellencye of the mynde, dothe not onely helpe the bodye, but alſo ma­keth it
moſte readye to the atchieuinge of all and euerye greate laboure: for there
can no body be ſtrong and heal­thye enoughe, when the mynde languyſheth: for
in the warres wee do often ſee that ſome little men and ſmall of ſtature do
fight wyth a good courage, and thoſe which are bigger, to be verye cowardes:
and therfore it is better to helpe and fortifye the mynde with vertue, and
wiſdome, if wee deſire to haue the right ſtrength of the bodye.

The exerciſe of mennes bodye is altogether coumptedCorporal exerciſe.
neceſſarye: for Slouthe dothe dull the bodye and maketh men geeuen to too much
tenderneſſe, but induſtrye or la­boure dothe ſtrengthen the body, and maketh
men more luſtye and ſtronge.

For the Lacedaemonians nouriſhed their children in the country, & vſed to
wraſtle naked, to thend they mighte ac­cuſtome themſelues, the better to
endure trauel & labors:Hard bringing vp of youth profitable. They lodged
abrode vnder the open ayre, aſwel in tyme of cold, as in tyme of heate, and
hardened themſelues in the duſt, in running, ſhoting, wraſtling, caſting, and
leaping. To ſet before valiaunt perſons & ſtout warriours, y• ſwete [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=25) delights of
boyes and gyrles, ſeemes to me no other thing thē to weaken ſtrength & to
haue all vertue in contempt & deriſion. Let children therfore bee ſo
exerciſed, that they may accuſtome themſelues to take paynes & labour, but yet
not in outragious ſauagenes: for as induſtrye and honeſte exerciſe doth
ſtrengthen the bodie, and make it more apt vnto labour and trauayle: ſo too
much exerciſe, & con­tinuallContinual toy linge. trauell, doth breake, cut of,
and ſhorten a mannes dayes, with vntymely olde age. Ariſtotle witneſſethe that
with ſuch kynde of toyle, the grouth of the bodye is hyn­dered, and the
members wrenched and diſfaſhioned. Cel­ſus ſayth that we ſee many times men of
greate toyle and labour, to become in the ende, moſt crooked and benom­med in
their members.

Iulius Caeſar commaunded that young warriors ſhould not be trayned or taught
neyther in the ſchole, nor by mai­ſtersThe commaundement of Iulius Caeſar for
trayning of yonge ſoldiers. of defēce, but at home, in theyr dwelling houſes,
by y• horſemen and Senators, ſkilfull in feates of armes, in wraſtlinge,
runninge, caſting of the balle: in whych prac­tiſes, he lyked wel to haue them
exerciſed, yea, he thought it wolde doe them much good to be enured in
ſwimminge, leapinge, ſkirmiſhing and making a ſhewe of a right bat­tayle in
deede: for they chat accuſtome themſelues to ſu­che exerciſes, come more
chearfully, and with better cou­rage to the warres, & are both in body and
mynd ſtrōger.Epaminondas, exerciſed vvraſteling.

Epaminondas the moſt worthy captayn of the Thebanes, enured himſelfe much with
wraſtling, not ſo much to get a corporal ſtrength, as for the agilitye &
nimblenes of his body: alſo Plato yt greteſt of al philoſophers exerciſed
wraſtling wt Ariſto Argiuus, by reaſō wherof it is ſayd yt for ye notable
habite of his body, hee was called Plato: for afore he was called Ariſtocles,
after yt name of his graundſyre.

The Lacedaemonians cōmaunded their womē to wraſtle among thē, & affied in
mariage, the mā cōqueror wt the woman cōquereſſe together: yt the iſſue
afterward coming of ſtrong and luſty parents, ſhould be likewiſe ſtronger thē
others: but this cuſtome is altogether to be refuſed & re­fected:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=26) Let women
therfore keepe theym ſelues at home and ap­plyeWomen by nature more ty­merous
and fearefull then men. their huſwifelye affayres, whome nature hath made and
ordayned weake and fearfull perſons, that by mea­nes of feare and awe they
myght be the fitter and apter to keepe home.

Let firſt the wytte of a chylde be nouriſhte and trayned vnto wyſedome▪ if it
may bee: whyche of all other thin­ges is the beſt and chiefeſt: let hym be
exercyſed in bodye but yet ſo as he hynder not thereby the gyftes and
dexte­ritye of hys wytte: for it is hard for a chylde to be exercy­ſed in
bodye and mynde together at one tyme, whereof there would be diligent
conſideration and reaſon had: for they neede bodylye exercyſe but a ſmall
whyle, leaſt they ſhoulde bee therewythe to muche delighted: for they are made
thereby more dull of capacitie,, and ſcarcely knowe howe to prouide for theim
ſelues: as wee reade of Milo Exāple of the greate ſtrength of Mylo.
Crotoniates of whome it is reported that he dyd all things beyond the ſtrength
and hability of man, & often winning the beſt game and victorie, was crowned:
and kyllinge an oxe with one blowe of his Fyſte, ſacryfyſed hym, but at length
truſtinge to muche to hys ſtrength, he came to a moſt miſerable death and
doleful ende: for eſpyinge a tree where into wedges were dryuen, but not yet
clouen aſon­der, and laughinge at the ſlouth of them that had lefte the ſame
tree, in that caſe ſo remayninge, hee went about toMiſerable end of Mylo teare
it aſonder withe his handes, but when the wedges were lowſed and fallen out,
and that the tree came toge­ther again to his proper nature, he was taken faſt
by y• ar­mes in that deſert & vnable to help out himſelfe, was de­uoured of
wylde beaſtes, and fowles of the ayre.

Polydamas an other famous Champion enteringe on a tyme into a certayne Caue,
and willing to ſit downe, hisExample of polydamas, frowarde fortune was ſuche,
that the vpper parte of the Caue ouer theym opened wide, and fell down vpon
them. Polidamas therefore goinge aboute withe his armes and ſhoulders, to
beare vp the waight, all his companions, [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=26) leauinge him
diſtreſſed fledde away, and hee therby fond­lye enforced to make for hymſelfe
hys graue there not without the greate deriſion of all the companye.

Secundi libri.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=27)

## 3\. THE THIRDE BOOKE entreateth of the election, & choiſe of Magiſtrates,
in a cōmon weale: of moral ex­amples in furderinge their offices and duties
in ſeuerall: Of diſcuſſing and redreſſing cauſes in variance: of reforming
enormities and controuerſies: of needeful ordinaunces: of accuſtomed watches
for defēce & ſaue garde, of the citty or countrye: of carefull proui­ſion for
corne and victualles, needfull aſwell in peace as in warres for the
publiqueſuſten­tation.

AL gouernaunce of a cō ­mon weale, conſiſteth in the deſcription and choyſe
of Magyſtrates, wythoute whoſe aucthoritye, wyſedome, and dili­gence, a cyttye
cannot flouriſte nor be: For ▪amongeſt People that lyue in Freedome, there is
nothing well done without magiſtrates: for euen as a ſhip wythout a Pylot can
neuer bee brought into the hauen of tranquillity: and as an Hoaſt of men,
without a captain, is alwayes in great daunger, & ſcarcely euer winneth the
victory: in like maner eiuil ſocietie ſemeth, to be obiected and  [...]ayd
open vnto Fortune: neyther can be in any parte quiet or fortunate, except (by
the aucthority, and councell of the Magiſtrates) it be gouerned. And yet
notwithſtā ­dinge multitude of Magiſtrates troubleth and pertur­bethHovve a
com­mon vveale proſpereth vvithout Ma­giſtrates. the order of a Cyttye. For as
in ſeafaring and war­like buſines, regarde muſt be had that there bee but ſewe
commaunders, & many obayers: ſo alſo iudge I it meete and requiſite to be
obſerued in the ſtate of a cōmonweale:

Auncient wryters commend the Maſſilians whoſe common weale for order ſake and
equitye, they prefer before [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=27) all others: for
they had Senators, in number (as Strabo maketh mention) 600. of whome fyftene
euery yeare by turnes bore greateſt aucthoritye: and of thoſe fyftene, al­ſo
three were apointed to decide laws, & matters in cōtro­uerſy, & theſe few
only, gouerned the ciuil ſociety very wel but in time of warres & vprores,
theſe Maſſilians did choſe ſuche Generalles and Princes as were ſufficient and
wel able to take ſome wayghtye charge of warres in hande: for verye manye
Phiſicians being brought vnto one ſicke perſon, do rather ſtryue amonge theym
ſelues by waye of vayne oſtentation: then miniſter thoſe thinges which may
heale, or remedye the paciente: And dyuers counſelles or opinions in greateſt
daūgers do rather hazard and enda­mage a matter then helpe it: theſe and many
others, are to be conſidered in the ordayninge of Magiſtrates.

But this agayne and againe, I deeme worthye to beeWho be mete perſons for to
be made magi­ſtrates in a common vveale. ſpoken, that very well it is, and
moſte meete, that the ad­miniſtration of the Common weale ſhoulde bee
commyt­ted vnto olde men, whyche both by reaſon of their age, & experience in
matters haue moſte ſkyll: for true is that ſentence of Plato, and which of
Cicero is holden as it were for an oracle,

Bleſſed maye that man be coumpted, to whome euen in his olde age, it hath
chaunced, to obtayne both wyſdom and true opinions.

Crantor, an ordynary ſcholar of Xenocrates, and moſte excellent Philoſopher,
reckoninge the ſtate of mans lyfe, and deſcypheringe by moſt wyſe deuiſion our
actions, &Fovver ſpecial regardes to be taken in mans lyfe. cogitacions:
affirmed that the fyrſte part of our lyfe is to bee imployed vnto vertue: the
ſecond to good health: the thirde to honeſt pleaſure: and the fowerth as he
thoughte vnto ryches. For doubtles, nothing that good or pleaſant is, can
happen vnto vs without vertue: next vnto thys (as the beſt cōpanion of
vertue) he deemed to be good health:
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=28) For ſcarcely
can it be well wyth vs in oure mynde, when it is euill with oure bodie: and
ſcarcelye can the griefe of the bodye bee without the griefe of the mynde:
Moreouer hee that is in good healthe, enioyeth fréeer mynde, and is not
fruſtrate of the quietnes of hys wytte, and ſenſes: next vnto theſe twayne,
let honeſt pleaſure come as a third cō ­paignion, which then doubtleſſe is
chiefe and beſt, when the minde enioyeth it ſelfe: it meaſureth all thinges
vnto the tranquillitye and pleaſures of the mynde▪ it is not de­lighted wyth
the tickling of the ſences, or allurementes of the bodye, but in contemplation
of greate and waigh­tye matters, whyche ſurelye bee the foode of an honeſte
minde, well furniſhed with liberall ſtudies: That fourth parte whyth hath
ſociety with the former three, although it be the leaſt of all, yet when wee
reſpect humaine neceſ­ſitie, and when wee conſider, that man hath nede of
meat, drincke, apparel, & dwelling houſe, it cannot bee accoūp­ted otherwiſe
then neceſſary: For as Callymachus ſaith, wythout ryches vertue aduaunceth no
man: and that ver­tue without ryches, doth little or nothing adorn any mā.
Theognis the true Poet, teſtifieth, that for feare of pouerty we goe headlong
euen into the Seas: for penury nowe & then vrgeth excellent perſons, and
compelleth them to at­tempt very harde enterpriſes. Plantus the moſt pleaſāt
among comical Poetes, for want and ſcarſitie of victuals, placed himſelfe for
hyre to grynd in a Myll, and there ſo often as he had any vacant tyme from his
worcke, hee ac­cuſtomed himſelfe to write Comedies and to ſell theim.

Caſſius Seuerus alſo an excellente Oratour, hauinge cōtinued for the ſpace
of. xxv. yeares a vaniſhed man, died in great penurie, ſcarcelye hauinge
ragges wherewith to couer his priuities. And Valerius the compaignion in
office of Brutus dyed ſo pore, that hee was buried at the cō monPinchinge
pouertye put­teth men to their ſhiftes coſtes of the Cyttye: And the
legittimate ſonne of kinge Perſeus (as Marcellinus wryteth) after his
miſera­ble calamity and frowning fortune, was glad to practize [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=28) the Smythes
occupation to get his lyuing withall: theſe cogitacions ought oftentimes to be
reuolued in mynde of all theym that will rightlye conſtitute humane ſocietye.

They that take vpon theym the office of a Magiſtrate:A Magiſtrate let them
knowe that they beare a maieſtie of the common weale, and let them forget
themſelues ſo longe to be pry­uate perſons, as they execute or vſe the
adminiſtration of a publique office: let the magiſtrates euermore haue be­fore
their eyes, the lawes of the common weale, wherunto in all pointes, let them
know that obedience is to be geuē. For as the lawes do gouerne the
magiſtrates: ſo the ma­giſtrates oughte to gouerne the people. For true is
that Prouer be pronounced by Tully:

The Magiſtrate is lawe, that doth speake and dispute:

But the Law is a Magiſtrate ſilent and mute.

For this happeneth in a good common weale, that hee whiche modeſtlye obeyeth,
may ſeeme worthy, and meete ſomtyme to beare aucthority: and it is expedient,
that heHe that obey­eth vvel ruleth vvell whiche obayeth the Lawes, ſhoulde
hope to beare rule in tyme to come: and hee that is in offyce, and hath
Iuriſdic­tion or gouernaunce, let him thinke that not long after, it may come
to paſſe that he muſt obay others: let the firſt retaine vertues, as their
guides, to direct and rule them:Vertues are the guydes of ciuill magiſtrates.
without the whiche nothinge is well donne, whereof the firſte and principall
is Iuſtice, whiche layeth the founda­tion of humane ſocietie & conteyneth in
it godlines: why­che S [...]xtus Empiricus teacheth to bee the knowledge
ofIuſtice. worſhipping God aright: For this vertue eſpecially reſ­pecteth the
deuyne reuerence, myſteries and ceremonies: without the which nothinge
orderlye, neyther any thing  [...]olilye or godly can bee done in a common
weale.

It is the nature of Iuſtice to hurt no man, nor to iniu­rye any: to geeue to
euery man that whyche is hys ryght: to rewarde thoſe that deſerue well, wyth
fauour, prayſe,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=29) and giftes,
and thoſe that deſerue euil, with loſſes, reprochDuties of Iu­ſtice. ſhame,
puniſhementes, and death: but moreouer a righte excellent duetye of Iuſtice is
in word and deede to keepe fayth & promiſe: for nothinge can be more filthye,
in thoſe whyche beare ſway in the publique weale: then to breake promyſe
whiche reproche doubtleſſe is neuer blotted out wyth obliuion, as wee reade of
the Carthaginians, whomTo kepe touch and performe promiſe is cō ­mendable.
Ennius the Poet called faythleſſe, or leaguebreakers, be­cauſe they ſtarted
from their leagues and promiſes: why­che (certes) was the onely and chiefeſt
cauſe, why that cit­tye which (for the Empyre of the whole worlde) conten­ded
ſo many yeares wyth the People of Rome, (the chiefPrudence vanquiſhers of all
other Nacions) was deſtroyed.

Prudence the ſecond vertue conſiſteth in choyſe, or diſ­cerninge of good and
badde and is the ryngleader or chief of other vertues: inſomuche that
Apollophanes a worthye Philoſopher ſaid: that this onelye was the vertue
vpponTemperance whome all the reſt were attendaunt. Temperaunce
(not­wythſtandinge) helpeth very muche, and ſo ſhinech in all our doynges:
that ſhe is thought to bee the moderatrix or directreſſe thereof, this is ſhee
whyche wyth ſo long conti­nued prayſe, hath extolled that worthye ſentence of
Solon, warning vs to doe: Nothinge to muche.

The Chyldren of the Perſians were carefully taught, & trayned to learne
temperance, whych to thend they ſhouldAn example of Temperance. the more
diligently obſerue, their rulers appointed & commaunded certayne of the
diſcreteſt olde men in their cyt­ties, to bee preſente at their daylye
exerciſes: to t [...] ende they fearing the lookes and graue countenaunces of
their auncient ouerſéeers, might in all their doinges be gouer­ned and
directed by modeſtye & temperance to frame thē Conſtancye. ſelues therafter
in althinges, from time to tyme, accor­dingly. Conſtancie muſt alſo be therwt
lyncked and an­nexed, namely that whyche is of wordes and dedes coūp­ted the
moſte faythfull obſeruer or keeper: Shée cauſeth that the ſecretes of the
publike weale be kept cloſe and in [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=29) ſilence, then
the whiche there can be no better thinge: for whiche vertue the Perſians
eſpecially are prayſed, whychePerſians truſty in keping coū ­cell. doe vſe to
kepe all their ſecretes moſt faythfully: neyther feare, neither hope, nor any
other fair promiſe, can aliure them to vtter anye ſecret matter, that is to
bee concealed: for they haue an olde leſſon or rule among them, whereby they
are aduertiſed: that ſilence is kept wt daunger of life. Neyther are they
thought able to atchieue, any great ex­ployte, which are not able to bridle
their tongues, whiche member nature hath ordayned, as the eaſieſt of al
others: thereby to ſhow that ſilence is no hard vertue to be kept & obſerued:

Ariſtotle ſayth yt there be thre things neceſſary in a Magi­ſtrate:Thre things
neceſſary in a magiſtrate. firſte that he embrace Iuſtice & the other vertues,
thereby to direct all thoſe things which are profitable for1. the common
weale: Nexte, that hee doe loue the preſent ſtate of his cittye, and beinge
therewith content enterpriſe to doe nothing eyther newe fangled or ſtraunge,
but to go that waye whiche their aunceſtors haue inſtituted: and2. whiche by
the treadinge Steppes' of others, was worne playne: for deſire of newe
alteracions and thinges, is ra­ther wont to wearye and weaken the common
weale: then to make the ſame better by any meanes.

Thirdly that magiſtrates ſhould haue power of yt peo­ple, ſufficient to
execute thoſe thinges, which appertayne3. to their function, or office: whiche
thinge doubtleſſe cau­ſeth that they themſelues, with greater courage bear out
their office: and thoſe agayne, ſhall more diligently obaye them, vnto whom
obeyſance is to be geeuen.

All Magiſtrates which haue the decidinge of lawes, & whyche do exerciſe any
kynde of reuenge or puniſhment a­gainſt offenders, ought as ſome bolde opinion
to be ſtrā ­gers: for as they themſelues ſay: priuate grudges, enimi­ties, &
hatred do ariſe amōgſt citizens, when as one citizē puniſheth another: but
on the other part, felow citizens, are more tractable & prone to ſhewe fauour
one towardes [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=30)
other then as if the matter were in the dealinge of a ſtranger: by the reaſon
whereof many people of the Italians, haue accuſtomed to ſende for ſuche
Magiſtrates from o­ther places: but to be ſhort, I am of opinion, that in a
wel gouerned common weale, wherin all men bee obedient to the lawes and
cuſtomes of their countrye: citizen Magi­ſtrates are far better, and gouerne
muche more honoura­blye then ſtraungers: which thing doubtleſſe, not onelye by
the Romains, Carthaginians, Athenians, and Lacede­monians: but by diuers
others, which commit all offices vnto their Citizens, may be perceyued: but
eſpeciallye it is euident by the noble common weale of the Uenetians, wherein
there is no place geuen to Straungers: and yetVenetians ad­myt no no ſtrā
­ger to beare rule amōg thē notwithſtandinge, there is neyther ſeuerity
wanting, nor by ſuch maner of iudgements, any diſcordes do ariſe, ney­ther any
ſedicions, or enimities growe.

And one thinge concerninge that common weale of the Uenetians, wee may well
ſay, which I cannot remember that euer I read or ſawe elſwhere: for the order
of that ci­tie neuer ſwarued & altered from the order & ſtate wherin by the
firſt founders thereof it was conſtituted and orday­ned: but hath alwaies
remayned in one ſtate of gouern­mentVenetians alte nothing afore time ordayned
by their predeceſſors and el­ders. immutable: for they that builded that citty
deuiſed amongeſt themſelues, and their Magiſtrates, a rewarde (as it were) for
their trauayles: and this inheritance left they vnto theyr poſteritye, that no
Alien or denizen, born in any other coūtry ſhuld be admitted, to beare any
office or aucthoritye amongeſt them: and ſo ſithens that tyme, perpetually
hath this order bene obſerued, almoſt a thou­ſand yeares, vntill this daye:
wherefore the poſteritye of them that firſt bulded the citty, haue alwayes
bene rulersSeigniorye of Venice. in the ſame city, & were called Senators,
Seigniors, fathers and nobles: and all the reſt Commoners.

The chiefe and principall care for the common weale conſiſteth in Senators,
whych ought to haue aucthority, aſwell in tyme of warres, as in tyme of peace:
vnto whom [[Page 23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=30)
alſo from the other magiſtrates men may appeale: theſe Senators alſo
(according to the inſtitution of Lycurgus) are the keepers and reformers of
the lawes, and as often as nede ſhall require do conſtitute newe, by certayn
lear­ned lawyers of their Seigniorye: for it is a verye harde thinge to
compaſſe and comprehend all thinges in wryttē lawes: for newe affayres
oftentimes happen and occurre through the diſorder of men, for redreſſe
whereof new la­wes are expedient, and all thinges dayly proue, worſe and
worſe, whych by the lawes are to bee puniſhed.

Solon the Philoſopher decreed no law againſt Parrici­desManquellinge novv a
commō practiſe in So­lon his dayes not thought that ſuch could bee. and
murtherers: being demaunded, why he had omitted the ſame: he aunſwered, that
he neuer thoughte, that any ſuche miſchieuous and wicked act, could be
commit­ted or done by any man.

All order of the Publike weale, and all Counſell, oughte in doubtfull caſes
and aduerſe affayres, to come from the Senators, & counſellors, who be called
fathers of theyr country, becauſe euen as parentes prouyde of du­tye for their
children, ſo ought the Senators for their ci­tizens and countrymē: let theſe
graue Councellors (as itA good coun­cellor the fa­ther of his coū trye were
grow together into one body, which ſeeth wyth ma­nye eyes, worketh with many
handes, and ſtandeth vpon many feete, which thinge, ſurely bringeth to paſſe
that ye common weale is farre better gouerned, then the ſtate of one Prince,
for hee alone, forecaſteth and foreſeeth what he can: yet cannot hee meaſure,
and compaſſe all thinges by counſell and reaſon: for no one mortall man hathe
the knowledge of all thinges: And he is counted and reputed for the wyſeſte,
who is ignoraunte in feweſt matters: for many learned, wiſe, and graue wen,
laying their heades and deuiſes together, do foreſee all thinges, nothing is
to theym obſcure, nothing happeneth ſodayn & vnlooked for, nothing new,
nothing ſtraūge, nothīg great, or wōderful.

There if the Senators theymſelues doe treſpaſſe, they ſeeme to offend more by
their example, then by the crime
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=31) it ſelfe:
for all the inferiors, do folowe their ſteppes, andExample of Superiors is a
preſident for infe­riors to folovv thincke themſelues ſcarcely to tranſgreſſe,
when as they ſe any Senatour guylty of the ſame cryme: let them ther­fore be
firme and conſtant, not vayne and lyinge, neyther geuen to filthy lucre: let
them not onely baniſhe away all filthy vſury, but alſo all gayne, wherein may
bee anye ſuſ­picionVſury. of filthynes.

Publius Scipio Naſica vnto whom the ſirname of a good man, was by the ſenate
beſtowed: who dyd ſo many nota­bleVndecente ge­ſture in a Senator put to
re­proche. exploytes for his country, on a certayne tyme ſtandīg in ye
electiō for y• office of AEdileſhippe, toke a certayn coū ­trey felowe by
his hard & rough hand, & feeling the ſame ſo hard, demaunded of him in ſporte,
whether hee vſed to walke vpon his feete, or vpon his hands: which thing was
ſo greuouſly taken of the country felow, & other ſtanders by, that it came to
the knowledge of the cōmon people, & was ye cauſe yt this excellēt Senator
Scipio had a repulſe in his ſute: foraſmuch as all the country people, thought
thē ſelues hereby to be had in deriſiō & made flouting ſtocks.

Uery litle or nothing do lawes and inſtitucions profiteGod is the principall
auc­thor and fau­tour of al good lavves and procedinges. except they be
groūded vpon yt ſacred ſcriptures, the auc­thor wherof is almighty god
himſelfe: for if thoſe aunciēt people which knew not god, but were led with
certain ſu­perſticions, and falſe religion did nothing apertayning to the
cōmon weale, without auctority of their high biſhops: what behoueth vs
chriſtiās to do, whych only embrace the true religion & which haue Chriſt yt
ſon of God for the foū der & author of our religion: ſurely we ought to
endeuor with al care & diligēce, yt nothing be done, nothing thoughtThat
thing vvhich to the honour and praiſe of god is begon conti­nueth in force and
felicity. vpon, or deuiſed, except god his aſſiſtance. ayd & good wyll be
thereto fauourable, & that al our purpoſes, miſteries or deuiſes, tend to his
honor & glory, by whom we attain life euerlaſting: therfore gods deuine
operations ought to go before the ordinaunces of man: according to this
ſayinge: Imprimis venerare Deos, firſte aboue al thinges worſhyp God. The
ſenators charge and duties therfore ſhalbe di­ligently to watch & care, that
no lawes be eſtabliſhed and [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=31) enacted, but
ſuch as he conſonant and agreeable to Gods good pleaſure, for if he be ayding
and well pleaſed wt oure chriſtian rites, & ordinaunces▪ there can nothing go
amiſſe in the common wealth, neither can ther any ſiniſter thing or miſhap
chaūce herein.

At the beginning, y• gouernance of humane affaires was in ye autority of ye
biſhops: & kings beinge initiate in ſacred lore, toke charge, both of deuine &
humane things, neither thought they y• any mā could poſſibly rule wel, which
was ignorāt in ſacred matters & eſtraūged from god: therfore in thoſe dayes
either the prieeſts thēſelues did gouerne, or els, the princes did attēpt
nothīg wtout their aduiſe & auc­tority: for Romulus at yt firſt foundaciō &
beginning of Ro­me, called the biſhop whiche had charge in the temples,
&Byſhoppes na­med kinges by Romulus. holy ceremonies by the names of kings, &
reigning as it were wt a mutual or aſſociat aucthority, wold haue him to be
the keper of ye laws & tradiciōs of their country: & not wythout cauſe, for
the Prelates being inſpired wt the holy ghoſt, do teach & inſtruct vs
throughly in the preceptes of holynes and immortality.

There are two times to bee conſidered vpon: the one of peace, ye other of
warres: & as in time of warres circūſpect care for peace may not be omitted:
ſo in time of peace ſuchTimes to be cō ſidered in pea­ce and Warre. things
ought to be forſene which in time of warres maye ſerue & be moſt neceſſary:
for ſurely it is a point of greate wiſdom, to haſtē & haue in redines, in ye
time of peace, ſuch things: which fear of warres ſhuld cōpel vs ſpedely to
ha­ueTime of peace in vſe & to ocupie: both theſe cōſideratiōs therfore muſt
be carefully looked to, by thē y• beare chief rule & auctori­ty, yt with
warlike municions they may defēd, & mainteine y• ſwete ioyes of peace: & that
y• municiōs of warres be notTime of War. preiudiciall or hindring to ye
maintenance of peace: for the Romaines, ye moſt excellent of all others, vnto
the chiefeſt office appointed two Cōſulls: y• one to deale in thaffayres for
the cities behoofe, & the other in warlike matters: for ſmally ſhould it
preuaile thē to lyue at reſt & quietnes wtin the walles of the city, if in
the fields al were in hurlyburly
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=32) & vprore, or
if their enemies were not kept backe frō inua­ding their terretories: & on
the other part to hold warres abrode, and at home to want aduiſe or councel,
were very daungerous.Tyme doth al­ter both the ꝑ­ſon and his ꝓꝑtye.

That promocions, or offices ſhould be perpetual in the common weale, I thincke
it to be perrillous: for the long continuaunce thereof, doth often alter
mennes maners: & now and then geueth theym occaſion of tyrannous prac­tizes,
as wee may well ſee of Iulius Caeſar, who being con­tinual Dictator, inuaded
the Publique weale: For yt is muche more harder in proſperity to obſerue
modeſtie, thē in aduerſitie▪ and therfore, that cuſtome is to be commen­ded
and allowed, wherby two Conſulles be appointed for no longer ſpace then one
yeare. The Couſull ought di­ligently to bee carefull in muſteringe for the
warres, that in euery precinct, the wealthe, nomber, and age be regar­ded: for
thoſe ſouldiers obey vnwillinglye, & are negligēt in their dutie, whiche are
forced beyonde their abilitye, & power: and very ill fareth it with that armie
whiche thin­kes themſelues without iuſt occaſion forced to warfare & when this
Conſull hath muſtered ſouldiers, let him not ſuffer them to harbor or lodge in
their wyntringe places, vnder Couert, but let theym lodge abroade in the open
fielde, yea if it were in a peaceable tyme: and let him tea­che them, y•
ſouldiers are of no more force then theyr cap­taynes and Generalle: for all
men affirme that this ſen­tence of Homer is true:

More ſafer is an hoaſt of Hartes, a Lyon being guyde: Then is an Hoaſt of
Lyons which an Hart haue on their ſide.

Speciall conſideration and care muſt bee had for the dueOuerſeers of the
lavves. adminiſtring and execution of Lawes in a good Common weale, which
ſurely cauſeth, that men do lyue without vi­olence or Iniurye: for it is
impoſſible for a multitude to lyue without  [...]ryfe, ſpecially in that City
where all thin­ges be common: albeit we ſay it is much better for euery man to
haue his owne: for we ſee that fieldes which are in [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=32) common amongeſt
manye, lye vntylled, and growe full of▪ brambles & bryers: but priuate
fieldes, farre more neate and trimlye huſbanded: but priuate patrimonies bee
they whiche make men diligent & attendant, & meaſure herein is to be
preſcribed vnto them, leaſt richemen inioye al, and y• porer and weaker ſort
cleane thruſt out and defrauded.

Varro ſayth, that variaunce at the beginninge toke hys firſt name of
contencion for lymits or boūds: which thing in deede Virgil ſeemeth to
affirme where he ſayth:

Limes agro poſitus, litem vt diſcerneret aruis.

There was ſet and ordayned a lymyt or bound,

To auoyde contention in fallowed grounde.

For now and then contention ariſeth for debarringe or ſtopping ye courſe of
raine water or of other matters whi­cheOccaſions of contentions for ſmall
mat­ters amonges Citizens to be reformed. daylye happen in Fyeldes, or elles
in the Cyttyes, when men doe argue and ſtande in contencion, for the walles of
their houſes: for droppinges of their h [...]uſe eues and of Rafters not
faſtened: and oftentimes it comes to paſſe that amongeſt merchauntes,
contentions may ariſe and ſpeciallye when many are found vayne, & double
dea­lers, with whome a man muſt not deale in ſecrete meanes, but before ſome
arbitrators, or conuenient witneſſes, and Iudges: Suche manner of ſtryfes
whereby enimitye and hart [...]urninges may growe, ought ſtraightwayes by cō
­poſition to be determined and ended, that y• citizens may be brought into
concorde, which then is brought to paſſe whē euery man enioyes his own,
obteyneth his due right, all variaunce or diſſention ſet aparte.

Upon holydayes and ſuche dayes as are appointed ey­ther for Fayres or feaſtes,
it ſhalbe good to ſtaye proſecu­tion of cauſes and matters iudiciall, whych
thinge alſo ys cuſtomablye frequented in any publique ioy or mourning.

A Praetor amōgeſt the Romaines was ſo called, becauſe hee bare rule: and hee
was called Urbanus amongeſt the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=33) citizens
adminiſtred the lawes: It was in the power of y• Praetor to miniſter both
publike & priuate aucthority, ther­fore it is nedeful yt the Praetors be men
of vpright dealing, &A Praetor. well deſeruing of the publique weale: who
oughte in no parte to be ignoraunt of the lawes and cuſtomes of the cō mon
ſtate, but playnlye and abſolutely to bee ſo ſkilfull in lawes both publike
and priuate, that nothing appeare vn to them eyther obſcure or doubtful: Let
good and conſci­onable lawyers pleade cauſes, and handle nothinge
withLavvyers. craft and maleengine: but let them ſpeake all things tru­lye,
and let them not leaue a lye vnpuniſhed: for there ou­ght to be nothing in a
comō weale ſo vncorrupt & ſyncere, as iudgement: which ſurely is more often
corrupted with ſpeach then wt mony: wherupon very wel ſaid Cicero, yt hee
vnderſtode not why he y• corupteth iudgemēt with mony, ſhould be worthy of
puniſhmēt: & he that corrupts it with eloquēce, ſhould haue prayſe: to me
(ſayth he) it rather ap­peareth yt he offendeth more in this point, which
rather wt ſpeache then wt mony, corrupteth the iudge: becauſe no mā with mony
can corrupt a wiſe iudge, but with ſmothe andCorruption of Iudgement.
diſſēbling ſpeach any man may: for how are yt corrupters of cauſes worthy to
be hated, and how greuouſly are they to be puniſhed? for they doe ſell the
patronage of Iuſtice & forſake the beſt office in the world, whiche is,
defendinge right: ſomtime they pynch & get mony from the defendāt, ſometyme
agayn poule the plaintife, and in ye ende delude them both: and many do very
il, which take on theim the patronage or office of defēding ye client, & do
handle y• ſame ſo coldly, yt they differ ſmallye from forgers of cauſes: for
true is the ſentence of Cicero which ſayth: perhaps men cā not be defended
wtout diſpraiſe, & that negligentlye to bee defended, coulde not bee without
great wickednes.

Let lawyers therfore & patrones of cauſes pleade their clients cauſes, and
that for dutie ſake, yt they may deſerueVnſaiiable Lavvyers. wel of the
citizens, & let their rewarde bee, to haue a good report in al mens mouthes, &
let it not be lawful for them if by any meanes it may, yt they take any bribe
or gyft, for [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=33) handling the
cauſe, as it was eſtabliſhed by the law called Cincia: for a filthy thing it
is and not worthy any man, toBribcry is a fil­thye thinge. ſet out the tongue,
for gayne or lucre in pleading cauſes. Surely Antipho Rhamnuſius (as antiquity
reporteth) was the firſt yt euer for defence of any cauſe toke reward, whoſe
example long times after, the Greciās, & Latines, folowed: ſaying that the
merchandize of the tong, was of far other ſort, then any other merchandize
whatſoeuer: but the Ro­maines from whom all good examples, aſwel of honeſtie,
as of vertue, are to be taken, by the law Cincia preſcribedGood exāples,
geuen by the Romaines. an order vnto the couetouſnes of orators, and pleaders
of cauſes, & becauſe yonge men puffed vp with hope of gain, ſhould not be
permitted negligētly to handle matters, at the requeſt of Appius Claudius,
they ſuffered the lawe Cin­cia to be moderated.

Unto thoſe Magiſtrates which wee aucthorize to haueConſideratiōs vpdon the
tra­uels of the magiſtrates. thadminiſtring of iuſtice, we rather ought to
impart ſom ſtāding fée or publike ſtipēd, then priuate gain: leaſt ther­by
the iudgementes of the lawe be ſet to porte ſale, whych thing no doubt is
preiudiciall vnto al people: and for the moſt part the cōmon decay of the
publike weale: whether the iudgement be corrupted or whether ells any thing be
done by deceipt or violence, by them whych be iudges, and haue iuriſdiction in
executing Iuſtice.

Ouerſéers of ſhamfaſtnes & modeſty, are ſo neceſſarye in a cōmon weale, that
without them, litle or nothing do other magiſtrates prenaile: for there cannot
be a more comodi­ousTribes or War d [...]sin a c [...]tye. thīg thē to haue
people well manered, with ciuility: wherfore ye moſt graueſt perſons & moſt
approued in vertu (ſom out of euery ſeueral tribe or ward) are her unto to be
admitted: which may reforme & redreſſe the maners of the city, leſt thereby
there crepe in pieueſh cuſtomes, pernici­ous both to the people & to yt whole
city: therfore great di­ligēce is to be required, yt the maners of ye people
be moſt ſyncere & perfect: & then again, yt no pernicious cuſtom do inuade the
citizens, then the which ther can nothing in ci­ties happen worſe: & laſtly yt
the religion & ceremonial or­ders, which haue bene by our elders wel
eſtabliſhed be al­ſo wel obſerued.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=34)The Romaines
called the Cenſure of ſhamefaſtnes & modeſty, the Lady and Maiſtres of
diſcipline,: and theym whyche bore offices, in the cōmon weale, they called
Cē ­ſors,Cenſor vvas he vvhich coulde by his Wiſdōe and knovvlege execute
his of­fice viz. to conſtitute, cōmaūd & comptrolle. which tooke their name
of iudging, comptrolling, cō ſtituting, or commaunding: of what effect it is,
very wel to diſcharge and execute this office, euen hereby-may wee perceyue,
in that this office or dignytye of Cenſor, dydde geeue the ſirname vnto Cato
Cenſorius, who very wel ex­ecuted this ſame function: The Infamy which wee
call the Cenſors checke, was farre more greuouſlye taken of yt Romaines, then
any other puniſhmente, and ſometimes yt rygour thereof ſtretched againſt the
magiſtrates: for the Senators were caſt out of the Senate houſe, by the
Cen­ſors checke, as wee reade of Lucius Antonius, becauſe hee put away from
him a yōg Uirgine whom he had maried: none of his frendes beinge called to
councell: ſo reade we alſo of Lucius Flaminius, who cauſed certayne to be put
to death, for looking laſciuiouſlye at certayne women, whomInfamy of Cē ſors.
they loued: alſo Caius Fabricius the Cenſor, remoued out of the Senate houſe
Publius Cornelius a noble perſonage, becauſe he broughte ten poundes worthe of
plate to a cer­tayneSenators diſ­charged for exceſſe riot. banquet. Fat and
corpulente Souldyers, per­fumed with oyntment, wer noted with this checke,
their horſes taken from theym, and they diſmiſſed and diſchar­ged out of the
hoaſte.

In iudgementes of lyfe and deathe, greate care & hede ought to be had: for
cyuil hatreds and priuye conſpiracies then burſt forth vnto reuenge, whē as
the magiſtrates ha­ue power of life and deathe: and therfore the Romaines,
when they had appointed their Conſulls vnto whom they committed, the ſpeciall
charge, of the common weale: yet was it not lawful for theym to execute or put
to death a­nye citizen of Rome, and trulye not withoute good cauſe: for
nothinge more procurethe the diſtruction of the weale publike, then the
puniſhement by death, of thoſe whiche ſpecially haue but ſmally delt with
others, or whoſe cry­mes [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=34) or offences haue
not ſo farre came to lighte as by no meanes they can or may be denayed, or
elles that they beeInnocentes vvrongfully cō dempned make people repyne at
magiſtrates. aparantly knowne vnto all men: for that worketh a per­petuall
iniurye, when ſuſpicion of innocencye remaynethe in the peoples heades, of
theym whyche throughe falſe or raſhe iudgement are ſayde to be vniuſtly
condempned, for innocencye caryeth with it great fauour, and the rumour or
mutteringe of the people ſtryketh feare into thē which haue condempned
innocentes: And moreouer the forre of conſcience bringes to paſſe, that ſuche
perſons, as haue ſo ouerreached themſelues, are thought neuer to lyue in
ſe­curitye, but appoint vnto themſelues, preſent puniſhmēt before their eyes:
Howe notable is that ſentence of Iulius Caeſar, whyche with often repeticions
he would vſe?

A wretched companion of olde age truelye,

Is the memorye of auncient crueltye.

And therfore, they that muſt geeue ſentence and iudge­ment, of the lyfe and
ſpyrite of man, whych is parte of the worlde, and hathe a mynde by the
ſpeciall gyfte of God, partakinge of reaſon, and filleth vp the number of the
ly­uinge, ought carefully to aduiſe and conſult wyth delibe­ration and not to
do any thynge wyth raſhe iudgemente, becauſe ſuche a Deede once done, cannot
bee called backe agayne.

Alexander kinge of Macedonie vnto his mother Olym­pias, vrginge hym greatlye,
to kyll a certayne guyltleſſe perſon, requeſtinge the kinges conſent thereto,
in conſide­rationPitty in the harte of Alexan­der tovvardes one that vvas like
to haue bene put to death. of that nyne monethes ſpace whyche ſhee bore hym in
hyr wombe: moſt gently thus anſwered. O good mo­ther, rather requeſt or
demaund any other reward at my handes: for mannes lyfe cannot bee acquited or
recompē ­ſed wyth any good turne, or benefit.

Sabacus, moreouer kinge of the Egiptians (a man for godlynes and religion
famous) as Diodorus Siculus ma­keth
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=35) mencion did
ſo muche abhorre ſheding of bloud, that he commaunded the conuict and
condempned perſons, be­ing bound with chaynes, to become ſlaues for the city,
ra­ther then that they ſhould be put to death: doubtleſſe truedeath redemed by
thraldome. is that tragicall ſentence, and in harte and mynde, euer­more to
bee recited, and recorded of them, which do beare rule. viz.

UUhat euer thou be that doeſt rule or raygne:

From ſheding bloud, leaue and abſtayne.

There was wonte to bee amongeſt the RomaynesEight ſpeciall kindes of
puni­ſhmentes vſed by the Roma­nes. eyght kindes of puniſhmēts, that is to
ſay: amerciamēts, baniſhment, impriſonmēt, whipping, recōpence of aſmuch
for treſpas made, reproche, bondage, & death: yet ſeldome wt death did the
Romaines accuſtome to purſue, except a­gainſt Parrycides, murtherers, rebels,
and ſuch like wic­ked perſōs, whoſe lyues was not to be ſpared. But nowe an
ill cuſtome hathe taken place, yt theeues euen for ſmall matters are executed
by death, & ſo they take awaye that whiche can neuer be reſtored vnto mortall
men. The great conſideratiō for the comon treaſure in a cōmon weale ought to
be had: for treaſures, & money are comp­ted the ſinewes or ſtrengthes of the
citty, without ye why­che it can ſcarcely be preſerued: for theſe thinges do
beau­tifye a city, in proſperity, & bring ready ſuccour in aduer­ſity:
wherfore there are to be ordained treaſurers, which may haue the aucthority of
receyuing, keeping, & layinge out of the common treaſure: theſe men ought to
be graue and vpright, and ought to abſtayn theyr hands from pub­lique &
priuate corruption: not vnhoneſt troubleſom per­ſons, but which can diligently
meaſure the rate of fortu­ne, & of ſuche perſons, as they ſhal haue to deale
withal, and beſides this let thē take hede that publicanes and tollers,
extorte nothinge by violence or craftye colluſion from theym ouer whom they
haue rule: for that kynde of [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=35) people is
odious, and nowe and then, by reaſon of theyr vnhoneſt dealing, & lewd
demeanour, prouoketh rnd ſtir­reth the common people to deſire of new
fanglenes.

In leuyinge of Tributes and Taxacions, treaſurersLeuving of tri­butei. oughte
to bee gentle and ſeeldome tymes to doe it: for it greueth the cittizens, to
haue their proper priuate ſtock and ſubſtance imployde on publique affayres:
excepte in great diſtres, or tyme of daunger, for then all good city­zens doe
of their owne good accorde fall in conſideration hereof, & willing be
contributory to payment: but if they maye ſpare their priuate ſubſtaunce, they
lyue better con­tented: & if there be no other remedy, but to do otherwiſe,
then ought they to entreate all men gentlye, thereby the more eaſely to rayſe
their tributes, and winne the peoples hartes withall: for farre more is the
good will of citizens to be eſteemed then any maſſe of ſubſtance of treaſures.
Noble was the ſayinge of Alexander the great, when onAlexanders friendes vvere
his treſures. a tyme being demaunded, where he had his treaſures laid vp,
aunſwered: he had layd them vp with his fryndes, & welwillers, and that they
were wel & warely kept to hys vſe there: for good wyl & good loue is the lady,
both of a mannes owne ſubſtaunce, and of another mannes alſo: Tyberius Caeſar
alſo vnto his Lieutenauntes, receyuers, or treaſurers, whiche counſelled him
to exacte trybute of his prouinces and countries, anſwered, yt it was the
parte of a good ſhepeheard, to ſheare his ſhepe: & not to flea thē.

The tyhat be aucthoriſed to coyn mony, ought to obay the commaundement of the
treaſurer, leaſt they forge or embaſe the coyne: or mingle it with any other
baſe met­tall, for it is moſte daungerous to make counterfeicte Monye, of
leſſe value then it ſhoulde bee: the conſide­rationMoneta à mo­nenda. wherof
is moſt diligētly to be ouerſene of the trea­ſurers: ſom do ſuppoſe yt the
word Moneta is called ſo properly,Pecunia à Pe­core. becauſe it geueth
warning, yt no deceipte in mony, ſtamp or weight be made or vſed, but yt name
of Pecunia, as Varro ſayth toke his beguning of Pecus: for y• riches &
ſubſtāce of men in tymes paſt conſiſted in Pecoribus: yt is to ſaye, in
Cattel. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=36) And
this thinge doth Lucius Columella teſtifye to bee true, and Ouid. libro 5.
Faſtorū, maketh mention where he ſaith:

All other Inſtrumentes as yet, were not for vſe out founde,

The firſt earth­lye treaſures of men.

The wealthy, Cattle did poſſeſſe, or els greate ſtore of grounde. And hereupon
were richmen calde, hereof hath mony name: But now vnlawfully eche man, to
ſeeke for wealth doth frame.

Cambyſes the father of Cyrus, king of Perſia, beinge aſ­ked by what meanes
citties mighte bee kepte in beſt ſaue­gar, aunſwered: if they whiche keepe the
ſame citties doe thincke they can neuer be wary enoughe of their enemye. The
ſaying of this moſt wiſe kinge, is alwais to be reuol­ued of them, which beare
aucthority in a common weale: for what auayleth armour? what municions? what
are ye walles annd towers profiting vnto them which negligēt­lyeSauegarde of
a cittye. keepe and looke to their watches and wardes? for wee ſee verye manye
citties by negligence of their watches, and ſcoutes, (with the ſodayn comming
of their enemies) put to the ſpoyle and ſacked: and moreouer as touchinge
night watches, to whome citizens truſtinge, and ſleeping ſoundly, haue not
knowen any thinge of the comminge ofNight Watthe their enemie, vntil the
ſcaling ladders haue bene ſet vp to their walles, and they throwne downe
headlong, from the tops of their turrets.

Spargapyſes the ſonne of Tomyris queene of Scythia, be­inge together wyth all
his hoaſt of men druncke with wy­ne, and ſlumbring or ſlepy, were in that
eſtate alltogether deſtroyed: and doubtleſſe, no Scoutes, nor watches,
canScoutes, Wat­chers and Warders. more ſafelye or diligentlye bee exerciſed,
then of theym which beare the chiefeſt aucthority, whether the ſame bee in the
Tents, or within the walles, certes it is ſcarce ſa­fe enoughe for the
Cytizens to ſleepe ſoundlye when they ſhall perceyue the chiefe ouerſeers of
the watchmen to be wantinge: and a Captayne ſeemeth to commyt his hoast to the
hazard of fortune, ſo long as he ſleepeth. [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=36) Alexander of
Macedonie hath left vs a good leſſō for this matter, who, becauſe he wold not
be deceiued by meanes of ſleepe, vſed as he lay in his bed to ſtretch out his
arme, (hauing vnder the ſame a braſen bolle or baſon ſtanding) & to hold in
his hand a balle of ſiluer, to thintent that whē A Wiſe exam­ple of
Alexan­der in vvatch­inge. ſlepe had weried and taken away the force of his
fingers: hearinge the fall of the ſiluer ball into the bolle or baſon hee
ſhoulde ſtreight way by the noyſe & ſounde thereof, a­wake agayn out of ſlepe:
ſurely this leſſon I thinck that moſt excellent king learned of the Cranes
which do vſe a nightly watch among themſelues alwayes, and becauſe they would
not be deceyued or betrayde by any miſhap in their ſleepe: they ſtand vpon one
leg holdinge a lytle ſtone in the other, which when it falleth from them by
hitting the other ſtanding leg, or making a noyſe with lighting on the
grounde, they are thereby awaked oute of their ſleepe.

Euen ſo with no leſſe care ought they to watch, whych beare aucthority in a
common weale, that in ſuch maner they may ſet in order their watches and keepe
the holdes of their cittye, that the common weale ſuſteyne no diſcom modity
nor diſhonour therby neyther in tyme of warres, neyther yet in tyme of peace:
doubtles Socrates in Plato vſed great diligence & care, in ye choyſe of ſuch
as ſhouldWho are mee­teſt for vvatch­chers & War­ders. kepe watch and ward:
and ſurelye the better & more wel their citizens be, the more fitter perſons
are they to kepe watche and warde: which otherwiſe we ſee falleth out in rude
or barbarous cityes, wherein laborers, worckemen, porters, and pore men are
put to ſcoutes, and watch: but the richer men cocker themſelues and lyue at
eaſe within their owne houſes: Sometimes watches are committed in charge vnto
the Souldiers only, which nowe and then being wearied wyth their dayly
trauayle, eyther watche rechleſlye, or ells ſleepe ſo ſoundlye, that they are
not to be awaked with any noyſe at all: as it chanced vnto thoſe Romaines
which kept theyr Capitol, when it was befie­ged
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=37) by the
Frenchemen: whiche Romaines had not they bene awaked out of their ſleepe by
the gagling of a gooſe, had bene vtterlye vndone, and the common wealth of
theGaglinge of a gooſe ſaued Rome from beinge taken. Latines, for euer
extinguiſhed.

Let there bee placed orderlye vppon the Walles in places fitte for that
purpoſe, two warders whyche muſte haue geeuen theym a Watche woorde, leaſte
they bee deceyued: and lett theym bee called vppon and puniſhed whyche ſleepe
in their watche tyme: Let the Scoutes in the daye tyme watche before the
Gates, on the towers, at loupe holes, or at other choſen places, leaſte that a
mul­titude of gueſtes vnlooked for, come as it were betweene theym and home,
and take awaye booties, carrye awaye Captyues and inuade the Cittye: wyth no
leſſe care alſo let the night watches bee placed in the cyttye, then vpon the
walles: for moſte myſchieuous deedes are rather put in practyſe by Nyghte then
by Daye. Theeues, Harlot­tes, Cutthroates, and robbers are no leſſe to bee
reſtray­ned, then Publique Enemies, agaynſte whome doubt­leſſeNight vvatch­ers
charged. needefull it is that the Ouerſéers of the Watche, ſhoulde extende
Punniſhmente wyth greate ſeueritye, yf they wyll rightlye prouyde for the good
eſtate of theyr Cyttye: For worſte of all fareth it wyth that cytye wherin
Harlots and nyght Theeues, raunginge in the ſame bee not ſufficientlye mette
wythall.

It was lawfull amonge the Romaynes by the Lawe of Twelue Tables to kyll a
nyght thiefe: So hathe yt alſo bene lawfull to do, to an Adulterer taken wyth
the manner, and alſo to a woman committing Fornication: Theſe notwythſtandinge
I iudge are not to bee permyt­ted, but in ſuche manner to bee handled, that
for feare of punniſhmente, all men keepe theymſelues at home from doynge euyll
abroade: For hee louethe to doe nothinge that is good or ryghte whyche
ſhonneth daye lyghte, and hee that ſtealeth in lurckynge manner, is afrayde
leaſte [[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=37)
ſome ſhoulde ſee hym and bewraye hym, and ſo thync­keth the nighte more ſafer
for him then the day tyme.

It was not wont onely to bee the charge of theym thatNight vvatch­ers preuente
and vvithſtand many daunge­rous chaunces in a Cyttye. had the ouerſighte of
the Watches amongeſte the Ro­maynes to exerciſe watches & wardes vppon the
walles,  [...]ut alſo it was enioyned that they ſhoulde bee vigilant a­gaynſte
all nighte Traueylers: whereby the Publique quietnes of the cyttye mighte bee
preſerued & mayntay­ned: moreouer theſe and ſuche lyke watches doe helpe in
many other matters, and eſpeciallye in auoydyng ca­ſualties of Fyer, whiche
ſurely are ſeene to be moſt daū ­gerous in cytties: for both do they quenche
caſuall chaū ­ces of fyer wythin the Cyttye happeninge, and alſo of­ten tymes
do catche in a tryppe ſubtyll Fyrers of houſes, whoſe offence therein is to
bee accoumpted capitall and worthye of deathe: and theym alſo whiche
negligentlye rake vp theyr Fyers, they ought to puniſhe by whippinge and
cudgellinge.

Dinocrates an excellente Architecte of Macedonie ha­uinge promiſed vnto
Alexander the greate, to rayſe vppe the Hyll called ATHON in THRACIA, of a mō
­ſtrous height, vnto the ſimilitude and reſemblaunce of a man, whoſe lefte
hande ſhoulde ſupporte the walles of a moſte large Cyttye, and the righte
hande ſhoulde holde a bowlle, whyche ſhould receyue the flouddes deſcending
from the Hyll, and poure theym into the Sea: Alexan­der (being delighted wyth
the deuiſe of this figure) aſked hym whether there were any fieldes neare vnto
it to nou­riſhe and mainteyne the Cyttye wyth Corne and victual, yea, or no?
DINOCRATES aunſwered: that yt muſt haue Succour and reliefe from beyonde the
Seas: The kynge ſayd that ſuche a deuyſe was not to be allow­ed at all▪ for
(ſayth he) as the infant lately borne into the worlde can neyther lyue nor
proſper wythoute the mylke of the Nurſe: So neyther can a Cittye bee
ſuſtrayned or
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=38) cheriſhed
without the fruites of the fieldes.

The example of this noble kinge ALEXANDER ought to exhort all builders of
cities, to appoint the ſitu­acionAl princes or magiſtrates may here ymy tate
the care of Alexander for his ſubiects in prouidinge corne and vic­tuels.
therof in plentiful & fruiteful places, and that they whych haue charge ouer
the people do eſpecially prouide corne, and victuals for their ſuſtētacion:
for ſmally ſhould the defence and ſauegarde of the citty preuayle, to ſmall
purpoſe ſhould the lawes, rytes, and order of a city ſerue, if the people
ſhoulde ſterue for honger: for what can bee more daungerous among that people,
whom neyther ar­mour, magiſtrates, neyther Gods Iuſtice, nor mannes Lawes,
neyther anye ſhame can keepe in ſtreight order, then dearth and famine: for
verye aptly hereunto ſaythe Lucanus the Poet.

Neſcit plebs Ieiuna timere.

Let therfore firſt and principall care be for competent prouiſion of victuall,
namely bread corne, the vſe wherof is ſeene to be farre more neceſſary, then
any other thinge and let there bee made three Purueyghours, or prin­cipall
victuallers, to haue the ouerſighte, and ſurueighe of all victual, and make
prouiſion of the ſame according­lye: let the corne be kept for common vſe,
eyther in deepe trenches, cleane fāned from the chaffe, and couered ouer,
whereby for ſeuen yeares ſtore, it may bee well reſerued,Good order for corne
to be kept. or in brode graners, wyth lyttle wyndowes, on the north ende
thereof, wherein for three yeares ſpace it may be pre­ſerued from the mothe,
wyuell and all noyſome vermin: and let them haue a ſpeciall care that there be
no corne or grayne carryed forthe of the citye, but in great ſtore and plenty
thereof, leaſt it become muſtye: but let it rather be brought in by exchaunge,
and rechaunge made from y• countries neare adioyninge, for it were farre
better to haue ſtore enoughe at home ſufficiently not only to ſerue them and
their country: but alſo if nede were to helpe our [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=38) diſtreſſed
neighbours: And let theym ſet a rate or price of things, leaſt they being
beſtowed at the wyl of them that ſhall ſell theym, they bee rated and
eſteemed, as it ſhall ſeeme good vnto them at all tymes.

Regarde alſo muſt be had that not with a little care &Good order for the
church diligence the temples and churches of the immortall god (which with
ſuche great coſtes and charges are edefied, & whiche make the cities,
ſpecially therby farre more gor­geous) haue ſuche officers and ouerſeers for
the gouern­ment thereof, leaſte otherwiſe by negligence and ſlouthe they falle
to ruine or decay: wherfore AEdiles are to bee appointed, which thereupon were
called by the Romai­nes, by that name AEdiles, becauſe (as Varro ſayth) they
had the ouerſighte of ſacred and priuate houſes: It was alſo the charge of the
ſame Officers, amongeſt the Ro­maines,Good order for ſtretee and highvvayes.
to ſee that the common ſtreetes, and highwayes, ſhould bee well leuelled and
made euen, and that ye ſame, ſhould be kept in decent order, and that therupon
no buil­dinge ſhould be erected and ſet, which eyther might hyn­der the
commodity or comlynes of the ſame: alſo they had a charge enioyned them, to
ſee that the water conduites, common ſewers, and ſinckes, ſhould be clenſed
and ſcou­red, and that the bridges ſhould bee repayred and amen­ded:Good order
for conduites and common Sevvers. moreouer, there is nothinge in a free cyttye
whyche dothe more breede enuye or hatred, then to ſee cer­tayne fellow
citizens in a ſhorte tyme enry­ched with the comon mony, or treaſure whereas
the ſame coulde not ſuf­fice them all.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=39)

## 4\. THE FOVRTH BOKE entreatinge of mutuall Societye in Mariage:
mayntenaunce of houſekeeping: or­dering of a houſholde, wyth morall examples
of neceſſary du­ties in eache degree.

ADRIANVS Caeſar was a Prynce of excellence wytte, and exquiſite learninge: for
often tymes hePrayſe of A­drianus Caeſar. both wrote, ſpake, heard others
ſpeake, and talked wyth hys frendes at once, & woulde do all this at one tyme:
he was alſo greatelye geeuen to Poetrye, and a fauourer of all good Sciences:
in Arithmetique, Geometrye, Muſicke, and Payntynge, moſt ſkilfull: he often
was wont to ſay that the Common weale is ſo to bee regarded of theym whiche
beare rule in the ſame, that euerye one ſhoulde knowe how that he had to doe
for the common weale and not for his owne proper and priuate eſtate.

Phocion the Athenian (when as abundance of treaſures was ſent vnto hym of
gyft, from Philip king of Macedo­nie)Phocions mo­deſt aunſvver in refuſinge
giftes and treſ­ſures ſen [...] hym. would not take any of it at all: and to
the kinges em­baſſadors exhorting him that if he himſelfe could eaſelye lacke
the ſame treaſures, yet at the leaſt, to take it for his childrens vſe: for
whom (ſayde they) it was verye harde beinge in ſuch penury and diſtreſſe as
they were, to main­taine their fathers dignitye: he aunſwered, if my chyldren
do reſemble and bee lyke to me their father in condicion, this lyttle plott of
grounde whych hath brought & mayn­teyned me to this dignitye, ſhall alſo
ſuffice to bringe vp and mainteyn them: but if they doe not reſemble me, ſure
I wyll not mayntaine their ryotte with theſe Treaſures and ryches.

In no place at theſe dayes is founde that lande whiche [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=39) of it owne
frutefulneſſe nouriſheth the Cyclopes without tyllage and ſowing: neyther is
that Erithrea of Luſitania whyche men ſaye Gerion ſometimes poſſeſſed, beinge
of ſo rancke, and fruitefull ſoyle, that when once the corne is caſt vpon ye
groūd, the new ſprouting ſeede eftſones brin­gethe forthe newe blades, and
beareth Seauen or rather more harueſtes one after another: neyther floweth in
ourLotos, ſome doe ſuppoſe to be a tree. coaſtes that floud Nylus, whiche of
it ſelfe bringeth forth an Herbe called Lotos, whereof men in thoſe partes doe
make bread to eate, and whereof wyth ſuch gredynes (as Homer ſayth) they doe
eate, that they altogether forget y• ordering of their houſholde affayres:
wherfore men muſt prouyde to haue poſſeſſion of Landes, that prouyſion of
victualles may be reſerued from tyme to tyme.

Marcus Curius hath by his wyſdom taught vs to haue greate ſtore of publique
landes: and that priuate mennePoſſeſſion of landes in com­mon vveale. ſhoulde
haue ſo much thereof, as to the meynteyninge of their lyfe and lyuinge,
ſhoulde bee neceſſarye: for when as hee oute of his tryumphes had adiudged
innumerable acres of Lande to the cōmon weale, to euerye manne in ſeuerall
hee onelye alotted Fowertye, neyther▪ reſer­ued he anye greater porcion
thereof vnto hymſelfe then the reſte had: Hee was blamed of certayne perſons
by­cauſe he had geeuen himſelfe the leaſte parte, and had en­tytled the common
weale to the moſte parte: hee ſayde vnto them, that no man ought to thincke
that grounde to be a little or vnſufficiente whiche ſhoulde ſuffice his owne
vſe and his families.

As it behooueth ciuill Societye to haue fewe to beareAn ouerſeer to order
houſholde affayres. aucthoritye, and manye to obey, ſo in houſholde affayres
there ought to bee one whiche ſhoulde haue chiefe rule, & hee to bee auncient
in yeares, and all the reſidue to obay. And as in a city by due obedience to
lawes, the magiſtrate is ſayde to gouerne others iuſtelye, ſo in Commaun­dynge
and obayinge, wee haue accuſtomed to gouerne
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=40) domeſticall
dealinges, let them whiche beare aucthoritye or office in a common weale, know
that the lawes do go­uerne and are aboue them, and let them that are the chief
of an houſhold follow the rule of a good huſband or houſ­holder: There is
therfore a good order in ſome citties, yt none maye bee choſen into the Senate
which hath not the charge of houſe and family.

He that is the Gouernour of an houſholde, ought al­wayes to remember that hee
hath ſometymes bene a ſer­uaunt, that hee do rather correct offences wyth
woordes,Houſholders. then wyth ſtripes, and had rather that his family ſhould
feare his ſeueritye and Iuſtice, then tremble at his cru­eltye: for it goeth
worſte of all with that familye whyche rather wyth feare then wyth zeale,
goeth aboute their bu­ſines. And furthermore in great trauayles, and in
ex­ecutinge waighty offices or duties, it behoueth the houſ­holder to ſhewe
himſelfe, the firſt man, officious, and dily­gent: for the Inferiours wil be
aſhamed of ſlouth & ſlug­giſhenes,Such maſters ſuch familye & ſeruauntes. when
they ſhall ſee the elder, to be diligent and paynefull: ſo on the other parte,
he ſhal beware and take heede, that hee doe nothing filthyly, whiche his
houſhold may haue in ſuſpicion: for they doe farre more offende by example,
whithe beare aucthority, then in committing ye offence.

Amongeſt the auncient in times paſt, there was ſuche multitude of Slaues, that
they by violence thruſte the freemen, out of certain cities, and now & then
rebelliouſly receiued & wtſtode their maiſters cōming homewards by force of
arms: for we reade that ye people of the coūtrye of Scythia were a nation
almoſt inuincible, for they dyd not onelye wythſtand Darius king of Perſia
from enterpriſing vpon their coaſtes & borders: but alſo put him to a vyle and
ſhamefull flyghte: moreouer they ouerthrew the ho­aſtes of Alexander, they
eſtabliſhed the Empyre of ye Par­thians, and people of Bactrians, they had
Aſia tributarye vnto theym. 1500. yeares, from whych country, when as [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=40) theſe Scythians
returned wyth conqueſt in theyr thirde expedicion (for they had bene eyghte
yeares abſence from their wyues) they were at the firſt dryuen backe, and
for­cyblie repulſed from comminge home, by theyr owne ſer­uants and bondmen.
For their wyues weryed wyth long loking for their huſbandes, newe maried
themſelues to their bondſlaues whiche were left at home to keepe theyr Cattle:
whyche ſlaues not without ſlaughter and bloud­ſhed, wythſtoode and woulde not
ſuffer their maiſters at their return to come home into their own coūtries &
hou­ſes: And althoughe in the ende the victorye fell to theyr mayſters, yet
notwythſtandinge they bickered and ſkyr­miſhed together ſo doubtfully, that
hard it was to diſcern who in the ende would get the vpper hande: but at ye
laſt the bondmen beinge vtterlye vanquiſht, were hanged vp­on gibbets, and the
women ſtryken with remorſe of their guylty and filthy conſciences, diſpatched
and murthered themſelues, partly by the halter and partly wt the ſword:
Amongſt the notorious warres of the Romaynes, is not alſo the ſeruile warres
recoumpted and reckoned, which tooke the name of Bondmen vanquiſhed?

But ſometimes ſlaues haue ſhewed forth Examples of moſt tryed fayth and
truſtines, as Caius Plotius Plancus witneſſeth, for he being by the Triumuiri
proſcript, & ap­pointed, to haue bene executed, for feare hyd himfelfe
pri­uelye, in a Ferme nere Salerne, when the Souldiers that were ſent to
ſearch him out, hauinge by the ſauour, of his Perfumes ſmelled him out, caught
his ſeruaunts, whoRemorſe of the maiſter to­vvardes his ſeruants fidelity.
beinge muche and longe tyme euill entreated, and tormē ­ted, woulde not
diſcleſe theyr maiſter. Plancus pyty­inge and hauinge compaſſion on the
fidelitye of his owne ſeruaūtes, came for the, amongeſt the myddeſt of them,
& offered his throate into the handes of the ſouldiers, there­by to delyuer
his ſeruauntes from preſent tormentes.

Marcus Antonius alſo an excellent orator, being accu­ſed of inceſt, had
experience in the fidelity of his ſeruaunt
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=41) who beinge
brought vnto iudgement, euen he which bore the La [...]terne, to that
vngracious act, beinge alſo tormē ­ted, ſcourged, rackte, withe burninge
plates ſchorched and halfe burned to death, would neuer declare his may­ſters
inceſt, wherunto he was priuye, and of councel: So haue there bene alſo others
in like manner approued: but the truſtines of ſeruants to their maiſters is
not alwayes to be aſſayed.

The freeman which hath vnder him the gouernmēt of ſeruants, ought ſpeciallye
to thincke that they are men, & not brute beaſtes, and that he ſhould not rage
with cruel­tye againſt them, in ſcourging, euyll entreating, or chay­ning of
them (for by ſcourging their hartes are made ob­durate & hardned) nether do
they any thing but with euilHovv the may ſter ought to entreate his
ſeruauntes. wyl: but the maſter ought to deale more gently wt thē, ex­acting
their daily taſkes, & that not without mercy: their diligence & good endeuour
is to be commended, whereby they may apply themſelues wt cherefulnes in their
labors and buſines: They ought alſo to haue ſuche foode and ſu­ſtenance geeuen
theym whyche maye ſtrengthen their bo­dyes wythout curyoſitye and coſtlynes:
Let theyr Appa­rell bee ſuche as may couer their bodies decentlye in So­mer,
and defend theym from colde and rayne in wynter: for Seruauntes pynched wyth
colde, ouer awed with fe­are, & hongerſterued, cannot performe any manner of
of­fice or dutie ofſeruice.

Wee muſte alſo take heede, leaſt throughe ſtrayte loo­kinge to our ſeruaunts
they become deſperate: for now & then they are geeuen to bee cruell, agaynſte
thoſe that be weaker then theymſelues: and the blowes or ſtrypes of the
mayſter are ſometymes reuenged vppon their childrē and wyues.

Wee haue yet freſhe in our memory a Seruaunte of a wicked wytte and cruell
meaninge: this felow had a veryA vvicked exā ple of a vvic­ked ſeruaunt.
rygorous mayſter, that often cudgelled and bet him cru­elly, wher at this his
ſeruant being angry, and not know­inge [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=41) how to be
reuenged vpon hys mayſter, on a tyme cau­ght two infantes (which were his ſayd
maiſters childrē) the one of a yeares age, the other of two yeares, and with
them aſcendinge vp into a certayne highe Turret, called his mayſter, and
wylled him to take his younge babes vp into his lap: whom ſo ſone as he had
ſquatted to the groūd hee caſt himſelfe headlong after theym, becauſe he wold
not come alyue into the daunger of his mayſter agayne.

Bondmen enthralled and endaungered vnto vs by the lawe, by reaſon they are to
vs indebted, are more gentlyWelvſinge of hyred ſeruauntes. to be entreated,
tyll they haue payde their dutie: for we ought to remember that ſo ſone as
they haue recompen­ſed their debt with their bodily traueyle, that they are
fre borne, and not of ſeruile condicion, as are thoſe franchiſed bondmen (who
although freed) yet after fredome, do owe ſome ſeruice vnto vs: wherfore we
muſt accoumpt theim as Iournymen or laborers hyred, and we muſt in al thin­ges
vſe them as freemen with curteſye, wee muſt require their worcke and allow
alſo reaſonable wages, and truly pay the ſame to them: for to haue their good
report it ſhal muche profite whenſoeuer wee ſhall bee dryuen to hyre o­ther
labourers.

Of al ſocieties or felowſhips, there is none more agre­able vnto nature, then
y• ſociety of man & woman: for ther is engraffed by nature in euerye liuinge
creature a loue & zeale to their like of kynd, and a reaſon of conſeruation by
coniunction of male and female: for there can be no wylde beaſte ſo cruel, ſo
ſolitary, & alone wādring, which in their time do not ſeke, a mate of their
own kind & condicion for procreatiō ſake: ſeing thē there is no ſuch ſociety
or felowſhip more according to nature, then that of the male and female: it be
houes vs to wryte of matrimoniall cōiunctiō eſpecially when as citizens do
matche theymſelues wyth Citizens in mariage by a long cōtinued good wil, & ſo
re­concile & make attonement betwene grudging enemies.

As we reade of IVLIVSC AES AR and Pompeius,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=42) whoſe
affinitye ſo long as it flouriſhed, dyd ſubdue and re­preſſe ciuyll diſcorde,
and reduced all the ciuill warres, vnto vnitye and concorde.

For had not the rauiſhed virgins of Sabina appeaſed y• myndes of their
Parentes and huſbandes by the Law ofExāple of ma­trimony. matrimonye, the
common weale of the Romaynes, had bene vtterlye deſtroyed: very neceſſary
therfore is it to in treate of maryage and naturall amitye: for man doth not
onely marye and take a wyfe for procreation ſake, but al­ſo, to haue a
companion of lyfe, wyth whom hee may liue together, and participate ether
fortune, both proſperity & aduerſity: for hee that is ledde by reaſon, doth
ſeeke for y• commodities of his lyfe, neyther ſeeth he that he can
ſuf­ficientlye prouide for his owne eſtate, excepte hee take a wyfe: therfore
man whē he hath prouided him of a dwel­linge houſe taketh a wyfe, that he may
procreate childrē, to the ende to lyue more commodiouſlye, and the better
beare the chaunces of eyther fortune.

It is eſpeciallye neceſſarye for a man to ſeeke a tradeTrade of ly­uinge.
whereby to lyue, that hee maye be the better prouided for in hys olde age and
ſickeneſſe: wherefore it is eyther re­quiſite for him to exerciſe huſbandrie,
or ſeafaring, or ſom other kinde of honeſte trades, thereby to get conueniente
ſtaye whereof to lyue.

Therfore our carefull mother, dame nature, parent of humane kynde, hath
ordayned wedlocke, to the ende that not onely the moſt pleaſaunt, but alſo the
moſt profitable ſocietye of lyfe, might thereby be put in vre: therefore as
Xenophon hath left in writinge in his boke of houſhold af­fayres, the deuine
prouidence of God made women to bee more fearefull creatures then men, becauſe
the ſame fea­re and awe, in the woman ſhould frame her the better to kepe home
and to be diligente: for awe & feare help much to the diligence of keepinge,
and naturall effeminacye or tenderneſſe hath deliuered vnto theim trades, &
faculties wherein they may be exerciſed, and finde theimſelues oc­cupied
[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=42) euen
within their owne houſes: furthermore foraſ muche as meate drincke and clothe,
muſt needes be had, & cared for, not in euery place openlye, or in wylde
woodes but at home vnder the roofe of the houſe, and in the innerThe man to
bringe in the maintenaunce of houſkeping by trauayl a­broade. partes of the
ſame, it hath bene neceſſarye for men to bee occupied abrode in company and
aſſemblies of men, wher they meeting together may deuiſe meanes, by laboure &
induſtrye to get ſuche thinges as beinge broughte home, ſhoulde be layde vp in
ſtore, in ſome conuenient place of y• houſe: the charge of diſpenſacion or
beſtowing whereof, is more conuenient for the woman then for the man.

Ariſtotle did verye well aſſigne the cares of all ſuche matters as are to be
done abrode vnto men, and of things to be done at home vnto women: and he
thincketh it veryThe vvoman to ſaue & kepe that is brou­ght and to o­uerſee it
at home. vncomelye & not fitting, that women ſhould deale in mat­ters which
are to bee done abroade, as alſo for men to ha­ue the orderinge and diſpoſinge
of thinges wythin dores, for all helpes and defences of mannes lyfe are more
eaſily procured and gotten, by mariage, then by ſinglehood.

We ought to reſtore that vnto nature which wee haue borowed, as to geeue vnto
others lyfe, whych our paren­tes haue geeuen vnto vs, by reaſon whereof we
obtayne, that our chyldren ſhould reſtore that vnto vs in our extre­me age and
weakenes, whiche they haue receyued of vs,Nature in the childe oughte to be
careful for cōfortinge the parentes in olde age. when they were not able to
helpe theymſelues: let theym I ſaye nouriſh and mainteyn vs, in oure
decrepicie, when we leane vpon our ſtaffe and be weake and feble: euen as we
brought vp them in their tender age, when we ſuſtay­ned and embraced them in
our armes, when they firſt learned to creepe: and by theſe meanes, the
interchaunge of nature is perpetuallie fulfilled, and that which it cannot do
in the ſimple generalitye is cōſerued and kept in ſpece and kynde.

Furthermore, the diſcommodities hapninge in our old age (which ſurelye are
innumerable) and the manyfolde kindes of diſeaſes which do vexe and torment
barren olde [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=43)
age and as it were by conſpiracies fall vppon olde men at once: by what other
reaſon maye they bee ſuffered, or by what cōfort ells maye they be mitigated
or aſſwaged, but by y• hope & helpe which we haue or ought to haue
inourComfortable to haue chyl­dien. children: for far leſſe greuous do thoſe
euils ſeme, which happen vnto the father ſtriken into extreme age, when he
himſelfe deelining toward decay, ſeeth his ſonnes growe luſtye of body, &
euery day more ſtrong: then thoſe things which vnto a man wythout children do
happen, which ſee leth and perceyueth the powers both of his body & mynd to
decaye, and therwithall at once al hope of helpe, & po­ſteritye to come to an
ende: but death it ſelfe (whiche vn­to all men is moſt greuous) doth bring
ſomwhat the leſſeDeath. to theym that leaue children behinde them is leſſ
greuous griefe vnto them: who knowing themſelues to be mortal perſons, & that
they can lyue no longer then humane cō ­dicion or ſtate wyll ſuffer them, do
behold their childrē by them begotten, reſembling them, to be called by their
pro­per names, wherby they are as it were reſerued ſtil aliue in the fame and
reporte of men, euen after their diſceaſſe: For they that departe this worlde,
leauing bebynde themDeath of the that vvant Iſſue brought in obliuion. no
chyldren, do carrye wyth theym the ruine of their race & offpringe, and
deſerue euyl of the common weale, yea of mankinde alſo are they wrapped in
perpetuall obliuion, neyther leaue they any ſteppe or imitacion of their lyfe
af­terwardes amongeſt men at any tyme.

Therfore I think beſt for a ciuyl man to take vnto him a wyfe, not onelye for
neceſſities ſake: but alſo to thendeCauſes neceſſarye vvhy the ciuill man
ſhoulde mary a Wy [...]e. they maye lyue wyth more Pleaſure and profite, wyth
whome a thanckefull, pleaſaunt, and atceptable ſocietye of lyfe, muſt be
framed, not to fulfill the luſt of the fleſhe, but to procreate and encreaſe
Iſſue, thereby to repleniſh the cyuyll common weale, whyche in deede is the
proper reſpecte and dutie of mariage.

AElius Commodus Uerus Emperoure of Rome, is ſayd to haue aunſwered his wife
verye notablye, when as ſhee [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=43) ſeemed to bee
offended at the filthineſſe of his Lyfe, and complayned of his forreyn
pleaſures: Suffer me, wyfe (ſayth he) by other women to exerciſe my Luſte and
ſen­ſualitye, for a wyfe is the name of Dygnytye, and not of pleaſure.

Socrates the Philoſopher when hee had longe tyme and muche ſuffered his firſte
wyfe XANTIPPA to beSocrates and his curſt Wyfe bothe angrye and churliſhe
againſte him (to Alcibiades meruaylinge that he coulde beare wyth ſuche a
ſhrewde, and bytter woman, and not baniſhe her oute of his houſe) made this
aunſwere: that in ſufferinge ſuche a Uixen in her behauiour at home: he enured
himſelfe the better to putt vp thoſe Iniuries and reproches whiche were done
to him abroade by others: For Socrates had two wyues at one tyme the better
thereby to perfourme throughlye the effect of pacience.

METELLVS NVMIDICVS the greate andMetellus bys oracion cōcer­ninge mariage.
eloquente Oratour: whyle hee was Cenſor diſcourſinge of the Maryage of Wyues
in his Oration, ſpake theſe woordes: My Lordes if wee coulde be wythout wiues
we ſhoulde all eaſelye lacke and be wythout that moleſta­tion? but becauſe
Nature hath ſo ordayned, that neyther wyth theym can wee lyue commodiouſlye,
and withoute theim we cannot lyue at all: I thincke it better rather to
prouyde for a perpetuall ſauetye, then for a ſhorte or mo­mentanye pleaſure.

Whiche manifeſte confeſſion of the care and moleſta­tion of wyuing, was
myſliked of many of the Cytizens of Rome, for they ſayde that METELLVS the
Cenſor whoſe purpoſe ſhoulde haue beene to exhorte the common people vnto
Matrymonye) could not confeſſe or vtter any thinge touchinge the griefes and
diſcommodities therof leaſte in ſo doynge hee ſhoulde rather ſeeme to diſſwade
the People from Matrymonye, then exhorte theym thereunto: For ſo muche as
almoſte there is nothynge
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=44) throughoute
the whole lyfe of man, can be founde, whych in euerye parte of it ſelfe is
abſolute and perfecte, that no ſtable amitye coulde bee founde, nor more
aboundaunt in all dutie, & godlines, then in matrimony.

Tiberius Gracchus wyllingly & of his own accord ſaued and redeemed his wiues
lyfe wyth his owne death, for he findynge at home, two ſnakes, in this ſorte
deſtyned, thatExample of huſbande hys faythfull loue tovvardes hys Wyfe.
vnleſſe hee killed one of theim, hee and all his houſholde ſhoulde periſhe &
dye, if he let the male eſcape, it ſhoulde then be his chaunce to eſcape
alyue: but if the female, thē ſhould his wyfe Cornelia eſcape alyue: hee ſo
entierly loued his wife, and ſo much eſteemed matrimony, that he rather choſe
to dye hymſelfe, then to ſuruiue his wife,

The wyues of the Myniās haue lefte vs an example of admiration: for their
huſbandes heinge impriſonned by the Lacedemonians, and iudged to dye for
conſpiringe againſt the ſtate, looked for preſent execution, according to the
cuſtome, in the night ſeaſon: but their wyues ma­kinge a pretence or excuſe,
to goe to ſpeake vnto their huſbandes,Exāple of the Wyues fayth­ful loue
tovv­ardes their huſbandes. & take their laſt leaue, obteyned licence of the
ke­pers to goe vnto them, where chaunginge their apparell and diſſemblinge
their ſorowes, wt their heades couered, ſuffered their huſbandes to departe,
and gaue themſelues to the death, to the end that they might deliuer and ſet
at libertye their huſbandes.

Moreouer the too much cheriſhing that Auguſtus vſed towardes his daughters,
made theym more wanton and laſciuious, whereupon Iulia, when a certayne ſeuere
and graue frende of hers, went about to perſwade her to fol­lowe the example
of her fathers frugalitye, ſhe ſcornful­lyeExāple of tòo much cheriſh­ing &
cock [...]ing of childrē aunſwered: my father forgets that he is Caeſar, but
I remember that I am Caeſars daughter: ſhee outraged ſo farre in diſſolute
lyuinge, that ſhee proſtituted her body to all men: and when as men that knew
well her filthy lyfe, meruayled how ſhee brought forth chyldren ſo lyke to
A­grippa her huſbande, ſeing ſhee had to doe wyth ſo manye [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=44) men: ſhee
aunſwered that ſhe could lawfullye entertayne and admitte adulterers after
that ſhee was greate wythA ſhameleſſe▪ aunſvvere of a ſhameles ſtrō ­pet.
chylde by her huſband: for ſeldome doth the woman ke­pe ſhamefaſtnes that hath
once loſt her chaſtity.

There are ſome women whiche take pleaſure to talke of their filthy demeanour,
and declare the blemiſh or diſ­eaſe of theyr mynde and body wyth filthy
ſpeche, therebySome Women delightinge in filthy talke declare the filthines of
their poluted mynde. to appeare more pleaſantly conceyted vnto the worlde: as
Popilia the daughter of Marcus, to a certayn man whych meruayled what ſhould
be the cauſe: that all beaſtes doe neuer admitt the male to couer theim, but
at due ſeaſons whē they woulde be made great with yonge, and women at all
tymes deſire the ſocietye of man: ſhee aunſwered: becauſe, they are beaſtes.

But let the huſband loke to it, that hee geeue no occaſion of filthynes or
offēce, vnto his wyfe: and let her takeThe huſbands vvordes levvdlye vttered
corrupt the levvd diſpoſition of the Wyfe. heede that ſhee do not ſpeake any
filthye thinge, at any ty­me in the preſence of her huſband, wherein ſome men
doe much offend, which allure their wyues wyth vncleanly­nes of wordes and
filthynes of ſpeache vnto luſt and con­cupiſcence, and doe inſtructe theym in
Fables, whereby they are made more readye to venerous dalliaunce, and inflamed
with ſtraunge lou [...]s: and the men nowe & then ſpeake thoſe thinges whyche
are able ynough to enflame euen thoſe women that be otherwiſe very cold
affected.

Furthermore let the huſbande, farre more diligentlye abſtayn from hauing to
doe with any other ſtraunge per­ſon, if hee deſire to haue a chaſte wyfe: for
no iniury doth more diminiſhe or ſooner breake the holye ſociety of ma­ryage,
then for the one partye, I will not ſay to be onely takē in adultery, but
alſo in any ſlender ſuſpicion therof.

The Perſians therefore very well dyd greuouſlye pu­niſheAdultery ſharpely
puniſhed by the Perſians adulterye, to then tent that the ſocietye of
matrimo­nye might be made the more firme and ſtable.

The continency of the huſbande for the moſte part kee­peth his wyfe in
chaſtitye, and maketh the man himſelfe
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=45) to be farre
more commendable: Laelius the friende of Sci­pio, is counted the happier in
this one reſpecte, that in all his lyfe tyme he had but the company of one
onely womā that is to ſay, his own wyfe, whom he had and no more: for there
are very fewe wyues ſo modeſte, and ſo louinge to their huſbands, that they
can willingly and patiently ſuffer & beare with their huſbandes harlottes.

I remember that I haue reade (not without meruay­linge)Women ſto­macke much to
haue their huſbandes ke­pe an harlot. of one woman euen Tertia, wife of the
former AE­milius mother to Cornelia, who was of ſuche gentlenes, and pacience,
that when ſhee knewe her huſbande (being the conqueroure of Affrica) to be
hotelye enamoured of her handmayd a beautiful piece, & knew wel that he vſed
her too familiarly: ſhee alwayes diſſembled the matter, leaſt otherwiſe ſhee
ſhould accuſe her huſband (that moſt excellent Gentleman) of Intemperancye,
and that why­che is more: ſhe was ſo farre frō reuenge, yt when AEmi­lius was
dead, ſhee ſette her handmayde at lybertye, and freely placed her in maryage
(to one that ſerued her huſ­bande) wyth no ſmall dowrye.

Surely a man ſhall fynde very fewe women in all the memorye of man, of this
nature, that can ſufferor beare wyth their Huſbandes Strumpettes: therefore
that good reaſon or argumente vſed by the lawyers, is to bee openlye fixed in
the houſes of men: wherein is geeuen vs for precepte:

What euer Lawe a man woulde haue

an other to obſerue:

From that let not hymſelfe digreſſe,

nor once aſyde to ſwerue.

For what is more reprochefull then for a man to bee condempned by that law
whiche hee himſelfe hath made,Solon his lavv for puniſhinge adultery. and to
reprehende that in others, wherein himſelfe lyke­wyſe treſpaſſeth: to mee
therfore that auncient Lawe of [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=45) Solon, ſeemes
altogether vniuſte: wherein is ſayde that if the man take his wyfe in
adultery, let him kyll heri but if ſhee take the Huſbande in adulterye, lett
her not once touche hym, wyth her finger: for once that Lawe beinge recited
amongeſt a companye of matrones one of theym (curteouſly ſmylinge vppon the
reſt) ſayd: I ſee playnly that Women were excluded oute of the councell of men
when thoſe lawes were ordayned: for if there had beene any woman there, they
woulde neuer haue ſuffered thys Lawe to haue paſſed being ſo iniurious to our
ſexe.

Alſo that Lawe was vniuſte whiche was had in vſe a­monge the Egiptians, as
DIODORVS maketh men­tion: For it appointed the man taken in adulterye, to bee
fcourged or whipped: but the woman to haue her Noſe ſlyt and diſfigured, to
the entent ſhe might in that part beAn hard thing to choſe a vvi­fe vvell.
puniſhed wherewt the face is moſte comly garniſhed to the ſighte of the
worlde: notwithſtandinge in matters touchinge Wyuynge: there is nothynge more
harder then to make a good choiſe, for maidens are brought vp at home wtin
dores, and do verye ſeldome goe abroade to be ſeene: For the whiche cauſe it
is almoſte impoſſible for a man to ſearche out their Beauty, Manners, and
Conuerſation, whych matter ſurelye maketh men doubtful what to do: for it is a
thinge of no ſmall effecte, to marye a wyfe, and wyth her to frequente
perpetuall Societye of Lyfe, whyche in all poynctes is vnknowen vnto hym at
the firſte.

The manners and conuerſacions of Maydens cannot bee better gheſſed at, and
perceyued by any other reaſon, then by the ſimilitude or lykeneſſe of their
parentes: forGood parents bring vp good chyldren. it is verye lyke that of
good Parentes, there can no euyll children be gotten: A chaſte mother bringeth
vp chaſte daughters, and ſhe that in harte neuer committed ſhame, wyll not
wyncke nor beare wyth any faulte of her daugh­ter.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=46) All young
men for the moſt part do deſire to mary a fayre wyfe: but yet it is (by the
opinion of Theophraſtus) leſſe griefe for a man to haue a foule, thē to kepe
a fayre wyfe: For hee thinkes that no thing is there ſafe, which al men do
deſire, becauſe ſome one man doth entyſe her by beau­tye, ſome by wyſdome, and
ſome through eloquence, and ſome by bounty and gyftes, and that whiche is
aſſaulted in euery parte, is vanquiſhed on ſome parte: This much doth Saynt
Ierome diſcourſe vpon, after the minde & opi­nion of the Philoſopher
Theophraſtus.

Ennius the Poet ſayde that wee muſt marrye wyues, y• are of a ſounde
chaſtitye, and whyche are ſeene to bee of a portly fauour: Aulus Gellius
expoundeth this ſentence, & ſheweth that thoſe women be of portly fauour,
which areChoyſe of a Wyfe. neyther of the fayreſt, not yet of the fowleſte
feature, but meane betweene both: whych mediocrity ſurelye is in al thinges
beſt and chiefeſt: for this reaſon is ſufficient to y• procreation of iſſue:
for pleaſaunt beautye in the womā helpeth muche, as in the men worthynes or
dignitye is moſt acceptable: theſe and many other thinges are to be thought
vpon, in the choyſe of a wyfe, and namely thys, that a mā chooſe one that in
goods and feature is lyke to himſelfe: for inequality breedeth contempt, and
perpetuall brawlinge, but equality knytteth together the myn­des with moſte
firme loue and affection: It is alſo good for a man to take ſuche a wyfe as
hath not beene touchedEquality in choyſe. nor maryed to another man before:
for there is a double labour and trouble to him that marieth a wydow, firſt to
vnteache her the maners of her former huſbande, and ſe­condlye to enure, and
acquainte her, wyth his owne fa­ſhions.

Ariſtotle thincketh the beſt tyme for maydes to be ma­ryed, at the age of
eightene yeares, and for a man at thir­tye and ſixe yeares of age: for thoſe
ages are rype and perfectThe age for man and vvo­man to marye for procreation
of iſſue: but as touching the trayning [[Page
39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=46) of theym vp in
faſhions, if they were a fewe leſſe yeares yonger, I woulde thincke it more
commodious, ſpecial­lye in this our tyme, wherin vices (as the Satyriſt ſaith)
do ſwarme: Lycurgus alſo affirmed that it was a ſhame­ful thing for man &
woman to paſſe beyond thoſe yeares vnmaried: For he ordayned that thoſe
perſons ſhould be noted wyth infami [...], and expelled the Theatres, who at
y• age of xxxvii. yeares were found to haue lyued wythout a wyfe: The Romayns
alſo debarred al them from bea­ringe any publike offyce, and eſteemed them as
vnworthy to be honoured any waye by the common weale, whyche woulde not helpe
and furder the ſame wyth augmentati­on of Iſſue.

Let the huſband inſtruct his wyfe wyth the beſt man­ners, neyther wyth
threateninges, reproche, nor ſtripes: for it is a ſeruile thing & not mete at
any hand, for famili­er Societye: and in deede wyues become obdurate
wythOrderly inſtruction to be ge­uen by the mā to the vvyfe. beatinge euen as
naughtye ſeruauntes, and bondmen be­come worſe and worſe, and with ſtripes are
dayly more & more geuen to folow their owne w [...]lf [...]ll wayes▪ So wo­men
are leſſe obedient to their huſbandes, and do all thin­ges peuiſhlye againſt
the grayne, when they are vngent­lye entreated of their huſbandes, and getting
at any tyme occaſion for their purpoſe, run [...]e head long into al
filthy­nes without eyther awe or reuerence of matrimony, thin­kinge that they
make none offence at all, when they may lay for their excuſe yt they do it in
reuengemēt of their ſtrypes before receiued: therfore with reaſon muſt wee
deale wt them, yt they may vnderſtand all thinges to be done, for the common
profyte of their whole houſeholde, for the honeſtye of theimſelues, and of
wedlocke: the ſecrets alſo y• are and ought to be betweene man and wyfe, let
them be included within the walles of their chamber and no fur­ther: for that
man taketh an ill way both for himſelfe and his wines honeſty which blabbeth
out thoſe thinges that are to be kept in ſilence: for we muſte ſo caſt in our
min­des [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=47) des
to liue in Wedlocke, that wee bee not as laughingeSecretes of Wedlocke
be­tvven man and Wyfe ought not to be reuealed. ſtockes to anye abrode, for
anye matters done wythin our owne houſes: therfore in matrimonye all thinges
ought to be kept ſecrete: for what can bee more lewde and ſha­mefull, then
eyther the huſbande amongeſt his friendes, or the wyfe amongeſt her
neighbours, to chatte and bab­vle oute ſuche matters, as ought in all poyntes
to be con­cealed.

Candaules Kynge of Lydia, had a wyfe, vppon whoſe beautye he greatly doted:
neyther thoughte hee it ſuffici­enteThe doting ſōdnes of Cā daules, ouer
[...]is fayre vvyfe hovv hee vvas for th [...] ſame ſlayne. to blaʒe abroade
her Feacture and Beautye vnto all men, and to manifeſt vnto the worlde, ſuche
matrimoni­all ſecretes as were to bee kept cloſe: but alſo would ha­ue one to
bee a wytneſſe of hys Pleaſures, and therefore broughte her foorth naked, and
ſhewed her to his com­panion Gyges (as Herodotus ſaith) whom aſſone as Gyges
had ſeene, hee was ſo inflamed wyth loue towardes her, that hee thoughte
vppon, ne cared for anye other thing more then how to obtayne her to his owne
wyll: and ſhee throughlye knowing the matter, and ſuppoſing her ſelfe to haue
beene of her huſbande thus betrayed, as one that alienated his dealinges and
loue to another, deuiſed with the adulterer Gyges to murther her huſband, and
thereupon beſtowed both her kingdome and herſelfe vpon y• ſame Gyges: by this
meanes did Candaules loſe both his lyfe, & his kingdom, when he thought his
pleaſures to be leſſe, ſo longe as they were kept in ſilence and vnknowen.

Cleobulus Lyndius (accoumpted one of the ſeuen ſages of Greece) geeueth vs
twoo good leſſons touchinge wy­uinge:Tvvo precepts to be obſerued by the
huſbād tovvardes his vvyfe. the one is that wee ſhoulde deale wyth theym by
flatteringe. The other that in preſence of ſtrangers, wee ſhoulde neuer chyde
theym: for the one hee ſayde, was a poynte of fooliſhenes, the other of
madnes.

Furthermore let the huſband commytte in charge vn­to his wyfe, al thinges
domeſticall and within dores, and [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=47) let hym ſuffer
her to haue the diſpenſation of the ſame:

Let her perfourme her dilygence at home, and let the huſbande employe his
induſtrye abroade: let her nouriſh and foſter their children, and let him
inſtruct and teacheThe huſbands charge abrode theym: let the goodman of the
houſe▪ as neede requireth knowe to ſeeke after ſuche thinges as appertayne to
the vſe of the familye, and this not by vſurye, or anye filthye lucre, but
eyther wyth tyllinge the grounde and fruictes of the earth, which is neuer
couetous, nether diſſembleth wyth her tyllers: but euermore reſtoreth the
Seedes to her committed, wythe moſte plentifull fruite and gayne: for it is
meete and conueniente, that the common mother of all men, ſhoulde nouriſhe and
bring vp her children as it were wyth her dugges and encreaſe, eyther wyth
libe­rall Sciences, or Merchaundyʒe, or nauigation, in traf­fique, in Sellinge
and buyinge, wythout lyinge or vani­tye, or in other honeſt trades, tendinge
to the profite, and ornament of the cyttye.

Furthermore it behooues him to ſpare and ſaue that hee getteth: for in vayne
doe they take laboure to gette Ryches, where is no regarde of ſparinge: and
where the expences do ſtill runne oute, wythout anye comminge in: neyther is
this prouerb of drawing vp water in a pitcher yt is ful of holes any other
thing then firſt to get, and then prodigally & ryotouſly to lauiſh out: Yet
would I not yt the houſholder ſhoulde bee a myſer and ſteyned wyth pin­chyng
couetouſnes, then the whych plague, there can beThe couetous man good to none,
but hur [...] ful to all. none more pernicious: neyther yet more diſcrepante,
or further of frō al humanity: for the couetous man hur­tēth all men, is
odious to all men, neyther doynge good to hymſelfe or to any of his frendes:
Hee neuer reioyſeth at hartes eaſe, hee is alwayes ſadde, churliſhe, penſiue,
and crabbed, he onelye cannot fynde in his harte to loue, and cheriſhe his
wyfe, and children, nor departe with any thing vnto them, to liue merily
wtall, but always is found
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=48) a ſteruer of
him ſelfe, an oppreſſor of his owne nature, is alwayes hungrye, alway
thirſtye, and continually vexed with an inſaciable gredye deſire, neyther can
any thinge ſuffice him: Uery aptly did the riche Attalus compare a couetous
man to an hungry dogge that ſnatcheth vp fragmentesA couetous mā compared to
an hungrye dogge. of bread and meate at his maiſters table, whiche ſlappeth vp
ſtreightwaies whole & vnchawed gubs wtout any taſte, and ſtreightways with
open mouthe, lokes ſtyll for more, ſtandinge at receipt of further hope for
more to come.

Let a man thanckefullye enioye his goodes, and eſtate preſent, and wyth well
doinge, let him hope ſtyll for bet­ter: for it is the parte of a faynt harted
perſon, too muche to feare penurie, & for that cauſe not to dare to vſe thoſe
thinges whiche are preſent: becauſe (forſooth) he feareth that he ſhall
hereafter lacke.

The charge of all dealinges within the houſe belon­geth vnto the wyues: and it
were very hard dealing that the goodman, who trauayleth and taketh paynes
abrode to ſeeke thrift, when he cōmeth home into his owne houſe as it were
into the porte or hauen of tranquillitye, after a moſte daungerous and harde
voyage, ſhould alſo be buſi­ed and trobled with ordering houſhold affayres at
home, when he ſurceaſſinge all care, and deſiringe to be at quietneſſe and
reſt, repayreth home, for eaſe and ſuccour: ther­fore let the wyfe performe
her diligence, and let her take vppon her the charge of all thinges which are
at home to be ordered, accordyng to the preſcribed ordinaunces of ye huſbande,
vnto whome in all pointes, ſhee oughte to bee obedient, for it goeth very yll
in that houſholde where ye wife beareth al rule, and the huſband obeyeth, and
is ma­de as one of the meigniall folke.

Let the wyfe eſpecially ſet in order her houſhold ſtuffe and thoſe neceſſaries
that are neate, and of value, & whi­cheOrdering of houſhold ne­ceſſaries. are
to be reſerued to ye vſe of a better life, whether the ſame belong to womāly
furniture, or to mans apparell: let her [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=48) diſpoſe and
order them wythin ſecrete roomes, in the houſe, that when ſoeuer occaſion
hapneth to occupye theym, they maye bee in a readynes, and not to ſeeke: for
it is aSafe layde vp ſone found. moſte certayne pouertye, when a man lacketh
that thinge which hee hath, and ſtandeth in neede of the ſame, know­ing not in
what place it is layde vp.

Moreouer ſuch things as dulie concerne meate & drinck, and which are prepared
for dinner & ſupper, let her ſo day ly diſpend & beſow, that they be neither
waſtfully gour­maundiſed, and ſwilled vp in glottonye and dronkennes, by the
folkes of the houſe: neyther by reaſon of too much nyggardy and pinching, let
them not bee hungerbytten and ſterued: Therfore let her keepe a meane, and ſo
ſhal ſhee at one and the ſelfe ſame tyme, both rightlye prouideA moderate diet
and meaſurable apparel. for their healthe, and alſo for the priuate affayres
of their familye, aſwell at one tyme as at another: and let her wt great
moderacyon qualeſy her ſelfe in thoſe thinges whi­ch appertayne to her own
ſelfe, eſpeciallye for apparell & ornamentes for her owne bodye, which
greatlye conſume her huſband [...]s ſubſtaunce: For they coſt deare at the
firſt and in ſmall ſpace are eyther by vſe cleane worne, or elles ſolde for a
greate deale leſſe then they were bought.Wyſe Women feare euil  [...]e­portes.

An honeſte manered woman oughte to feare nothinge more, then euyll reporte:
for ſhee that once hath an euyll name, whether it be rightlye by her deſerued,
or that ſhe bee wrongfully ſlaundered, hardly can recouer her good name and
fame agayne: for a woman ſuſpected of vnchaft lyuing leadeth a miſerable and
wretched lyfe.

The true ornamentes of women are Modeſtye, chaſte­tye,The true ornaments of a
Woman. ſhamefaſtnes and prayſe, whiche cannot bee purcha­ſed, wyth any gold,
pearles, or precious ſtones: but ſeing it is ſo, that all theſe cannot be
ſeene in any one good wo­man, although very honeſt: Chaſtitye yet is that only
or­namente, whiche may ſupplie whatſoeuer lacketh in theChaſtitye the ſpeciall
o [...]nament in a Wo­man▪ others: for this enlargeth the dowrye, when it is
not of it ſelfe ſufficient, it not onely adorneth and maketh come
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=49) lye that
which is deformed, but alſo reduceth a woman to the ſimilitude of beautie it
ſelfe, it enobleth ignobilitye, & finally fulfilleth all thinges, whiche in
any parte may o­therwiſe be wantinge.

The fiftye Uirgines of Sparta haue eternized theyr names vnto all Poſteritye:
for they beinge by their Pa­rents ſent to do ſacrifice among the Meſſenians,
thinkingExample of chaſtitye. to be entertayned after the maner of frendly
hoſpitality: the Meſſenians with ſuch impaciencie and concupiſcence, luſted
after them, that diſpiſinge the law of hoſpitalitye, they ſought meanes by
ſollicityng their conſentes to car­nail knowledge, & ſo to deflo wre their
virginitye: whych filthy motion the virgines denyinge, & they importunate­lye
vrginge to diſhoneſte their bodies, yet was there not one founde of all thoſe
virgines, that woulde conſent vn­to their willes: but choſe rather to dye then
ſo to looſe their maydēhode, whoſe bloud yt Lacedaemoniās, through the great
helpe of God, reuenged afterward by a notable victorye.

The ſecond ornament of a woman is to haue prety children,A ſecond ornamente of
vvo­men is to haue pretye and to­vvardly chil­dren. and of an excellent
towardneſſe: whiche ornamente how much it is to be eſtemed of, Cornelia the
wife of Pau­lus AEmilius hath taught vs: for when a certayne womā of Campania
cōminge vnto her, & ſhewing outin a braue­rye her pearles, golde, and
pretious apparell, requeſted the ſame Cornelia in lyke maner to bring forth
and ſhewe her ornaments, and iewels, ſhe fooded her out wyth wor­des, vntil
ſuche tyme as her children returned home from the ſchole, whome ſhee ſhewinge
vnto the other woman, ſayde: Beholde my delicate ſtore and treaſures,
allVertuous chyldren the righ [...]e Ievvelles of deareſt eſtima­tion vnto
parē tes. myne ornamentes, all my Iewelles and all my delights: which
perſwaſion is the beſt that can bee vnto all matro­nes, that in reſpecte of
their children they ſhoulde deſpyſe al other iewelles, and ornaments, and
repute their chiefe attyre in the hope and towardnes of their Children.

Beſides this let the Wyfe take heede, that ſhee vſe no [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=49) diſſymulation,
nor cloaked Iuggelinge wyth her huſbād in any matter: for what thing can bee
more diſhoneſt in a woman, then to ſhewe her ſelfe not to be the ſame whych
ſhee was.

Pompeia the wyfe of Nero the Emperour, was not on­lye made a ieſtynge ſtocke
to the worlde, ſo longe as ſhee lyued, becauſe ſhee prancked herſelfe too
muche in cury­ous trymminge vp herſelfe to the beſt ſhewe of all beau­tye, but
alſo purchaſed vnto her name perpetual ignomi­nie. For not Poets onely, but
Hiſtoriographers alſo, notCurioſitie of a ſimpering p [...]ik medayntye. a
fewe do wryte, that ſhee not in couert maner, and claſe­lye, but apertly and
manefeſtlye fancied this curioſity, & they affirme, that ſhee had alwayes in a
readynes, wher. ſoeuer ſhe went, whole heardes of Aſſes, that ſhee might
continually cheriſhe her delicate face, & rynſe her mouth wyth the mylke of
theym daylye, thereby to appeare the fayrer and beautifuller: for there is no
good hope to bee had in that woman whiche ſeeketh to bee prayſed abrode for
her beautye: It was lawfull for the Spartane virgins to goe with their face
bare, tyll they were maryed, thatWoman ſha [...] faſte. they mighte thereby
the better gette theym huſbandes: but after they were maryed they courred doth
their head and their face, as thoſe then that ſoughte after no Huſ­bandes, but
onelye cared to retayne ſuch as they enioyed: But Gorgias Leontinus opinion
is, that mennes wyues ſhoulde bee kepte at home from goinge abroade: whyche
thinge ſurely liketh not mee: but for theim to goe abrodeWomē ought to be
reſtrayn­ed from much fi [...] kinge and gadding abro­de. verye ſeeldome, that
truelye doe I greatlye commende: For a woman that is a walker, and a traueiler
from her owne houſe abrode, can ſeeldome bee chaſte: let the wyfe ſhewe her
ſelfe of one mynde and concorde, wyth her huſ­bande in all thinges, for there
can be nothinge more pleaſaunte amonge mortall menne, then when the man, and
wyfe doe gouerne their Houſholde wyth concorde, and mutuall good wyll
together: and on the other parte no­thingDomeſtical diſcord. worſe, then
mutual diſcord, & domeſtical brabling.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=50)The Athenians
haue taught vs that ſilence in matters betweene man and wyfe, ought to bee
vſed: for when as Philippe king of Maoedonie warred againſt the Atheni­ans,
and that their ſcoutes had intercepted letters of O­lympias ſent from her vnto
kinge Philippe her huſbande, they commaunded thoſe letters to bee redeliuered
whole vnopened, and vntouched, becauſe they thoughte it was not lawful (no not
for the enemie) to know and vnderſtād the ſecretes paſſinge from the wyfe to
her huſband.

In wedlocke alſo let all anger and ſtomackinge be far abſent, whiche makes
loue manye tymes more ſlacke and ſlowe, and altogether diminiſheth the ſame,
diſorderinge all domeſticall affayres, and cauſing the ſtate of wedlocke to be
more vnpleaſaunt.

The moſt auncient Romaines, did adorne that womā with a crowne of chaſtitye,
whiche was onely contented wyth one huſbande, and with continuall wydowhood,
toThe vvyfe no ſtomacker or reſiſter. profeſſe and ſhewe forthe the ſinceritye
of her incorrupte mynde: for ſhe ſeemeth to be of an vnbrideled luſte, whi­che
maryeth agayne, eſpecially if ſhee haue children, whi­che are the pledges of
matrimonye, and expreſſe the lyue­lye ymage of her late deceaſſed huſbande,
both in counti­naunce and name: moreouer ſhee that maryeth agayne, is ſeene to
bee curſt, and wicked towards her children, be­cauſeWydovves'ma  [...]yinhe
agayne make men iudge them to do it for luſte and lecherye. they are depriued
of their father, and forſaken of all men: neglectinge theym as it were in the
entraunce of their lyfe, euen at that age and time when they haue moſt neede
of their parentes helpe: which reaſon (vndoubted­lye) ought to perſwade all
wydowes to kepe their chaſti­tye, together with their children, that they make
no fur­ther tryall of fortune, of whom they being once deceyued may ſcarcely
hope for better lotte or fortune afterwarde.

Annia, a woman of noble race among the Romaynes, when her neighbours and
friendes p [...]rſwaded her in her wydowhood to mary wyth another huſband,
ſeeinge ſhée was yet of aluſtye age, and excellente beautye: made [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=50) aunſwere that
ſhe would not any wyſe ſo do: for ſayth ſhe if I finde a good huſband as I had
before, I wyll not beeAnnia a vvor­thye vvydovv her aunſvvere touching mariage
the ſecond tyme. always in feare leaſt I ſhould forgo him: but if I ſhould
matche my ſelfe wyth an euil huſband, what neede haue I to trye an euill man,
when I haue once already had ex­perience of a verye good man: for ſhe that is
diſapointed by the deſtenye of her firſt huſbande, ſeemes to be wyſe if ſhee
no more committe her ſelfe vnto the Fortune of Ma­ryage.

The daughter of Demotion the Athenian, althoughe ſhee was a virgine, yet
hearing of the death of Leoſthenes her eſpouſed huſband, who was ſlayne at the
battle of Lē ­nos, Firſt loue is moſte ſtedfaſt. killed her ſelfe: affirming
that althoughe ſhe neuer had any carnall or matrimonial copulation with her
huſ­bande, yet if ſhee ſhoulde bee compelled to take another man, ſhee ſhould
deceyue the ſecond, ſeeinge that in hart ſhee was maryed to the firſt:
notwithſtanding thoſe wo­men deale a greate deale better: who in the firſte
flower of their yeares do hap to marye the ſeconde tyme, namely if they be
then wtout children: for al lyuing creatures de­ſire to haue and begette
Iſſue: and for procreation ſake, rather then for luſte to ioyne together,
ſeemeth a thinge much more fitte & reaſonable.

Hiero of Syracuſa, being on a tyme chidden by a certein familier frende of his
becauſe his breath did ſlincke, & hee for helping thereof had vſed no
remedies: ſayd, yt hee ne­uer knewe ſo muche in himſelfe before that tyme, &
bla­med his wyfe, in that ſhee had neuer admoniſhed hym thereof: to whome his
wife modeſtly excuſinge herſelfe: ſayde, huſband be not angrye with mee, for I
thought yt all mennes mouthes had ſmelled ſo, and therfore I keptA modeſt
aunſvvere of a chaſt Ladye. ſilence. Armenia alſo comminge home from a royal
feaſt made by kinge Cyrus, when all men for the comlyneſſe of his perſon
highly prayſed Cyrus, ſhee beinge demaunded, by her huſband, what ſhee thought
of the dignity and fea­ture of yt king: huſband (quod ſhe) I neuer turned myne
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=51) eyes from
you, and therefore what an other mannes fea­ture is, I am vtterlye ignoraunte.

In the education or bringinge vp of chyldren there are two thinges eſpeciallye
to be conſidered, wherof the oneConſideratiōs in the educati­on of chyldrē
chiefly appertayneth to the mother, the other vnto the fa­ther himſelfe, the
firſte reaſon concerneth the meanes to lyue, the ſeconde to lyue well: the
firſte becauſe it is and falleth for Home, belongeth to the dutie of the
mother whiche ought to bee the gouerneſſe of the houſholde mat­ters accordinge
to the preſcribed ordinaunces enioyned her by her huſbande: The matrone
therefore that is with childe, ought to forecaſt and conſider that ſhee muſt
bringMatrones vvith chylde. foorth a chylde, and greate dyligence muſt ſhee
take that in no reſpecte ſhee hurte the chylde within her bodye, be­fore it
bee broughte into the worlde, and eſpeciallye ſhee muſte cheriſhe her owne
bodye, and take her meate wyth modeſtye, feedinge vppon ſuche kynde of foode,
as may nouriſhe and ſtrengthen her younge one, and not that whiche maye weaken
it, and ſhee ſhall ſhunne to muche Slouthe: a moderate Walkinge for her is
profitable and healthfull, and cauſeth farre more eaſie deliueraunce in
childebyrthe: Shee ſhall alſo beware of all vehementeA vvicked de­maunde of a
Woman in an vngodly prac­tiſe. laboures, eſpeciallye daunſinge, whiche thinge
by exam­ple HYPPOCRATES confirmed: For when a cer­tayne woman coulde not
auoyde the receyued Seede of man, ſhee deſired his deuiſe to helpe her that
the Seede ſhoulde not proſper, whome hee counſayled euerye daye, by iumpinge,
and daunſinge, to ſtyrre the Seede, and ſo the ſeauenth day by meanes of her
leapinge and daunſing ſhe brought foorth an vnperfect conception, couered
ouerDaunſinge daūgerous for Women that  [...]e vvith child wyth a lyttle
thinne rymme or ſkinne, ſuche as wee ſee is in an egge betweene the ſhell and
the yolke: Some wo­men keepe ſuche Reuell rexe and coyle in daunſinge and
leapinge, at banquettes and feaſtes, that for verye payne they eyther procure
abortion before the tyme, or elles bringe the ſame foorthe verye weake and
feeble: other to [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=51) thende to ſeeme
pretye and ſlenderer vnto their louers, do gyrd themſelues ſo ſtraight, that
they hurt themſelues, & their bellies alſo thereby very much: ſome cramme &
fillStrait gyrding Toſpotvvome their bellies with dayntye fare and wyne, euen
tyll they ſurphet agayne: and very many women vſe to cloye their ſtomackes
wyth ſower fruite, and vnrype apples. I letFrute eaters. paſſe to ſpeake of
their luſtes, and certayne beaſtly pranc­kes, not by ſpeache to be vttered,
wherby they do not onelye trauaile before their tyme, but alſo do bring forth
into the worlde lotheſome monſters.

After that the lyttle infante ſhalbe borne, whiche not longe agone the mother
knewe not, becauſe it was cloſed in her wombe: let her wyth her Dugges, and
with that Fountayne, nouriſhe and foſter it, whiche prouident Na­ture hath
wyth ſuche plentifulnes prepared in her breaſt: Worſt of all (in myne opinion)
do ſuche women deſerue of their children, which put their babes out to
nourſing,Naturall mo­thers are natu­rall nurſes. and at that tyme when they
haue moſt neede of their mo­thers helpe, committinge theym vnto younge
huſwyues and countrye nourſes, ſuche vnto whom in deede, ſome woulde not
committe a younge kytlinge, if they had anye pleaſure in it: furthermore they
are not whole mothers, but rather appeare to be halfe mothers, whiche ſtraight
waye put out to nurſinge, theyr owne naturall chylde, & denye to geeue it
ſucke, whom euen nowe in their owne wombe, wyth their owne bloud they
nouriſhed: do they perſwade theimſelues that theyr neepples and duggs are by
nature geeuen them for an ornamente, or beautifiynge of theyr breaſt, and not
to the nouriſhmente of their chyl­dren▪ But wee do knowe ſome women which wyth
ſlyb­berſauces and medecines do drye vp and ſtoppe that moſt ſacred Fountayne,
the nouriſher of Mankinde, yea not wythout greate daunger of theyre owne
healthes, to the end (forſooth) they may appeare the more beautifull and in
the eyes of theyr Louers more pleaſaunte and accep­table.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=52) Let no good
mother ſuffer her chylde to be infected wyth the contagion of mylcke drawen
from another womans breaſtes, and let her in ſo doinge performe the poynte of
a whole and entiere parent, deſeruinge well of her childe:Good mother good
nurſe. whom ſhee ſhall thereby make more readye to requite & recōpēce her
whē it ſhal grow to further yeares of diſcretion, if it ſhall perceyue that
it hath not at any tyme bene defrauded of the mothers foſteringe, and
nouriſhemente, in the firſte beginninge of lyfe: for the benefite of the
mo­thers breaſte, was among the Auncientes had in ſuch re­uerence and regarde,
that what ſoeuer hard or difficulte, requeſt the mothers were to craue at the
handes of their childrē, their faſhion was to requeſt the ſame, for & by the
mylcke whiche they gaue vnto theym in their Infancye, and babeſhippe. For what
pleaſaunter delights or plea­ſures can there be, then a younge ſucklinge
chylde whoſe liſpinge ſpeache, & prety endeuouringes to bring out hys wordes,
his ſwete laughter, and the pleaſaunt mothers ſpeach agayne vſed to her ſayd
chylde, ſeemes to me farre to ſurpaſſe all other counterfeict ſcoffers or
ieſters.

Neyther nede Apes, or little dogges, to bee ſoughte for there, to ſport
themſelues wythall, where little babes do creepe about the houſe.

The members and tender partes of younge chyldren are to be faſhioned by the
Nourſes handes, and the lytleOrderinge and tendering the members of children,
Infantes bodye to be wrapped and bounde with a ſwath­inge bande, from the
ſhoulders, euen downe to the ancle, but yet ſomewhat looſer about the breaſte
and bulke: for the bredth or largenes of thoſe partes, do make very mu­che to
the dignitie and ſtrengthninge of a man, and ſome­what ſtraighter about the
ſtomacke, and about the nether partes of the bellye, the better to confirme
and ſtrengthē the ſame: and that the Bellye beare not out aboue com­lye
proportion: Ariſtotle alſo affirmeth that cryinge is profitablie geeuen by
nature vnto chyldren, for hee thin­keth that it is an indeuour or ſtriuing
vſed by the chylde, [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=52) to his
encreaſinge, and that it helpeth much to ſtretch out the breaſt, and hart
ſtringes: wherfore hee preſcribeth the Nurſe not to force the childe from
cryinge. Women con­ceyued with child ought to haue great care of themſelues
leaſt that they be deliuered before their time, or miſcary in child bearing,
which thing yt we may haue foreknowledge of, Hyppocrates teacheth: for eyther
he ſayth ye infant mo­uethFor Women to knovve the full time of goinge vvith
childe, and vvhen to be deliuered. & ſtyrreth in the mothers wombe, vpon the
70. or ells 90. daye, & it expreſſeth y• it is eyther the ſeuenth or nynthe
moneth, wherein ſhee ſhall be delyuered of her chylde, ſo ſhal a carefull
mother be ſkilful of her tyme of deliuerāce, before it happen.

Wee muſt take heede (as Celſus ſaythe) leaſt in tyme of proſperous healthe we
do conſume and waſte awaye ſuche thinges as ſhoulde be ſauegardes and
preſeruacions vnto vs in ſickneſſe: wherfore a luſtye healthefull man, who is
at his owne diſpoſition, will refuſe no kinde of meate that the cōmon people
vſeth, and twyſe a daye rather then once deſireth to eate meate: neyther
taketh he any leſſe thē wil ſatiſfy his ſtomacke: he vſeth alſo diuers kindes
of lyfe, as ſometimes to bee in the countrye, ſometimes in the cittie, but
more often in the fieldes. To ſayle vpon the Seas, toHovv a luſtye, and
healthfull man diſpoſeth his tyme. hauke,, and to hunte, and ſometimes to take
his reſte, but yet moſt often to exerciſe himſelfe: for certaynly Idlenes
enfeebleth the bodye, but laboure ſtrengtheneth it, ye one haſteneth vntimelye
olde age, the other maketh a man to haue a longe and luſtye younge age.

Wee muſte deale with children by a lyttle and lyttle to teache theym, euen as
when we would fill a veſſell whych hath a narrowe mouthe: for if we poure
water faſt, it fyl­leth and runneth ouer: but if wee drop it in by a ſlender
funnell, wee ſhall fille it toppe full. To prayſe the indu­ſtrye and diligence
of children in their exerciſes, doth vntoHovv to deale vvith children in
teachig thē. theim much good, and to chyde them for their ſlouth, is vn­to
theym profitable alſo: for, to bee preferred before their equalles, and to bee
prayſed for well doinge by their may­ſters,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=53) doth much
ſharpen childrens wyttes, and quickneth their courage in all their ſtudies and
exerciſes.

The mothers diſcipline and correction, for children in their firſt tender
yeares of Infancie is verye profitable, & maketh theym more prone, docible and
apte to learne & compaſſe greater ſtudies: Now when they ſhall come to ſeauen
yeares of age, let the father take care of them, and inſtructe theym with a
certayne greater diligence, whoſe charge is to trayne vp his children to lyue
well and ver­tuouſlye,Infancy of the childrē is the mothers char­ge to loke
vnto then whiche diſcipline, none ſurely can be more profitable, or of greater
effecte geeuen from mortal men. For Alexander who for his wiſedom was ſurnamed
the greate, was wonte to ſaye, that hee was no leſſe bounde vnto Ariſtotle his
Scholemaiſter, then vnto king Philip his father: for albeit his father had
begottt him into this worlde a lyuing creature: yet Ariſtotle was he that
tau­ghte him the waye to lyue well, whiche knowledge he in deede thought, was
to be preferred before bare lyfe.

The chiefe and ſpeciall token of witte in children ſayth Fabius Quintilianus
is memorye, when as the childe lear­nethMemorye in children is the beſt token
of Wytte. eaſlye, and remembreth ſurelye: It ſhall therfore be beſt in the
firſte yeares of their youth, to exerciſe memorie for the more perfecting and
throughly furdering the vigor and force of their wytt, & eyther by ambition or
rewards and gyftes to allure theym, to the end they may kepe ma­nye thinges in
memorye, and not be aſhamed or abaſhed, to vtter and recite the ſame in any
great aſſemblie of peo­ple. For the propounding of rewarde, & allurement,
ſhar­penethCheriſhing of children. the witte, ſtyrreth vp the memorye, and
maketh yt myndes of Children more chearfull, and prompte to anye matter. There
are ſome wryters which ſuppoſe that blu­ſhinge in a chylde is a very good
ſigne of ſhamefaſtnes, & better then paleneſſe: for paleneſſe argueth to much
fear­fulnes, theother pretendeth and ſheweth a very good to­wardenes,Bluſhing
in children a ſign of good nature as Diogenes witneſſeth: for on a tyme he
ſeing a chyld to bluſh: be of good cheare my ſonne (quod he) for [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=53) ſuche a kynde of
coloure, is the colour of vertue. If the father vnderſtand, or perceiue his
ſonne to be doci­ble, and of excellent wytt, no couetouſnes ought to let or
ſtay him whereby he ſhould fruſtrate his ſonne of ſo great a commendacion: let
him therfore ſo ſone as hee can, be­take his chylde vnto good Scholemaiſters,
that he mayThe fathers care to prouide a good Schole maiſter for his children.
in thoſe liberall Artes, be taught and inſtructed, wher­vnto nature herſelfe
hath moſt adapted hym: for nothing oughte more to bee wiſhed for vnto the
Parentes, then to haue their children learned, of whom ſurelye, to bee
van­quiſhed and ouercome, in all kynde of prayſe, they ought not onelye to
ſuffer, and take in good parte, but alſo to eſteeme the prayſe and reward of
victorye gotten by their Children, to appertayne vnto theymſelues.

There is nothinge that cauſeth Children to prooue more obediente to their
parentes, then when as they vn­derſtande that they haue profited in ſtudies of
good Artes by the furtherance, and diligence of their Parents be­ſtowed vpon
them: Neyther ought the Chylde ſo mu­che to conſider of his Parentes
ſubſtance, whyche trulye are but thinges tranſitorye, frayle, and in the
handes of Fortune, and whiche do onelye garniſhe and ſet oute theA rich man
vn▪ learned. bodye, but do not increaſe the mynde or furniſhe it wythe
perpetuall goodes: wherefore verye well ſayde Diogenes that a ryche man beinge
vnlearned, is as a ſheepe wyth a golden fleece.

Parentes ought alſo to commytte the cuſtody of their children vnto their
friendes to bringe vp, aſwell for that they doe leſſe cocker theym beinge
abſent, and agayn be­cauſe they wyl bee the leſſe wanton in other mennes
hou­ſes, beinge nouriſhed at an other mans table, and cheri­ſhed by another
mans fyer, & they greatlye feare left they ſhould be very ill thought of, &
thruſt out of dores by thē, vnto whom their Parents had betaken & cōmitted
theym in gouernance, vpon great truſt and diligence. For it hath bene ſeene,
that euen greate Prynces, vnder Tutors, and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=54) ouerſeers,
haue manye times proued more excellent then vnder their owne Parentes. I
thincke it profitable for the chylde to be taught and inſtructed in twoo
kyndes of diſci­pline at once, neyther is it to be feared, that the wytte of
the chylde ſhoulde be ouercharged by two ſcholemaiſtersTvvo kyndes of lerning
not preindicial for the chylde to practiſe at one inſtante. of ſeuerall artes
or Sciences: for he is put to no more pay nes, but his diligence is deuided,
and tediouſnes remoued: for when the childe is wearye of one kynde of
teachinge, he goeth ſtreight to an other, euen as it were vnto an Hauen or
reſtinge porte of his trauailes, and the inconſtancie of thoſe young yeares
which hardly perſeuereth long in one and the ſelfe ſame thinge is not
altogether vnprofitable: Nothinge more famous can bee geeuen from parentes to
their children, then the ſtudies of good diſciplines and ſci­ences whiche are
therefore called Lyberall Sciences, be­cauſe they make mē free from al vyle &
lothſome lucre, & from all voluptuouſnes, and looſe diſhoneſtye: for they
re­duce and bringe vs to wyſdome: then the which there can bee nothinge more
excellente vnto mortall men, by reaſonCommodities proceding of Learninge.
whereof wee ſeeme to approche, and to be conioyned wyth the lyuinge God: the
rewarde of whiche ſciences, if there were none other to bee had amonge mortall
men, verelye vertue onelye of it ſelfe is ſufficient: whiche yet alwayes is
accompanied withe Renoume, and Honoure, euen as the bodye is with the ſhadowe:
If it bee ſo that Children be ſomwhat of a dull capacitie or otherwiſe leſſe
fyt or apt to receyue learninge, let them be put to learne the practize of
ſome other trades, and occupations, eſpeciallye ſuch asChildren of dul and
meane vvytes hovve to be emploid come ueareſt in goodnes vnto learning, leaſt
that they re­mayne vnprofitable by meanes of Idleneſſe and ſlouthe: for true
is that ſentence of Marcus Cato:

By ſlouth, and doinge nothing at all:

Men learne to doe euyll, great and ſmall.

Therfore diligent and paynful cytizens, ought to dryue [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=54) ſluggiſhe and
ſlouthfull people out of their citties, euen as the diligent Bees do the
Drones or Dorres, which wyllSolonsla vve, for the chylde that is not nur tered
and vv [...]l inſtructed by his father. not take paynes, for the common
Honnye: and wee muſte eſteeme as moſt holye, that ordinaunce whiche Solon
enac­ted, affirming that:

That chylde to his father is nothing bounde,

In any reſpect of dutie naturall:

If that for him hee hath not founde,

Some kinde of trade to lyue withall.

But if all other diſciplines and Arts ſhould be lacking, yet oughte they to
foreſee and regarde, that their children be not brought vp without the rule of
good manners: for it is farre better for men to bee wythoute children, and
toBetter to be vnborne then vntaught. be for euer barreyne and berefte of all
progenye or Iſſue, then when men haue children, to bringe them vp euill
nur­tured, or of ſewde behauiour. Epaminondas the Thebane a worthye man, and
of greate wyſedome, neuer maryed a­nye wyfe: whiche thing his friend Pelopidas
reprehendingEpaminondas. becauſe hee left not the Seede or ſucceſſion of his
valiant­neſſe, vnto his children, and therfore that in ſo doinge hee dyd ill
prouide for the commoditye, or profite of his coun­trye: Epaminondas thereupon
(ſmyling) aunſwered: take you heede frende Pelopidas, leaſt you doe worſe
prouide for the publique vtilitie of your countrye, which may happen to leaue
ſuch a ſonne begotten by you, whoſe lyfe perhaps hereafter may be wiſhed of
ſome to bee better: by whiche ſayinge, this moſt wyſe Gentleman ſheweth, that
Parē ­tes ought to feare nothinge more, then leaſt they haue ſu­che childrē,
as may degenerate frō their ſteps & qualities.

Neocles the Athenian, a man noble, and excellente, had a ſonne called
Themiſtocles, whome in his youth he diſhe­rited, becauſe hee was miſlyked and
thought to lyue verye lewdely, waſtinge his ſubſtance, and in euerye poynte
diſ­obayinge [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=55)
his fathers commaundemente: this ſeuere and harde dealinge did not diſcourage
the ſonue, but did ra­ther farre more encourage him to remēber himſelfe: for
hee thinkinge that ſuche a manifeſt blemiſh of miſdemea­nour coulde not bee
extinguiſhed withoute ſome ſinguler induſtrye and prayſe, from thence foorth
wholy vent hym ſelfe to thexerciſe of vertue, and by al care and ſtudy, that
in him was poſſible, endeuoured to traueyle for the com­moditye of his common
weale: & with all dyligence that he could, protected and maynteyned the cauſes
of his fri­ends, and priuate iudgements: and within ſhort ſpace ſo amended his
faultes, and reformed the vices of hys youthe, that there was no one man in
his tyme preferred before him, and verye fewe were thoughte to bee founde
equalle vnto him: therefore the ſeueritye of a father to­wardes ſuch a Sonne,
was not to be found fault wythal, who in dede of a moſt naughtie & lewd
perſon, reclaimed him to be a man in all kynde of prayſe moſte cōmendable.

Polemon, the Athenian lyuinge vnchaſte in his youth­full yeares, was wanton
and geeuen to filthy behauiour, ſometimes alſo ouerſeene with drinke, & hauing
a Gar­landeExample of a ryottous perſō reclaymed. (as the cuſtome was for the
ſtouteſt drincker to ha­ue (ruſhed with his companions into Xenocrates
ſchoole, onely to floute and mocke, and to playe ſome pageant of knauery: at
that tyme as it chaunced Xenocrates was diſ­courſinge amongeſt his ſcholers
touching modeſtie, tem­peraunce, and chaſtitye: whiche purpoſe for al this,
hee chaunged not, but playnly conuerted his meaning, euen vpō Polemō there
preſent: by which oratiō made, he ſo re­formed himſelfe, yt without any more
ado, forſaking there his companions, and chaunginge his former old lyfe, he
yeelded himſelfe ſcholar vnto Xenocrates, and within a ſhorte ſpace excelled
all his ſcholefellowes: and beſides this, ſo nerelye expreſſed his
ſcholemaiſter in all matters that after his deceaſſe this Polemon, beinge then
lefte hys ſucceſſor, ſo learnedly behaued himſelfe after thimit a ciō [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=55) of y• other,
that the Scholemaiſter was thought one ſtyl, and not ſcant perceyued to be
chaunged. Younge men alſo are to be enured wyth bodely exerciſes, both for
theirYoung men muſt be exerci­ſed. better health, for (as Celſus ſatih) ſlouth
enfebleth the bo­dye, labour ſtrengtheneth it, the one cauſinge vntimelye olde
age, the other long and luſtye youth, and alſo for that they might be made
more proiftable members for y• cō ­mō weale in tyme of warres, wherin they
are more prōpt and actiue, if they come thereunto wyth a bodye exerciſed
rather then vy ſlouth effeminated: in which thinge the La­cedaemonians did
verye muche excell: whoſe children, in runninge, leapinge, and caſtinge the
dart, were day­lye exerciſed and practiſed: from whō Diogenes on a tyme
returning and goinge to Athens, was aſked whither he went, and from whence he
came: I come (ſaith he) from men, and am now goinge to women.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=56)

## 5\. THE FIFTH BOOKE EF­fectuallye diſcourſinge vppon the ENDEVOVRS, TRADES,
OFFICES, DVE­ties, and ſeuerall vocations: aſwell of the ciuill cit­tizen as
of the vplandiſh countreyman: alſo the diſcouerye of vices, with the daūgers
that in euery realme and countrye there­by enſueth.

RApine promiſeth Idle­nes and reſt: but vertue ſheweth be­fore her, labour and
ſweat. Euill ma­nered perſons, and ſuche as in their ſpeache and geſture be
groſſe and vn­nurtured, be termed vnciuil: becauſe they rather ſeeme to haue
bene brought vp in the coūtrey then in the Cytties. From hence is deriued the
worde, &Ciuilitye. phraſe of ſpeache called Ciuilitye, or Urbanitye: becauſe
it doth appertayn both to ſpeach and manners, and is ſo cal­led by the name of
the latine worde Vrbs, a cyttye: becauſe through cyuil companying or meeting
together of wyſe & learned men, a certayn knowledge and learning is gotten,
which dyrecteth and trayneth vp men in gallant curteſie, pleaſaunt order, and
comelye grace, the contrarye wher­of, is called Ruſticitie.

If a man would in fewe woordes determine and define what a Ciuil man is, hee
ſhall ſay that he is a good man, and one that is profitable to his common
weale: for firſte,What a ciuill man is. and ſpeciallye hee oughte to haue
before his eyes that ſen­tence of Plato where he ſayth:

Men are of God created, not onelye

To profite themſelues in this lyfe preſente:

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=56)But that
they ſhoulde their natiue countrye

Studye to profite wyth honeſt intent:

Partely agayne that they be ſtyllbent,

To profite frende, children, and kinſfolke naturall:

To this ende to lyue well ought all men mortall.

And by good righte, humane ſocietye is inſtituted andSociety hu­mane vvherun
to it tendeth▪ appointed to lyue together, for one to profite another: Theſe
thinges when wee ſhall conſider vppon, wee ſhall well perceyue that we ought
to helpe and prouide for our natiue countrye.

The little Bees, and Antes, being creatures not only the leaſt of all others,
but alſo dumbe and deafe, oughte to be examples vnto vs, whiche vndoubtedlye
do laboure one for another: they ſwarme together, they keepe theimExamples of
Bees. ſelues together, they are preſerued altogether, wyth like defēces and
ſuccours, they dryue away their enemie with common daunger, and mayntayne
their ſtore, their yong ones & all their company: for who can be counted a
good Citizen whiche is good for none but himſelfe onelye, ga­thereth riches to
ſerue his own turne without imparting any thing to others, and ſcarcely for
couetouſnes ſufferīg his children and wife to haue ſomuch as may
conuenient­lye ſerue theim meate and drinke. For we ought to eſtee­me the
ſtate of a common weale, as a ſhyppe whiche hath neede of the helpinge handes
and diligence, of all theym which are within it: euerye maryner ought to
endeuourCompariſon of the ſtate of a comon vveal vnto a Shippe. himſelfe to
the vttermoſt of his power, not only to ſaue it, from being ouer whelmed &
drowned: but alſo that ſhee may arryue at ſome ſafe port, or hauē. And as in
it, ſom holdes the rother or helme, another directeth the Sayle­yardes,
another looketh to the Cables, and others about other matters as the caſe
requireth, and they haue alone mutuall or common care for the preſeruation of
the ſhip: So ought all citizens to worke and traueile, & ſome with councell,
ſome wyth diligence, ſome wyth ryches, & ſome
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=57) wyth
paynfulnes and induſtrye, to helpe the cōmon weal, that not onelye it be kept
in good eſtate, but that it maye euery day encreaſe better and better: for
thoſe Cittizens that bee thus minded, are coumpted beſte, and by theſe meanes,
do they make the publike weale moſt wealthye, For ſurelye no ryches, no
reuenues do more enlarge the ſtate of a Cittye, and make it ſafer, then when
as the Cy­tizensConcord in a r [...]a [...]me. among themſelues, be at vnitie
and concorde, and ioyne together for the honour of their countrye: And on the
other parte no power nor ryches are ſtronge enoughe where as the myndes of the
cytizens are factious and iar­ringe. Whiche thing Scilurus by a merueylous
example taught: for hee beinge by reaſon of ſicknes and age nowe come to
decrepicie, cauſed his ſonnes beinge fowerſcore and ten in number, to be
called before him, and holdinge in his handes a bundle of Speare ſtaues,
whiche hee had bound vp together, in number ſo many as he had ſonnes, raught
forth the ſame to euery one of his ſonnes ſeueral­lye, commaundinge them to
burſt them aſunder, whicheCōmoditye by concorpe. thinge they affirminge to
bee vnpoſſible▪ the old father drewe theym oute one by one, and burſte theym
aſun­der al, and thereby toke occaſion to admoniſh them that while they agreed
and were at vnitye among themſelues they ſhould not be ouercome by anye force
or power, but that the longer they lyued, the ſtronger they ſhould be:
contrarilye hee tolde them that they ſhoulde be weake, & of no force, if they
diſagreed & were at diſcord amōg thē ­ſelues, & that euery litle enemie
ſhould thē eaſely ynough ouercome them: for true is that auncient ſentence
wherin is ſayed, that

The common weale is a continuall liuing creature,

Which is neuer killed, nor dyeth at any tyme,

Except to it ſelfe it iniurye procure:

And be the ſole cauſer of proper ruyne.

The Romaynes poſſeſſed the Empyre of the whole worlde, ſo longe as they
abſtayned themſelues from ciuil [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=57) bloudſhedde and
inteſtine warres, but when the ambiciō of Cinna, the infamous table of Sylla,
the bloudy ſlaugh­ter of Marius, and the warres of the Sonne in lawe,
a­gaynſteExample of ci­uill diſcorde. the father in lawe, enkindled & inuaded
the weale publike, thē ye Romaynes (before) the chiefe rulers of the whole
worlde became laughinge ſtockes vnto their Raſ­call people, and vnto their
barbarous enemies: wherfore in a free cittye there can bee no better
perſwaſion, then yt whiche trayneth euerye one vnto concord and vnity,
wherwith euen the leaſt cities are encreaſed, and enioy the be­nefite of
perpetuall libertie: for this is a ſure and ſafe wall of defence: theſe are
the Adamant towers, whyche with no force, no warlike engine, neyther wyth any
thō ­derclappes of Iupiter, can be deſtroyed & throwne down: By this meanes
ſhall this our cittyzen, whom we would haue accoumpted verye good bee mynded
to vnitye, if hee folowinge the opinion of Pythagoras and Plato, conſi­der
that oure mynde doth conſiſte in three partes, whoſe principalitie, and reaſon
they do ſhewe to reſte in the head as in the tower or caſtle of the bodye,
that this our mind beinge immortall, ſhoulde alwayes bee nouriſhed wyth the
Foode of contemplation of greateſt and wayghtieſt matters.

Let our cittizen frame his mynde, to execute the Ta­lente or gyfte wherewyth
hee is endewed: for the offyce of the mynde is to vſe reaſon, whiche ought
alwaye to be­areReaſon ought to rule our af­fections. rule, and to haue our
appetite or deſire ſo inclineable and obedient thereunto, that wee couet not
any thing fil­thye or vndecent: and euen as an horſe vnrulye and tram­plinge,
is gouerned by the Brydle and Bytte, of a good ryder: ſo lett the Appetite or
affection of the mynde, bee lead by reaſon, to whome let hym always obays, and
ne­uer obſtinately reſiſte, if he deſire to be accoūpted a good & a wyſe man:
for true is that ſentence of Marcus Fabi­us Quintilianus:

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=58)

As the birde to flye the horſe to runne,

And wylde beaſtes by nature to crueltie

Are geuen, to lyue vnder the Sonne:

Euen ſo, man hath actiuitye

Of mynde and wytte to lyue wythall,

As creature wyth reaſon imbute:

That tis beleeued, the originall

Of his ſoule is celeſtiall inſtitute.

Fortitude, Temperance, Prudence, and Iuſtice, are fower Siſters lincked
together in mutuall bandes, they are neuer ſeperate, for ſurely one of them
alone without ye others cannot be perfect, but ſemeth altogether maymed and
vnperfect: Fortitude wythout wyſedome is counted raſhenes. Prudence wythoute
Iuſtice is deemed crafti­nes,Fovver ēardi­nal vertues. and an euill kinde of
mallyce: Temperance without Fortitude is reconed cowardiſe, & Iuſtice wythout
Tē ­perance, is thought to be crueltie. Wherupon Ennius y• Poete ſayth:
Sūmum Ius, ſūma In [...]uria▪ Extreme rygorConcord in muſicke. is extreeme
wronge.

Let therfore theſe fower vertues agree amonge them­ſelues in a concorde, euen
as it comes to paſſe in muſicke, and inſtrumentes, that they may make a
perfect concord,Good reporte and fame for vvell doing. conſonancie, and
harmonye.

It is ye common profite whiche maketh men to gayne good report for their well
doinge, and well deſeruinge of all men, whiche the Auncientes in tyme paſte ſo
highlye eſteemed, that they vouchſafed thoſe perſons of deuine honours of whom
they had receiued cōmodities and profit.Worthy actes of Hercules. For
Hercules (although a mortall man) yet was thought to be in the number of the
Goddes, for no other reaſon, but becauſe he beſtowed many greate commodities
vpon manye nacions: for eyther hee buſled or contended withe wilde beaſts
deſtroying countries, or with his arrowes, kylled the lothlome filthye foules,
or ſlewe the perillous pyrates and common robbers which kept the Seas, and
[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=58) befet the
wayes wyth ſuch daūgerous ſtales, y• no trauai­lers mighte paſſe▪ or elles
did ſome other ſuche kynde of worthye exploites: doinge therein muche eaſe
andpro­fite to mortall men, and makinge their lyfe more ſafe and happye.

Dyoniſius alſo called Bacchus, was counted a God, be­cauſeHovv & vvhy Bacchus
vvas deified and made a God. amongeſt the Thebanes, he taught the vſe howe to
make wyne, and was reputed not onelye Noble and fa­mous in warlike affayres,
[...]ut a verye good ſearcher out of hidden ſecretes, for hee firſt playde the
Philoſopher inTriptolemus. Europa, and then in Aſia: So was Triptolemus
honored for a God, becauſe hee taught the vſe of corne amongeſt ye Iſis.
Athenians: and Iſis a goddeſſe becauſe ſhee taught the or­der how to ſowe
corne and flaxe: Therfore doubtles they are worthye of rewardes and dignities,
which do profite, men with their inuentions.

It was the poynte of a noble mynde, not to permitte inA vviſe man vvil neither
do yll, nor ſuffer any to be done by his vvyll. anye wyſe, that a man ſhoulde
deceiue himſelfe, whyche thinge by a pretye example Carneades doth admoniſhe
vs in this wyſe.

If thou kneweſt a ſerpent lurking priuilye

Under a place, and wouldſte haue any man:

Vnwares to ſitt do wne euen there preſentlye,

VVhoſe death might redound to thy profite than.

Thou ſhouldeſt do very yll, except wyth warninge

Thou diddeſt dehort him thence from harminge.

A Good man is always one & the ſame, he neuer ſwar­  [...]eth from himſelfe,
and had rather be honeſt in deede thē ſo to be accoūted, hee is not couered
wt any cloake of diſſi­mulatiō, keping inwardly priuy hatred, & hartburning,
& yet outwardly pretēding a fayre face: but hath alwayes one coūtenaūce,
his eyes always after one maner, his loo­ke always one, & his ſpeache in like
maner always true.

A cittizen muſt alwayes beware that no notable vyce
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=59) reygne in
hym: hee ſhall exerciſe thoſe artes and ſciences wherewith hee may be able to
lyue honeſtly, wyth out in­iurye and to bringe vp his familye: For hee ought
to ha­ue regard of his domeſticall matters, to the ende he may helpe his
chyldren, kinſfolkes, and frends: but eſpecial­lieThe citizē carefull for
himſelf and his family the common weale of his countrye, when tyme ſhall
require: for as Cicero ſaythe, the priuate poſſeſſions & ryches of euery man,
are the ryches and wealth of the ci­tye. Let theym gayne, but withoute
iniuryinge or hur­tinge of others: for as the Poet ſayth.

Goodes that are gotten by ſiniſter meane▪

Are in lyke ſorte conſumed agayne.

Architas of Tarent a noble Philoſopher of Pythagoras ſecte, whe ſent letters
vnto Plato, that he ſhoulde beware and take heede of Dioniſius the Tyraunt of
Syracuſa, if hee loued the ſauetye of his owne lyfe: was had in admirati­on
amongeſt all men, becauſe hee was ſkylfull almoſt in all artes: this man was
of ſuche dexterity of wytte, that he made & framed by a certayn wonderfull
reaſon, & ar­tificiall worckemanſhippe the proportion and Image of a Doue,
which Doue as Fauorinus the philoſopher reporteth did flye: it was contriued
wyth ſuch equall peyze or wayghte, and in the ſame was a wynde encloſed,
whyche wyth a temperate ſpiryte, cauſed it to flye.

Amongeſt the moſt noble prayſes of Affricanus, wher­ofPrayſe of Africanus for
his bountie. both Polibius and other wryters made mention: Thys one was
accoūpted great, that he daylye went downe into the iudgement hall, & from
thence did not returne home­wardes agayne, vntyll hee had gratified and done
good, to ſome one or other: And Titus the ſonne of Uespeſian Prayſe of Titꝰ
Veſpaſianus. (who after his father was Emperour of Rome three yeares) was of
ſuche gentle, & curteous nature, that at ſup­per time remembringe that hee had
pleaſured and done good to none that daye, ſayde theſe woordes: Friendes
[[Page 52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=59) this daye
haue I loſt.

It ſhalbe the dutie of a ciuill man to vſe liberalitye, & franckenes, in
gratifiyng wt requitall and thanckes vntoLiberality and thankfulnes. others,
and neuer to forget a good turne receyued: which reſpecte of curteſye was ſo
highly in the olde tyme regar­ded, y• not only perſons lyuing, but euen the
very perſons already dead could not neglect it: For Simonides the Po­ete,
ſeeinge as hee iourneyed, a certayne man (vnknowen to him) lyinge dead & raſt
out vnto the byrdes, and beaſtes of the fielde, dyd ſtreight waye burye him,
but when hee came to the place where he thought in his mynde to haue taken
ſhippinge, hee then agayne ſawe in his dreame, the ſame partye whom hee had
buryed, warninge him not to enterpriſe his voyage as hee had determined: for
if hee dyd, he tolde him that night he ſhould ſuffer ſhipwracke:Gratitude.
when Simonides had tolde his dreame vnto his company­ons, they laughed hym to
ſcorne, and hee alone remained on the ſhoare, the reſt of his other companions
not credi­tinge his wordes: but aſſone as the Shyppe was gone a lyttle from
the lande, there aroſe a tempeſt incontinente, that brake al their tackling,
and al to ſquatted their ſhip, that they were drowned euerye mothers Sonne:
And ſo Simonides, for the good turne that he dyd in buryinge the deade man,
receyued thereby the benefite and ſauegarde of his lyfe.

Let euerye good Cittizen take heede, that hee bee not founde a blabbe, or lyer
in his talke: for to lye is the pro­pertie rather of a ſeruile, then of a free
mynde: for Ari­ſtotlePeriurye. verye pretelye to a certaine perſon,
demaundinge him, what Lyers gayned by their lyinge? aunſwered: that they
cannot be beleeued an other tyme when they tel truth: but yet it is a far
worſe thinge for any man to for­ſweare himſelfe: which fault was ſo odible
among the E­giptiās, y• all periured perſōs ſuffered puniſhmēt of death as
they which neyther regarded religiō towards god nor fayth towards mā: let
the honeſt citizē moreouer bridle in
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=60) himſelfe a
certayne braynſicke ſawcineſſe, and brablinge in ſpeach: for as it is a prayſe
to ſpeake lyuely and boldly if at any tyme a man haue neede to ſpeake: ſo is
it worthy of diſprayſe not to haue a ſtaye of the tongue if ſilence bee
neceſſarye: for Cato in his adoleſcencie ſtudying eloquēceRaſhe ſpeache and
Philoſophie, vſed a certayne wonderfull ſilence of ſpeach, and when on a tyme
a certayne familier frende of his ſayde vnto him: Cato, many men do finde
faulte with thy ſilence, bee aunſweered ſayinge, I wyll then ſpeake when I
haue throughly learned to ſpeake ſuche thinges as are not worthy of ſilence.

Pythagoras alſo the moſt wyſe prince of Italique Phi­loſophie, taught his
ſcholars to be ſilent before he taught theym to ſpeake, thereby ſhewinge, that
a mannes wor­desCato vſed re­ſtraint of ſpea­che. are firſt to bee premeditate
or thought vpon, ere they be vttered. For to brydle, and reſtrayn the tongue,
which nature (meaninge Scilence) hath walled aboute wyth a trenche of teethe,
is a poynte of no ſmall wyſdome: there­foreSilence. the ſayde Philoſopher
reſtrayned tal [...]katiue younge men, enioyning vnto ech of them fiue yeares
ſilence.

Ariſtotle when he ſent his ſcholar and kinſeman Cali­ſthenes [...] vnto king
Alexander among many other precepts gaue him this one, that hee ſhoulde vſe to
ſpeake verye ſeeldome, but yet verye pleaſauntlye before him, thatAriſtotles
ad­uiſe to Caliſt­hene▪ touch­inge ſilence. had both the power of lyfe and
death, in the ſharpenes of his tounge: ſuch perſons alſo as haue diligently
ſearched the natures of lyuing creatures, doe wryte that certayne lyuing
creatures lacking reaſon, do maintayn their ſaue­tye with muche ſilence: As
geeſe whiche by reaſon of too muche heate forſakinge the eaſte▪ and flyinge
weſtward, in their flyght ouer the hyll Taurus, where many Eagles breede
(which rauenous foules they greatlye dreade) doe vſe to fyll their beakes wyth
little ſtones, leaſte that the force of cuſtome, or neceſſitie ſhoulde moue
them to gag­gle, and there bewray themſelues vnto the Eagles, to the greate
hazarding of their lyues: but after they haue ſilēt­ly [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=60) paſſed the toppe
of that mountayn and hylles therea­bout: they let fall the little ſtones oute
of their bylles, & with a more careleſſe flight, holde on their courſe alonge
the ayre with loude noyſe, and farre clearer voyces: Let therefore the
Cittizen learne to keepe ſilence and to conſi­der with whom hee doth talke,
and let him obſerue opor­tunity in ſpeache: for ſure according to the old
prouerbe: A worde once paſt, cannot be called backe. And therefore let them
rather vſe the example of the Geeſe, then of Ca­liſthenes: for they by a
little ſilence ſaued their lyues, but this man euen with a ſmall libertie of
ſpeache loſte the ſame, when as he would not geeue eare vnto the ſayinge of
his good mayſter: for greater is the prayſe of a ſeaſon­able ſilence, then of
talke out of due tyme vſed.

And furthermore let the good cittizen be ignoraunt in gloſing and flattring:
for neyther can the gloſers or flatterers in any reſpect profite eyther kings
or princes. AndFlattery muſte be eſchevved. true is that ſentence of Quintus
Curtius mentioned in his moſt excellent bookes of the Actes of Alexander,
where hee ſaythe.

More often is a kingdome ſpoyld through clawbacks flattery:

Then by mayne force of forreyne foe, or homiſh enemye.

Ariſtippus the Philoſopher did earneſtlye ſue to Dyoni­ſius the Tyraunt for a
certayn thing in the behalfe of hys frende▪ which when he ſaw he could not
obteyn, ſtreight waye he humblie embraced the Tyrauntes knees, and by and by
obteyned his deſire: and when this thinge was laide in his diſhe for a
reproche (by ſuche perſons as were preſent) he pleaſauntly ſayd theſe wordes:
I was not the aucthor of this kynde of flatterye, but Dyoniſius
himſelfe,Diogenes. who hath his eares in his knees: and Diogenes being
de­maūded what Beaſt did byte cruelleſt, merely aūſwered,

Of wylde beaſtes a backebyter,

Of tame beaſtes a flatterer.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=61)For in deede
flatterers do very muche hurt not onelye amongeſt princes whome they do
prouoke to tyranny and crueltie, but alſo in a free cittye oftentimes (to
creepe in­toHurt of ſlatte­rers. the fauour of the common people) do geeue
aduiſe vpō thinges whiche are againſt a common weale, & now and than, make
the fooliſh multitude of people ſtarke mad.

Moreouer let not a good citizen bee haſtye, or raſhe to anger: let him at no
tyme ſpeake anyethinge in chydinge moode or rage: for anger procedeth of the
weakenes of mannes mynde, and that by a probable argument or rea­ſonRaſnnes of
an­ger. is ſhewed: becauſe angrye perſons are, to them that be in good caſe,
fayntye and colde, vnto men they are wo­men, to youngmen olde men, and to
perſons in proſperi­tie, miſerable: yet notwithſtandinge manye things are now
and than done by anger, whiche in the ende (after the parties haue pauſed, and
come to theimſelues) doe makeInconueniēce of anger. theym ſorowfull and
repentaunt of that whiche they ha­ue ſayde and done: Alexander oftentimes
ſhewed exam­ples of an inuineible mynde, but becauſe hee was raſhe and haſty
to anger, hee emblemiſhed and made his otherExample of furious anger in
Alexander. vertues in ſome parte more obſcure: for hee kylled Clitus his
frende beinge an aged man, and giltleſſe: and a little while after, when hee
was come to himſelfe agayne, hee would haue thruſt the weapō which hee toke
out of Clitus his wound into his own body, had it not bene for his frien­des,
that were then about him.

Dyoniſius alſo the Tyraunte (beinge on a tyme dyſpo­ſed to play at y• Tenys)
layd down his coate and ſword wtaDyoniſius. young man to keepe, in whom he
tooke great delite: here at whā as a certain familier of his (ieſtinglye &
thincking no harme) ſayd: Dyoniſius, thou putteſt thy lyfe into this mannes
handes, and the young man laughing at the ſame words, the Tyraunt cōmaunded
both of them out of hand to be ſlain: ye one becauſe he had ſhewed a way to
kyl him, and the other becauſe he allowed and tooke pleaſure with laughter at
ye ſaying: for ye which act certainly he was af­terwardes [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=61) ſo ſory, that
hee neuer tooke anye thing more greuouſlye in all the dayes of his lyfe: For
in ſuch kyndeNot good to doe any thing vvhile anger loſteth. of anger when the
mynd is kyndled and enraged, we muſt ſurceaſe from all manner of dealinges,
tyll the heate of choler be aſſwaged, following herein the example of
Ar­chitas, who being on a time ſome what moued with anger towardes his
Seruaunt, ſaid theſe woordes: with whatHovv Archi­tas qual ified his anger.
mynde ſhould I entreate the, or how would I deale with thee now if I were not
angrye?

Demoſthenes that moſt excellēt Oratour ſeing ye nature & diſpoſition of
Phocion, which was of contrary opiniō to al other citizens of Athens, ſayd on
a tyme to him: Phociō y• Athenians wil kyll the, if a madnes once take them
in ye heads, to whō Phociō anſwered: nay they wil kill thee Demoſthenes if
they euer chāce to be wiſe. Furthermore a ciuil mā ought ſo to diſpoſe &
frame al ye ages of his time y• in eueryone of thē he may exerciſe hīſelfe
in y• which ſhal then beſt become him, neyther let him do any ſuch things in
his childhoode or youth, wherof he may afterwards re­pent whē he is growen to
furder yeares: on y• other part to omit nothing which he ought to bring to
paſſe at thoſe yeares: For in Childehoode is prayſed that towardneſſe of Wyt,
whiche fore ſheweth hope of honeſte lyfe in tyme to come: In Adoleſcencie
Diſciplines of good Artes: wherin, who ſo excel, do ſeeme preſently righte
excellence men: then in the reſte of the Ages of man, the fruictes of workes
are looked for: that is to ſay, ſome conformitie of ſayinges and doinges:
agayne on the other part, a chyld is commended for ſimplicitie, a young man
for gētlenes, and an oldman for grauity: in which poynt there is mut­che
amiſſe euē at thoſe firſt yeares which are more apt for learninge, which
ſurely many in playinge and lewdneſſe, do loſe: for growinge to bigger ſtature
for ſhame faſte­neſſe they are aſhamed to learne, whereas rather they ought to
bee aſhamed to be ignoraunte: Undoubtedlye that is true whiche was holden as a
Prouerbe amongeſt the auncient learned men.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=62)

So long our ſelues to learn we muſt employe.

As in this worlde wee any lyfe enioye.

Yet notwithſtandinge there are ſome whiche wyll not ſticke to mocke and floute
men that are geuen to ſtudye, & learninge in that age.

Themiſtocles the Athenian, a moſt excellent gentlemā, being an hundreth and
ſeuen yeares olde, and perceyuing that hee muſt then needes departe oute of
this worlde, is reported to haue ſayde that hee was verye ſorye that hee muſt
then dye when he firſt beganne to taſte of learninge and wyſedome: what then
ſhall others doe, whoſe lyfe is farre ſhorter & leſſe exerciſed in ſtudies of
good diſcipline? ſeeinge that hee whiche had runne beyonde the boūdes of
nature, did thincke himſelfe not to haue lyued any longe tyme, to thattayninge
of perfect wyſedome.

The longeſt ſpace of mannes lyfe whiche by his byrthe and death is defined,
ſome haue runne in longe race, andManns age by the opinion of Philoſophers.
ſome in a ſhorte. Plato affirmeth that Lxxxi. yeares is the laufull bounde,
and ende of mannes lyfe: Solon af­firmeth lxxx. yeares iumpe, many threſcore &
fyftene: & ſome the threeſcore & tenth yeare: for they do deuide our age, or
tyme of lyfe by the number of ſeauen, whereunto the Pythagorians attribute a
certayne perfection, and doe ſhewe, that in euerye ſeuen yeares, ſome chaunge
and al­teracion hapneth in the bodyes of men: wherfore they af­firme that
euery ſeuenth yeare of our life is daungerous,Manns age de­uided by ſeuen
yeares. whiche the Grecians call  [...], The Latines Iudicia­lem ſeu
decretorium, Iudiciall or decreiorye: and this do they ſhewe by this meanes.
Firſt becauſe in the fyrſt ſea­uen yeares childrens teeth fall out or do
lowſe, geuinge place to other teeth comminge vp more fitte, and readye to
chawe the meate: and at that tyme the perfect pronun­ciation of their mother
tongue is perfect and playne: In yt ſecond ſeuenth yeare the ſoft haires or
moſineſſe in yong Springaldes appearethe, in the thirde the Bearde be­gynneth
[[Page 55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=62) to
burgein and grow, and is the full accompliſh­ment of height in mannes ſtature:
in the fowerth hee be­gynneth to ſpreade and enlarge in breadth and thickenes
of ſtature: In the fyfthe the ſtrength of man is fully per­fected and made
rype & able for the procreation of Iſſue: In the ſixte man ſtayeth his
pleaſure and voluptuouſnes: and in the ſeauenth reſteth wyſedome and
eloquence, yet nowe his ſtrength doth by little and little ſecretely decay.
And in the eight there is a certayne concinnitie or aptnes of the vertues of
the mynde, which remayneth in ye ninth ſeptenarie or ſeuen yeares: finally in
the tenth by lytle & little he groweth towardes his ende.

Pythagoras ſayde that fowerſcore yeares was the pre­fixed tyme for the lengthe
of lyfe, and deuideth it in agesMannes life deuided into fo­vver equal nū
­bers compared to the fovver ſeaſons of the yeare. by twentye, allottinge vnto
childehoode twenty yeares, to adoleſcencie as many: as many to youth, to
manhhode other twenty, and to old age as many, comparing māns lyfe vnto the
fower ſeaſons or quarters of the yeare: As to the ſpringe, chyldehoode: to
ſommer youthe. To Au­tume manhoode, and vnto winter olde age: But Uarro a moſt
excellent Philoſopher amonge the Latines, thinc­kethChildren. that chyldrens
age continueth tyll they bee fyftene yeares olde, bycauſe ſo longe they are
Impuberes: that isYongmen. to ſaye vnhearye and not apt to generation, from
thence tyll thyrtie they are counted young men or luſty youthes, becauſe the
bodye doth growe luſtye large and ſtrong tylManhode. y• age: vntill the age of
xlv. they are called men, bycauſe at that age they are beſt able to defend and
helpe their cō ­mon meale with armoure and weapons: Tyll threeſcoreOldemen.
yeares they are called graue and aunciente, becauſe then eſpeciallye mannes
bodye beginneth to drawe towardes olde age: and from thence, vntill thende of
eche mannesExtreeme olde age. lyfe, hee affirmeth the fifthe degree to reache:
vnto the whiche age who ſo doth attayn, he calleth them very old men, becauſe
then the Bodye becommeth vnwieldye, by reaſon of age: but Staſeas the
Neapolitane, an excellent
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=63) Philoſopher
in his time and a rare Phiſltiō determineth and concludeth mannes lyfe at
lxxxiiii. yeares.

We ought not to deſire to liue long, no not although the deſtinies do ſeeme to
ſmyle vpon vs, or to fauour oure peticions. by reaſon of the ſundrye chaunces
of fortune, &Man may not vviſh for long  [...]yfe. doubtfull healthe of our
bodye: for a certayne wiſeman, beinge demaunded how longe a man ſhoulde wiſh
to liue, made this aunſwere: so long as the commodities of thys lyfe be mo
then the diſcommodities thereof.

Theophraſtus (as Cicero ſayth) was w [...]nt to accuſe na­ture, for that ſheee
had geeuen vnto Crowes and Hartes, longe lyfe, whoſe lyfe was altogether
vnprofitable, and vnto men very ſhort and ſwyfte, who both might benefite
theymſelnes and others, if they mighte haue tyme of lyfe fully to drincke of
wyſoomes Well.

Poſſidonius a notable Philoſopher ſayd, that one day of a learned mans tyme,
was more worth then neuer ſo longe an age of the ignoraunt: let therefore our
ciuill man liueModeratiō in dyet. very moderately, & let his dyet & table
fare be accordinge to frugality, and temperaunce: for intemperancye &
gur­maundiſe enfebleth the bodye and dulleth the mynde: for as temperancie
maketh a man long young, & preſerueth the bodye in healthe and good lykinge,
ſo the other dothe haſten olde age before the tyme, & maketh the body weak,
taketh away coloure, and cheerefulnes of countenaunce: for it is true whiche
was wont to bee in this reſpect, euen by the Phiſicians themſelues, that:

Many mo perſons by glotony are ſlayne,

Then are by warre, famine, or any other payne.

For men not able fully to digeſte that whiche they re­ceiueGourmandiſe ſurphet
and belly cheare. into their ſtomacks, are geuē to be of vnluſty health, they
are euermore ſick, ſeldom whole, & ſone com to their end: and furdermore ther
is no goulfe or whirlpole whi­che doth more ſwallow vp & waſte a mannes
ſubſtaunce, then gluttonye, which the more it is filled and fed, y• more is it
ſtyll an hungered, and the better it hath dyned, the [[Page
56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=63) more it ſtudieth
and takes care how to ſuppe: There are ſurely no ryches ſo large and copious,
no houſholde trea­ſure ſo notable, nor wealthe ſo greate, whiche in a ſmall
tyme are not ſwalowed vp into the bellye.

Diogenes on a tyme readinge in a paper ſet on the doreRyotous per­ſons. of a
certayne ryotous perſon, that was driuen to ſell hys houſe, merilye and
pleaſauntly ſayde theſe wordes.

I well perceiued this building ſumptuous,

Beſet wyth wyne, and cates ſo curious,

Would vomite out his maiſter ſhortlye

That kept ſuch reuellrexe through follye.

Glotony doth not onely waſte & conſume the ſubſtance, but bringeth very many
Gentlemen into ſeruitude: do we not ſee y• ſmelfeaſtes, and ieaſters, become
perpetual bōdSmelfeaſes. ſlaues for their bellies ſake? are there not manye
whych as it were buye their dynner and ſupper not onelye wyth flattringe
ſeruices, but alſo wyth moſte vyle and abſurde offices? for whom it were a
great deale better to feede vp on the very maſt & Acornes ſhaken from the
tree, & to liue wyth wylde beries & apples, then at another mannes ta­ble to
be fed with peacocke & the dayntie Acipencer. Surely greately are they to bee
blamed, which ſekee thē ſelues maiſters for good cheare ſake, forgetting the
ſtate of Lybertie.

Albidius a certayne citizen of Rome deuoured & conſumed all his goodes or
ſubſtance in eatinge and drinking, &Prodigality & ryot of Albidi us. finally
euen ye very houſe it ſelfe, wherein he dwelt, which was then euen all the
ſubſtāce he had left) was by caſual­tie of fyre conſumed & brent: this thing
when Cato heard of, he ſportingly ſayd: that Albidius had ſacrificed his rē
­naunts and fragmentes: by the which ſaying Cato, quip­ped the glotony of the
ſayde Albidius, and ſhewed yt ther­by he was become an open praye, and
laughing ſtock vnto fortune: for yt thinge which he could not eate, hee
burned. [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=64) And
that whiche he could not reuell, deuour, and ſwyll, y• had hee committed into
the handes of Fortune to ſporte wythall.

Exerciſe is called the beſt ſauce for meate, and hunger is coumpted a delicate
or daynty diſhe fynely ſawced, for the prouocations of glottonye and curious
cates and iun­kettes, ſought for both out of the ayre, the heauens,
earthExerciſe and la  [...]ur a good ſ [...] for meat. and the Sea, doe not
ſauou [...]e or relice, better wyth an ydle ſlouthfull perſon, then bread doth
wyth him that la­boureth and is an hungered: Ptolomeus the kynge wan­deringe
throughe Egipt, and his ſouldiers hauinge not ouertaken hym wyth victuels,
beynge verye hungrye, dyd eate courſe bread (which he gotte out of a
ſhepehear­des cottage) greedely, & with greate appetite: ſwearing, that in all
his lyfe time he did neuer eate any thinge more ſweete and delicate then that
bread was: Alſo Darius fly­inge from Alexander (beinge ſore athirſte) did with
greatDarius. luſt and greedines drincke muddye and troubled water, taken out
of the next ryuer, whiche was ſoylled and ſten­ched wyth dead carcaſes throwen
into it, ſayinge that hee neuer taſted any thinge ſweeter in all his lyfe.

A certayne ſwyllinge dronckarde geuen to gullinge, & quaffinge, was wont to
ſay in ſporte, that hee neuer thur­ſted bycauſe hee did with oftentimes drin
[...]kinge preuenteGood vvay to procure a ſto­macke. his thirſt: But the ciuil
man muſt expect and looke, that nature wyl require meat, which (by walking,
labouring, & exerciſinge himſelfe) is to bee prouoked: by the exāple of
Socrates the Philoſopher, whō on a tyme walkinge, a certayne man aſked why he
ſo did, he aunſwered:

UUith walkinge, honger buy would I fayne

Good appetite, for my ſupper to gayne.

The auncient Romaynes for no other cauſe vſed to ſup in their open courtes, &
vnder the open ayre: but to the entent to ſhew their continencie, and
frugalitye, vnto the [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=64) people whoſe
care and ſtudie, was not ſo greate to peſter their table with manye diſhes, as
it was afterwardes to their poſteritie: for the Epicure who was the auoucher,
and meinteyner of pleaſures, diſpiſed fine and dayntie di­licates, and filled
the barkes of trees, which hee vſed for diſhes, wyth Herbes and Apples, and
woulde ſaye that a man ſhoulde feede vppon homely meate, becauſe they are the
more eaſely to bee had: for delicate diſhes and ex­quiſite brothes are
prepared and dreſſed with great care, and exceſſiue coſte, and do make a
greater griefe & trou­ble before a man can fynde theym forth, then they bringe
pleaſure in eatinge. Hippocrates alſo wryteth, that ſuch perſons as are
carefull for Gluttonye and Bellycheare,Epicure. Belly gods. are neuer in ſound
health, neyther can be long lyued, and that their ſpirites are ſo incombred
with to much bloud, and too much  [...]ramminge, as if they were wallowed and
ſouſed in the myre: and therfore they haue no mynde vpō any ſober or heauenly
thinge, but alwayes frame theym­ſelues to thincke vpon their diſhes, and how
they may fill their bellies: It is a thing profitable ſo to diſpoſe yt minde
with ſomthing, that thereby at all tymes & ſeaſons, frui­tes may be had and
reaped: for fewe thinges can be wan­tingeHuſbandrye purueyghour of many neceſ
ſaries. for dayly expences vnto a ciuil man, if hee will ha­ue diligente care,
to looke to his huſbandrye, and the fee­dinge of his cattle: a very meane
diligence wherein, Cato ſayde did encreaſe, a mannes ſubſtaunce: neyther ought
any man to be aſhamed to fede flocks of beaſts or heards of cattle, for euen
moſt noble perſons of all the aunciente people afore tyme, did vſe to feede
and keepe Cattle.

Let banquettinge be ſeeldome haunted of a good citti­zen: for it is vncertayn
whether the ſame banquets pur­chaſe a mā fauour or diſpleaſure: for although
thoſe thatBanqueting are bidden gueſtes, bee bound to requite the ſame wt like
agayn, yet there are many whiche beinge neglected and vnbidden do take
diſdayne thereat, and practiſe againſte the ſame eyther reproche or Iniurye:
for, to keepe Ban­kettes
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=65) or feaſtes
is thought to belonge vnto kinges, prin­ces, and moſt wealthieſt perſonages.

Ryot and couetouſnes, are two plagues which (as Ti­tus Liuius ſayth) haue
oftentimes ſubuerted, and vtterlyeRyot and couetouſnes: vvo plagues.
deſtroyed, whole citties and Empyres.

Let the good Citizen keepe a meane in his apparell, & obſerue a meaſure in his
degre & ability: for in deede, as it is a fowle thinge to weare yll fauoured
and vndecente garmentes, ſo is it ſubiect to enuye, to weare that whiche is to
gorgious and fine, and eſpecially, when as a mannes ſubſtance will not
ſtretche to mainteyn the ſame, or wheras hee beinge indebted to others, braues
it oute vppon other menns purſes: for in apparel this is to be conſide­red yt
a man weare nothing but ſuch as he may lawfully,Manner of ap­parel. and that
it doe not differ from the cuſtomable order, and vſage of his country: let it
be ſuche as may become both the perſon that weareth it, his ſtocke, & kynred,
his yea­rees and manners: for as fine braue apparell (ſo far forth as it
becōmeth) doth adde dignity & aucthority vnto mē: ſo nyce, womaniſh, &
ryotous apparell, doth not cōmend & ſet out the body, but diſcouereth the
vanitie of ye mynde. Adrianꝰ Caeſar herin purchaſed to himſelf prayſe becauſe
hee ordayned ye the Senators, & the worſhipfull perſōs of Rome, ſhould not
goe abrode, but in their gownes, except when they returned home from ſuppers.

Al neceſſarie expences, are to be reſtrayned, as ye charges of funeralles,
whiche bring no commodity to thoſe yt are dead, & are chargeable to thē that
are aliue: and yet their fame and good report which liued with prayſe, &
honeſtye is not darkned with modeſt funeral ceremonies: but on ye Vnneceſſarye
expences muſt be forborne. Funeralles. other part their funeral pōpe, ſhal
not make the memory of them to be famous among poſterity, whoſe life hauing
bene loſe, and inglorious, hath lefte nothinge behind thē worthy of memory.

Cyrus king of Perſia commaunded by his laſt wyl and teſtament, yt there ſhould
beno other Sepulchre or tombe [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=65) erected for him,
then the earth onely which brought forthe graſſe, & flowers, then which there
can nothinge be foūde more noble, neyther any thing that may more beautifye
ye graue: ſurely me thinkes the reaſon of ye auncient Egip­tians is to bee
deryded, whereof Dyodorus maketh menti­on, becauſe they diſpiſinge ye tyme of
this preſent lyfe, didCoſtly fune­ralles of the Egiptians reproued. call their
dwelling houſes, by the names of Innes as the which they coumpted their
harbours and lodginges. for a ſmall tyme, but moſt vaynlye and fondlye they
laſhed out luſtely, and ſpared no coſte, in erecting of ſumptuous Tō ­bes, &
burialls: for they thought that the graues were ye perpetuall & euerlaſting
dwelling places of them yt dyed, and were therein buried.

The Scythians (as Plutarch mencioned) did burie wythScythians ab­ſurd maner of
burying their kinges. their dead kings, their butlers, cookes, yea and
harlotts: to that end as I thincke, yt their kings ſhould want no ne­ceſſarie
ſeruice after they were dead: and certayne coun­tries of India with their dead
huſbandes, eyther burne or burie their beloued wiues, or others whōſoeuer
they beſt loued in their life time: Oh a matter not only horrible inIndiās
ſauage maner in buri­alles. ſight, but alſo to be ſpokē of, to kill a lyuing
man, becauſe the dead man ſhould not lacke a frend or ſeruaunte, when as in
deede he can neuer want or ſtand in nede of any ſuch, who hath no feeling at
all.

Little differeth from this madnes of the Indians, the people called
Maſſagetae, and thoſe called Derbites, which do kil their kinſfolkes &
friends, whē they waxe old, or by any caſualtie draw nea [...]e vnto death,
makīg therat great ſolempnitie & feaſting, and there eate them together with
other meate: and this they ſaye they doe, becauſe they ſup­poſe it to be the
worſt fortune that may happen vnto men, to be deuoured with wormes.

Eſſedones philoſophers of Europe, which dwelling neare to the ryuer Danow,
vſed to celebrate ye funeralls of their Parentes, and neighbours, with mery
cheare, and  [...]ocund reioyſing of their frendes and familiers together: ye
dead [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=66) corſes
being mangled & mixed with the intrayles of their ſlayne beaſts, they doe
feede vpon, & eate vp in bāqueting: but the Heades, or Skulles, of their
deade Bodies, they keepe to ſerue theym in ſteede of Drinckinge
Cuppes,Semiramis. garniſhing theym with golde and ſiluer.

Semiramis a Queene of a moſt haughty, and excellente mynde, cauſing a
ſumptuous Sepulchre or Tombe, forCouetouſnes. her to be made, wherin ſhee
would lye after her death, cō ­maunded theſe wordes to be engrauen
thereuppon:

What king ſo euer ſhal haue nede

of mony, wealth, or treaſure,

Let him pul ope this tombe with ſpede,

and take thereof at pleaſure.

Theſe wordes Darius the king reading, and thinkinge there had bene treaſures
hid there in deede, commaunded the ſtone of the Tombe to bee taken away,
whiche beinge rowlled aſyde, be ſaw other words ingraued vnto this ef­fect and
purpoſe:

Except thou haddeſt beene a kinge couetous

Couetuſnes of king Darius reproued.

Of mony: inſaciable, and deſirous,

Thou woldeſt neuer haue broke vp, and violate

The graues of them, that are extinct by fate.

This moſt excellent Ladye by a ciuil deriſion, did thus taunt the vyce of
couetouſnes.

Sertorius hauing won Thynge, a town in Mauriſia where (as thinhabitants ſayd)
the noble Sepulchre of Antheus was being of wonderful yea incredible
greatneſſe, gaue cōmaundement that it ſhould be razed and thrown to
theMonument reuerently pre ſcrued. ground, and therin founde a bodye of lxx.
cubites long (as Plutarch maketh mention) which he bebolding, meruay­led
greatly thereat, and commadūed yt the ſame Tombe ſhould be ſtreightway
reedified and reſtored, & greatlye enryched the fame thereof, leaſt otherwiſe
hee ſhould haue emblemiſhed his honoure, by defacinge and violating, ſo
notable a monumente.

[[Page 59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=66)

## 6\. THE SIX T BOOKE EN­treatinge of Nobilitie defined by the opinion of
Philoſophers, the commendati­on of their bountifulnes, liberalitie, and
franckneſſe towardes all men: how ſome are thoughte meete to ſupplye
functions, by reaſon of their Aunceſtors before time aucthoriſed to beare like
offices: of good prouiſiō for the ſuſtētation of the cōmons: Of ſuch as
hauing houſes in the citye, and alſo in the country, cannot be ſo carefull,
for the common vtilitye of both places. The diſcription of the venemous vyce
Enuie: of ſeuere Iuſtice vppon male factors, iniurious to the ſtate of the
common weale.

HIPPODAM VS Myleſius a man deſirous of glorye, a worthy warriour, &
excellentlye well learned in the ſtudies of good artes, purpoſing to write of
the good eſtate of a common weale, firſt & eſpecially, thought it conuenient
and neceſſarye to deuide and diſtinguiſhe the cittye and countrye in ſeue­ral:
for it ſemed vnto him a thing very hard to compaſſe, to make a common rable
and multitude of men gathered together within the walls of one citye, to lyue
quietly to­gether, excepte there were aſeperation made betweene theym:
therefore hee diſtributed and deuided the people into three ſortes, one to be
Artificers, another huſbande­men, and the thirde warriours: and he thoughte it
good reaſon that the magiſtrates ſhould be appointed and cho­ſen by all theſe
perſons indifferentlye.

Cicero vnto Saluſt who taunted him as a newe made Cittyzen, and one come of
baſe Degree, boaſtinge him­ſelfeCicero and Sa luſt at diſſen­tion. to bee of
moſte noble diſſente aunſwered on this maner: I haue by my vertue, worthynes,
and ſeruice to
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=67) my countrye
ſhyned before, and geeuen lighte to all myne aunceſtors, yt if they were not
knowne before, they mighte yet of me receyue a beginninge of theyr memory:
thou by meanes of thy lewde lyfe whiche thou haſt leade filthelye, haſt vnto
thy aunceſtors, brought great cloudes of darck­neſſe, ſo that although they of
thēſelues, were famous & notable citizēs, yet by meanes of the, they ſhalbe
brought into obliuiō: wherfore do not thou obiect vnto me men of auncient
race: for it is better, yt I do floriſhe in mine owne actes that I haue done,
thē to leane vpon the reputacionCicero his aū ­ſvvere vnto Saluſt. of
aunceſtrie, & ſo to lyue that I may be an originall or be­ginning of
nobilitye, and an example of vertue vnto al my poſterity: for Cicero might wel
bring profe of ye progenye or ofſpring of his nobility, becauſe he was
lyneally deſcended of the Uolſcian kinges.

Plato wyſeſt of all Pliloſophers, and his folowers (frō whom Ariſtotle doth
ſmally differ, maketh four kindes of nobility: ye 1\. was of thē which
proceded frō noble ſtockeNobility. and auncient race of honorable elders: the
ſecond was of thē, whoſe parēts were mē of aucthority, princs, or chief
rulers: the iii. was of thē whoſe rulers excelled others in any kind of
notable prayſe or cōmendaciō, eyther at home or abrode in the warres: the
iiii. kinde of nobility▪ he ma­keth that, which he ſheweth to be moſte
excellente of all ye reſte, when as anye man excelleth others, eyther in
wor­thynes, wyſoome, or magnanimitie of the mynde, & lea­neth onely to the
vertue of his owne cōmendation: And this man he iudgeth worthy to bee
coumpted noble, whō not other mēns worthines ennobleth, but whom his pro­per
vertue and valiauntnes, doth aduaunce to honour and renowme: but vnto theſe
fower kindes of nobilitie, Ari­ſtotle alſo added the v. yt is of them which
famouſly excel­led in any notable diſcipline: & this did he by good right: for
they ther by do not only ennoble themſelues, and their lignage, but likewiſe
ennoble the Citties, and countries wherein they were borne.

Iuba the ſonne of Iuba kinge of Numidia, beinge but a [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=67) childe, & taken
priſoner by Iulius Caeſar, did folow his tri­ūphe into Africa: and although
he had loſt both kingdomExample of Iuba. & libertie, & alſo deſpoyled of his
honour & dignitye, yet hee betoke himſelfe vnto learning, & within a ſmall
time, proued ſo well, that hee was coumpted amongeſt the beſt learned writers
in Greece: and whatſoeuer nobility For­tune had taken frō him, ye ſame did
the diſcipline of good ſciences, more abundantly reſtore in him: wherunto alſo
Hanniball gaue himſelfe, euen in the deſperate and trou­bleſome broyles of the
Carthaginenſes, & being ſomwhat aged in yeares, did learne the greeke tounge
and therein became ſo eloquent, yt he wrate the actes of certayn Em­perours,
and certayn excellent bookes of the orderinge of warfare & martiall affayres.

It ſeemeth mete that they, whoſe parents, graūdſires, and aunceſtors haue
afore time bene honored, and endow­ed wyth publique offices, ſhoulde alſo haue
charge of the common weale, as it were by a certayne rightfull inheri­taunce:
& therupon let them employ all their diligence, & care: for as a field is very
well committed into the handes of country borne perſons, which know, and can
ſkil of theSucceſſion of offices. ayre and ſoyle: euen ſo they that are come
of ye race of Se­natours, haue learned to execute thoſe publique offices, as
it were by naturall diſcipline, deuiſed to them by their aunceſtrye: for al
the common people wil beare and obey more willingly & patiently, their rule or
aucthority, ney­ther think they it amiſſe, for ye ſon to beare office, whē
they call to mynd that all his anceſtours haue executed ye ſame offyce
aforetime. They whiche beare rule in a common weale ought to haue a diligent
care, that the people be not oppreſſed, pinched, & famiſhed wt want of corne
or grayne, & y• they mai (as far as is poſſiible) enioy a perfect peace &
tranquillity: for ſurely all common people (although thei be ready, & prōpt
to reuengement of wrongs, for y• whiche it is ſene now & thē, y• they do
enter into armes & warres: yet notwtſtāding, they expect ſom euēt & ende, &
if fortune [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=68)
fauour theym not, they fall to brablinge with their Ru­lers, by ſwearing,
wreſting, and turninge all the faulte in their neckes: and more ouer we muſt
not raſhly credit the opinion & rumour of the cōmon people, for as Maro
ſaith:

Scinditur incertum ſtudia in contraria vulgus.

The cōmunaltie vnſtable, is disperſt in opinions variable.

The opinions of which common people, are ſlippery, wauering & mutable, & not
only for a day but notſo mu­che as for one hour, ſtedfaſt & firme: wherfore it
may bee ſpokē of ye cōmon people which we do vſe in y• prouerbe.

Of Sand an infinite quantitie take,

And yet vnpoſſible it is a coarde to make.

Religion, ceremonies, myſteries, and al deuine honor whereby we make the
liuinge God mercifull, and at one with vs, requireth men holy and innocent:
who beinge in­dowedThe ſpiritual­tye ought to be mayntay­ned by the ly­uinges
of the Churche. with the zealous ſtudie of ſacred and deuine ſcrip­tures, do
wype away the cloudes of blyndenes and error, from the eyes of men: for theſe
men (to the end, they may lyue modeſtlye and keepe in good ordre, the temples
& ſa­cred houſes, wt great coſtes & charges, edified) haue neede of wealth,
ryches, and fruites of the earthe, whiche in dee­de do neuer or ſeeldome
fayle, neyther haue they neede to make any marchaundize, by buying and
ſellinge.

Without ſauegardes, and defenders of the ſame, a cō ­mon weale cannot be. For
what ſhould the Citizens doe within the walles, if they had no other defence,
but with­inPouertie not relieued. the walles of their Cyttye? In what wealth
doth that Citty ſtand, or how are the pore relieued there, whereun­to the
huſbandmen of the countrye do runne for ſuccoure, when as in the fieldes
adiacente, there is feare on euerye ſide? In what hope, or in what diligence,
do the huſband­men toyle or moyle, if they ſee their Sommer, or harueſt corne,
and fruictes to become an open pray or ſpoyle, forHuſbandmen. the enemie: and
without keepers geeue ouer all thinges in their fieldes vnto Fortune in euery
place.

The corne whiche is reaped, in the cōmon fieldes, may [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=68) bee kept and
reſerued, vntill ſuch tyme as there happen a dearthe or ſcarſitie, or that the
difficultie of Warre doe vrge, in hollow trenches couered in chaffe, and very
wel fenced and made ſafe from all and euery kynde of vermin for ſeuen yeares
ſtore, as Lucius Columella maketh menti­on: which thing ſurely if it were
diligently looked vnto, and that in his due ſeaſon the olde frute were ſpent,
and the new fruict laid vp in ſtore, it ſhould preſerue the peo­ple from all
ſiege and famin of the enemie. and with moſt ſafe and ſure defence protecte
theim from the annoyaunce of their enemies: for litle preuayleth armour or
weapons of defence in fight, where the people do famiſhe, for want of
ſuſtentation: and a famiſhed communaltie is euermore ſtudious, and bent to
newfangleneſſe and tumulte.

Hee that wyll haue a well tylled grounde, let him ſell his houſes in the
cittie: for hee that taketh more pleaſureA good citizē a good huſ­band▪ or
felicitye to dwel in his houſe within the Cittye, then in his houſe in the
countrie, hath no nede at al of any groūd: for he cannot well handle ciuile
affayres, which taketh eſ­peciall pleaſure in huſbandrye, and countrye
dealinges: for truely it cannot bee but hee muſte needes neglect the one of
theſe twayne, which coueteth to ſatiſfie his minde with both theſe benefites.

Gardens planted with herbes & trees, be made for plea­ſure and recreation: for
in thē are borders of Roſes, bed­des of violettes, Fiſhepondes, and ſuche
other like com­modities of pleaſure: for Graners, Barnes, and
ſtore­Houſes,Gardens and Orchardes. wherein Corne is layde, whyche doe
encreaſe bothe profite and liuinge vnto manne, doe rather ſerue for the
maiſters wealth, then for his diligence: yet not­withſtanding it ſhall not bee
impertinent for a Citizen, or ciuile perſon to haue pleaſure, and practiſe in
huſbandry.

And as hee growethe in more wealthe, to haue manye ſeruauntes for the
orderinge of his huſbandrie, and ſuche as bee mere ſtraungers, borne out of
that countrye (vnto whome hee may preſcribe thoffices of that which
pertay­neth [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=69)
neth vnto huſbandrye.

Straungers and foreyners beinge merchauntes, are friendly to be entertayned
when they come into the citye for good and honeſt purpoſes: for the Societies,
and en­tercourſesMerchaunt ſtraungers hovv they are to be entertay­ned in a
cittye of traffique with ſtraūgers, helpe the trade of merchaundiſe among
citizens, & do make them wealthier and furniſh the cittie with ſtore of that,
which it wanteth, & caryeth away from hence thoſe things, wherof we haue
ſuperfluous ſtore and abundaunce: yet is it expedient, that there ſhould be
but few of them denized with the freedom of the citye: for certaynly the
multitude of Inhabitaunts oute of ſundrie places is daungerous, in euerye
nacion: for the common people, gathered together out of ſundrye countries,
ſeldom agree well, and there can ſcarce be vni­tye or concorde, among men of
ſundrye nacions: and wee may well ſo thincke that ſtraungers, will but a while
cō ­tinue in that zeale & good wil, or natural affection, which free borne
people do, that haue receyued from their Aun­ceſtors as it were y• ſeede of
loue towardes their coūtrey, & haue euen wt their mothers milke, a tender
good wil & affection towards their citizēs. Of the true citizens that may bee
ſpoken, whiche in louely ſpeache, wyues are wōtTrue Citizens to complayne
ſayinge:

A Louer that already hath fixt his good wyll

Towardes one, cannot be lured by good or by yll:

Entyſte by flattring ſpeach, nor vrgde to that end,

To chaunge for a new, and forget his firſt frend.

So greatly is the loue of our natural country engraf­ted in vs, euen by
nature, that wee cannot want or be with out the ſame, for any contynuaunce of
time or diſtaunce of places, for no reproches, neyther yet for anye
iniuries.Straungers. Therefore wee muſt warely deale with ſtraungers: For
Ariſtotle affirmethe that all Nacions whiche retayned many ſtraungers, and
Inhabitantes of forrein countreis [[Page
62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=69) to be reſident
among thē, were diſquieted with diſcordes.

We muſt eſpecially take hede that nothing be done, in the cōmon weale by
violence or fraud: for what things ſo euer are done by vyolence, are weake &
vnſtable, & not on­lye prouoketh the multitude vnto enuie, but alſo vnto
re­uenge. Appius Claudius the Decemuir, by violēce chalen­ged Virginia to be
his bondwomā, which thing her fatherAppius Clau­dius. not ſuffring, thruſt
his daughter through the body wt hys ſword, & with embrewed handes returned to
his hoaſt, ex­citing vp the cōmon people againſt the Senators, which thinge
brought no ſmall plague vnto ye common weale.

There be ſome that are ſorye to ſee others ſurmounte,Repyners at o­thers vvel
do­inge. and excell in vertue: there was ſometimes amongeſt y• Epheſians a
certayn excellent mā called Hermodorus, who excellīg others both in learning
& honeſty was neuerthe­leſſe baniſhed out of his country: and vnto certayn men
yt meruayled thereat, & aſked thoſe people why they had ba­niſhed ſo worthy a
mā, they aūſwered: there was no other cauſe, but that in vertue, and
integrity of lyfe, hee dyd to farre excell y• reſt of his felow citizens: for
vnto all good men doth euer chaunce cōmon backbyters, & euil willers:
wherfore now and then we muſt deſſemble if we deſire to flye enuye: aſſuredly
wyſedome muſt ſomtime geue place vnto raſhnes, for enuy doth not onely caſt
vnder foote ve­rye manye notable perſonages, but alſo doth ſubuert the ſtate
of cities, yea & vtterly deſtroy the cities themſelues.

The Poets fables of Enuy are notable affirming, thatEnuie deſcri­bed. it is a
plague feeding vppon Serpentes: meaning there­by to ſhewe that enuious perſons
do ſwalow poyſon, and vomite vp venime agayne: for an other mannes felicitye
is poyſon vnto the enuious perſō: neyther can he take any ioy of himſelfe,
except he infect others wt his poyſon: & cer­tes, ther can be nothīg more
filthy, or more vnfitting a mā then to reioyſe at an other mans euil & to bee
vexed or yll apayd for other mens good fortune, both which things y• enuious
man vſeth to do.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=70) Tymon the
Atheniā dyd once make an oration at Athēs in a great aſſēblie of people, in
the which he ſayd yt he had one only little Orcharde wherin was a great
figtree, vp­onExample of envye. which many cittizens had hanged themſelues,
and be­cauſe in that place hee purpoſed to buylde a wall, he ſayd he muſt
needes cut downe the ſame figge tree: and yt ther­fore he was come to tel
them, that if any would hang thē ­ſelues, they ſhould make haſte and come
quicklye, whyle the figgetree were yet ſtandinge.

Euerye man maintayneth his priuate Subſtaunce al­though it bee ſmall: Neyther
doth the poore man leſſe eſteeme of his ſmall pittaunce, then the rych of his
great Wealthe: and if any Contencion happen to aryſe, bee­tweene a poore man
and a rycheman, although the ryche man (in deede) be wronged, yet becauſe hee
is mightier, & wealthyer, it will be thought that he doth ye wrong & in­iurye,
and thereby purchaſeth the enuye of many others: but yet if any man do ſaye
that the pore mannes patrimo­nye is taken from him, by extorcion and violence,
or ſtrōg hand, euery man beginnes to feare his own caſe, deayſeth new fangled
alteracions, rayleth at his betters, fauoreth the oppreſſed, bendeth himſelfe
vnto Sedicions, and can neuer be quiet in his mynde, till hee ſee that he hath
ſafe­lye, and warelye ynough prouided for his own ſafety.

Periander practiſed Tyrannye in Ambracia, and cuſto­mablye cōmitted buggerye
with a certayne boye, whomPeriander a buggerer. on a tyme as hee was
Drinckinge in preſence of manye others, hee merely aſked whether hee was at
anye tyme greate with childe by him or no: the boy was throughlye enraged with
anger, and could not abyde that thoſe filthy thinges, which hee had ſuffered
before, ſhoulde haue bene once named and ſpoken of: and thereupon founde he
mea­nes, to kyll and deſtroye this Tyraunte. Pauſanias alſoPauſanias. of
Macedonie a youngeman in beautye and nature moſte excellent, was likewiſe
violently and forcyblye abuſed in his bodye by Attalus, and by him was made
dronke with [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=70) wyne, and
brought in at a banquet, and offered as a com­mon ſtrumpet vnto the luſte of
the gueſtes there: Pauſa­nias ſtomacking this ſhamefull villanye, tolde the
whole matter to kinge Philip, but the kinge with ſundry dela­tory woordes,
ſeemed to haue thereof no care, but rather made thereat a laughinge game,
preferring. Attalus vn­to better place and rowme in warfare then hee: whiche
iniury ſo throughly touched Pauſanias. that he conuerted his diſpleaſure
towardes the kinge, and the reuenge whiche he could not take of his
aduerſarye, hee extended vpon the vnrighteous Iudge: for as he ſate at the
maryage of Cleopatra the daughter of Attalus betwen both the Alex­anders, the
ſonne and the ſonne in lawe, Pauſanias ſleweComplaintes, of pore oppreſſed
ſuters muſt not be reiected him, fearing no ſuch matter & by killing the king
turned into ſorow and heauines that day which ſhould haue bene a daye of ioye
or gladnes, playnely hereby ſhewinge, that the complaintes of ſubiectes are
not to bee diſdayned, nor contemptuouſlye be reiected.

It goeth not wel in that common weale, where a man muſt lyue by prayer or
intreatye, where Citizens muſte liue in that caſe, that they dare not ſpeake
frankly or bold­lye thoſe thinges whiche they thincke to be for their
pro­fite: Philip king of Macedonie, vnder a certayn pretence of libertie
inuadinge a great part of Greece, beſieged A­thens, excuſing himſelfe by
letters, and Embaſſadors, ſēt vnto the Senate and people of Athens, that hee
did not thoſe thinges, to the ende hee would take away from thē their
liberties or Franchiſes, or to bringe the Citty into bondage, but becauſe he
had a grudge againſt ten of their Citizens, which in the Senate houſe had
alwayes bare­kedFayre & ſmoth Wordes. againſt him, and did not ceaſſe to rayle
vpon him with reprochfull wordes: and therefore if thoſe fewe might be yelded
vnto hym, hee ſayde hee woulde reyſe his ſiege and departe, and deliuer the
people from warre, and famine. Namely and eſpecially be required to haue that
moſt ex­cellence oratour Demoſthenes deliuered vnto him, vppon
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=71) whom all the
coūtenaunces, and fauours of the Grecians were at that time bent and caſt, &
beſides him nine others of y• eloquenteſt, & notableſt perſons, both for talke
& auc­thoritye: hereuppon the Senate was in great perplexi­tye, and many of
theym agreeing vpon this poynt, cryedThe Senate in d [...]bt. out, that it
were much better, to ſaue a multitude, then a fewe perſons: theſe fewe were
ſhrewdely afrayde, whom the king had requeſted thus to bee yelded into his
hands to death, & ſcarcely durſt they ſpeake their myndes, ſeeing that by
their deathes all the reſidue, hoped for peace & ly­berty, & it had come to
paſſe in deede, that theſe fewe had then bene yelded, had not Demoſthenes
diſplayde y• craft and dereiptful fetch of the kyng by this wittely deuiſed
fa­ble vttred vnto them.

The wolfe on a time (ſayth he) perſwaded certain ſheepe­heards (whoſe
diligēce he had a deſire to deceiue) to enter frendſhip and amity with him,
condicionally y• the ſhepe­heards ſhould deliuer vnto him (as hoſtages or
pledges) their Dogs which were his hateful enemies, & gaue al y• cauſe of all
the ſtrife & debate: the ſhepeheards gaue eare vnto this tale, aſſēted to his
requeſt, & for better aſſurance of their faithful meaning, deliuered their
dogges, which were the moſt diligent garders of ye ſhepe: thē the Wolfe when
al feare was taken away, not only at his fill, but al­ſo at his pleaſure
deuoured and tare in pieces the ſhepe, & killed the ſhepeheardes themſelues.
Euen ſo (O ye Athe­nians) doth Philip yt king at his preſent mean & go about:
who deſireth to haue al their heads vnder his gyrdle whiche haue impugned his
doings & which doe manifeſte and bring to light his ſecret treacheries, and
colourable dea­lings: becauſe he may the more eaſlye inuade, & ſacke the city,
whē it is bereft & ſpoyles of the ſauegarders therof: for doubtleſſe yt
cittye muſt nedes periſh, wheras mē may not ſpeake their mindes frely in ſuch
matters as concernAbſtlnence frō ciuyl bludſhed the vtility of the weale
publique.

Let ye good citizen greatly abſtain frō ciuil bloud, being euer mindful of
this tragical ſentence,

[[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=71)

Who ſo euer he be that doth rule or raigne

From ſheding of bloud let him abſtayne.

But if neceſſity conſtrain, & that the citty cannot other­wiſe be ſet in good
ſtate, except by ſheadinge of y• bloud of ſome naughty lewd perſon: let them
deale as good Phiſi­ans vſe to do, who after yt they do playnly ſee (yt the
trou­bled & infected members of their Patientes, cānot by any maner of
remedies be reſtored to perfection or recouery) although it be againſt their
willes, & to the greate griefe of all the whole body: yet do they not let to
cut of ye ſameNaughty mē ­bers in a com­mon vvealth muſt bee cut of corrupt
members, leaſt they ſhould infect all the reſt of ye body: for wee muſt not
fauour or ſpare any perſon, there by to bring ruine or decay to the whole
Common weale: but we muſt vſe reuenge, that the ſame may be preſerued
inſafetye.

Amiſchiefe new hatching and but now in the pryme,

Is ſone to confuſion ſodenly brought:

But that which is olde, and laſted long tyme

Is often incurable, though al meaues be wrought.

To geue as ſpoyles vnto the cōmon people the goodes of ſuch as be proſcript &
out of the Princes protection, is a­gainſtComunalty of Rome refray­ned from
ſpoylinge one an other. all equitye, and therfore the Comunaltie of Rome
deſerued great prayſe, & fauour, when Marius & Cinna, proponed the richemens
houſes to be ſpoyled by the Cyt­tizens: for there was no man found ſo needye
and ſo bare whiche at that tyme ſpared not from deſpoylinge & pur­loyning of
that which an other man had ſore ſweat and la­boured for. Neyther was there
anye man amongeſte theym whiche coulde fynde in his harte, to reape any
commoditye vnto himſelfe, in the tyme of that ciuill ſorow [...],

As ſeuerity in a citty is ſomtyme wholſome, ſo cruelty is alwayes peſtiferous:
For the Seuerity of Lucius Sylla was a beginning of all euilles amongeſt the
Romaynes: for that ſame moſt infamous table wherin were fourſcoreSeueritye of
Iuſtice. thouſande Perſons proſcribed, and of theym fower that had borne the
honourable office of Conſul, to wyt, Carbo,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=72) Marius,
Norbanus, and Scipio, and amongeſt them alſo at that tyme Sertorius (a man in
thoſe days greately feared) wrought much miſchiefe vnto the common weale: for
o­ther men taking hereat example, in a ſmall tyme, ſubuerted the whole Empyre.

But yet the multitude of people, yea thoughe they doe ſome what treſpaſſe,
muſt be mercifully ſpared: Iulius Cae­ſar after that he had vanquiſhed the
hoaſt of Pompeius the greate, ſpared the Cittizens: and theym whom hee had by
force of armes ſubdued, hee rewarded with benefites bountifully: and glorying
in himſelfe, wrate letters vnto his friendes at Rome, therein mentioninge that
he tooke greate and moſte ſweete pleaſure becauſe hee had preſer­ued in ſafety
thoſe Citizens, whō he alwayes reputed for his aduerſaries and enemies, and
had made theim to be­come as it were bound in tender affection, and good wyll
towardes him.

The nature of crueltie doth make the prayſe of victory far leſſe: for greater
had the prayſe of Octauius beene to­wardes Antonius, if hee had not commaunded
A [...]ilius, being thē but a Chyld moſt Innocent, & the ſonne of An­tonius,
Fauour and mercie of the conquerours and victors to­vvordes theym that be
ouer­come. and of Fuluia, to be beheaded: and yet not with ſtā ­ding Octauius
ſtreightway ſhewed the euident tokens of repentaunce, for that whiche he had
done: for he ſtreight wayes reuenged the death of Attilius: for Theodorus the
ſcholemaiſter of y• chylde who betrayed him vnto Octaui­us, priuily tooke from
the childe when hee went vnto his death, a precious ſtone which he ware about
his Necke, whereof Caeſar hauinge intelligence, commaunded the ſame Theodorus
to bee condempned and hanged vppon a gibet, and ſo reuenged the vilanye of
that trayterous ver let, ſhewing there in playne profes of his channged mind,
relenting in that whiche hee had afore done.

No man can patientlye brooke to bee flouted, contemp­ned and to be hadde in
deriſion: for wee reade of Manlius Torquatus, the Sonne of the moſte
valiaunte, and noble [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=72) Lucius Manlius,
was euen from his childehoode of a dull and blunt w [...]tte▪ in ſomuch that
he was ſe [...] away by his father into the countrye▪ as one that ſeemed
neyther fitte nor profitable eyther  [...] [...] for priuate offices: but hee
wythin a ſmall tyme after, as one wearye of his ſlouthfull lyfe, deliuered and
preſerued his father beinge accuſed from a greate and waighty matter of a
iudicial controuerſie: and in the Battle foughte by the Latines brought away
the tryumphe and vyctory, to the great re­ioyſinge of the people of Rome.
Neyther may Themiſto­cles bee pretermitted with ſilence, whoſe lewdenes of
lyfe his mother diſpayring (for thamendment or reforminge) hanged her ſelfe:
but when he came to be of more diſcreti­on, hee proued to bee of ſuch
excellency, in all his doings, that Cicero the moſt excellent oratour, called
him ye prince of Greece.

The age of twentye and fower yeares is lawfull & al­lowable for any man to a
[...]e and attayne vnto an offyce: and let no man therfore  [...] if  [...]ee
[...] not a magiſtrateAt vvhat yea­res an officer may be choſen before thoſe
yeares: moreouer let no man diſdayne that any more auncient perſon then
himſelfe is preferred in of­fyce before him, both becauſe the enuye is greater
amōg thoſe that be of equal vocatien, and alſo becauſe, euery mā doth hope
when he cōmeth to that age, that then hee ſhal attayne vnto the like
preferment.

It ſtandeth with the honour of the cytty when the Ci­tizens are called by
honorable and goodly names: for an vncomely maner of nomination or tearming of
them ſee­methApt names for Citizens. ſo to take away ſomewhat of the dignitye
of the per­ſon, as an honeſt or decent callinge of a man, ſeemethe to adde
worſhippe, honour, or dignitye: In whiche thinge, the diligence of the
parentes in naming their children, is to bee prayſed, and eſpeciallye ſeeinge
that in that poynte they beſtow no coſte, and yet doe not a lyttle adorne
their children therewith: Wherefore ſome are worthie of diſ­prayſe: who
hauinge Parentes and Aunceſtors yll na­med
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=73) woulde neuer
leaue or dygreſſe frō the ſame names, euen as if they were loath to defraud
their poſte­ritye of the reproche or ignominye of their Aunceſtors.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=73)

## 7\. THE VII. BOOKE DE­ſcribinge the Natures, Vſes, Pro­fites, & choyſes, of
all ſortes of groundes▪ The ſundrye diſpoſitions and inclinations of Perſons,
accordinge to the quality of the ſoyle where they be bredde. The commo­ditye
of woodes, and the orderinge thereof. The greate neceſſitie and benefite of
Waters, Fountaynes, and Springs, with the ſtraunge vertues of ſūdry VVelles
in forrein Countries.

MArcus Cato ſaid that in buyinge of Landes, two thinges eſpecially are to be
conſidered, hole­ſomenes of ayre, and plentifulnes of the ſoyle: wherof if the
one wereChoyſe in buyinge of Lands. lacking, he iudged that that groūd was
not to be areoūpted of & to bee tilled. And not without a cauſe, for he that
buyeth barren grounde, and fruiteleſſe ſoyle, buyeth to himſelfe and all his
poſteritye after him, pouertie and perpetuall labour. And hee that buyeth
grounde ſcituate in a peſtilent ayre, buyeth vnto himſelfe and to his
ſucceſſion continual ſick­neſſe, vntimely oldeage, and haſty death. For
fruitfulnes of the ground, doth not a little further and helpe toward lyuing
well and pleaſauntly. Whereupon the Arabians are called happye, becauſe they a
[...]ound and are enryched with corne, fruites of the earth, vynes, & ſweete
od [...]urs.

Good choyſe muſt be had for the buylding of any City, that it be ſet and
builded in a very  [...]olſome pla [...]e, & that is, if it ſtand vpon ſome
what highe ground [...] ▪ For cham­pane and p [...]a [...] ground, is ſ
[...]eldome in euery  [...]y [...] foundChoyſe of ground in building of a
City. ſafe, and  [...]al [...]eyes are ſubiect  [...] fulſome fogges, & daū
­gerous miſtes, but this high place, ſhal neyther  [...]ſpecte the h [...]ate
regions of the ayre, nor thoſe that bee to muche tolde and fros [...]ye, but
thoſe that  [...]ee temperate, proſper­  [...]ge towardes the Eaſte, or
towardes the Sowthe.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=74) Excepte it
bee ſuche a countrye as is neare the Sea, for y• hath commonlye the Southern,
and Weſterne wyndes hurtfull, eſpecially if there be  [...]ennye grounde nere
there unto, which haue not their courſe and iſſue into the Seas or Ryuers: for
oute of the ſtandinge water, ſo ſone as the morning gleames of the ſonne
appeareth vpon the ſame, there ariſeth cold wyndes or dampiſhe cloudes,
infectingDiſcommodi [...]y of ſtanding, vvaters. the ſpirites of the Cattle
feeding in thoſe fenny places: wt the contagion of that foggye myſtineſſe,
they do alſo infect the place, and make it peſtilent, eſpeciallye in Somer and
Autumne, what tyme the Southern partes of the world be far hoater thē at
other ſeaſons. A [...] it al fenny & mar­ſhye ſoyle is to bee eſchewed, &
ſhonned, becauſe, it always venteth out a moſt poyſonned ayre, beinge in ſomer
darkned and dymmed with vaporous fogges, and in wynter with colde exhalacions
& myſtes: moreouer by reaſon of feruent heate it engendreth▪ gnattes and other
ſtinging [...] and odious vermin, which doe at ſuche tymes flocke toge­ther in
ſwarmes, and infect the citye, and be very  [...]o [...]ſ [...]m both vnto man
and beaſt.

Many wryters do agree in opinion, that Italye, of all other countryes is moſt
temperate: and euen as the Pla­netItalye a temperate nacion. Iupiter, hauing
his courſe, in the middeſt▪ betwene the moſt hoate and feruent planet of Mats,
and the moſt cold planet Saturne, by reaſon of diuerſitie in qualities,
recei­ueth temperatenes: ſo it, ſtretching and lying bet [...]n the Northe and
South receyueth a temperate  [...]irture▪ ther­fore innumerable prayſes doth
this countrye deſerue, as Marcus Vitruuius ſayth: for it bringeth forth men of
body and mē  [...]ers in proportion moſt excellent & which in for­titude of
courage, wyſedome & diſcipline, are able to ſur­paſſe all other nations. Let
the  [...]uncient Romaynes  [...] witneſſes herein, which with their warli
[...]e forecaſte, and proweſſe,  [...]amed and daūted the outragious
fiercenes; of all the Barbarians, and which (as Cicero ſayt [...]) by theyr
own induſtry either inuēted al things better thē al other [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=74) Nacions, orells
whatſoeuer they receuied of other coun­tries, the ſame they made much better
and perfecter. And in ſmall tyme ſubdued they all Nacions, and obtey­ned the
Iuriſdiction and Empyre, of the whole worlde.

Naturall Philoſophers, affirme that ſome Bodies, broughte oute of colde
countreys into hoate regions, can not endure and continue, but are ſone
diſſolued: Con­trarily, perſons brought out of hoate regions into colde &
northernly countryes, are not onely not hurt, endamaged or diſeaſed, by the
chaunge of the ayre, but are made more luſtye, healthfull, and longer lyued.
Ariſtotle witneſſeth that thoſe people whiche inhabite colde Countrys, doe
rather abounde in courage, ſtomacke and ſtrength of bo­dye, then in wyſedome
or knowledge, and that their Bo­dies are farre taller and fayrer: the ſame
country people are alſo of a whyte complexion, of a ſtreight flaxen hayre,
graye [...]ed, and ful of bloud, groſſe wytted, but very migh­tye and ſtrōge,
venturous and without feare, but in tyme of ſicknes they are fearfull and
fayntharted: as the Frē ­them [...] People bred vp in cold coū tryes. which
becauſe they excelled in largenes of body, deryded and ſcorned the hoaſtes of
the Romayns, ſaying: Lo, what little fellowes be yonder, of ſo ſmall ſtature,
of whome Ceſar maketh mention, in his moſt excellent Cō ­mentaries, where he
ſayth: the ſhort and lowe ſtature of our countrymen was had in contempt
amongſt yt French­men in compariſon of the largeneſſe of their own bodies: and
a little after as touching their wytte he addeth thus: as the Frenchmen are
ready, and couragiouſly mynded to take warres in hande at the firſte: ſo is
their mynde veryePeople of the Southpartes. tender, and nothinge able to
reſiſte aduerſities: But cō ­trary [...]wyſe men borne in the Southe partes,
and beinge moreſubi [...] [...] vnto the heate of the Sonne, are leſſe of per­
[...]age, and ſlendere [...] of ſtature, of brown or ſwart colour,  [...]urle
hayred, blacke eyed, their legges croked, and ben­dinge, weake and nothing
ſtrong: for theſe men, by reaſō of their ſmal ſtore of bloud, and ſubtilitie
of the ayre, do ex­cell
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=75) in wytte,
and are notablie ingenious, wherefore they doe quicklye conceiue and attayne
the knowledge of thin­ges, and are more prompt for deuiſes and cogitations: in
ſickeneſſe they doe ſhewe themſelues to be of a right ſtout ſtomacke, but in
battle very daſterds, & cowards.

Cato diſtinguiſheth a good ground by nyne ſeueral dif­ferences, The firſt part
he ſayth is, where Uyneyardes may bring forth abundaunt ſtore of good wynes:
the Se­condeCato his diſtictions of good grounde. hee appoynteth for an
orcharde, that may caſlye bee watred: the third for Oſyers: the fourth for
Oliue trees: the fyfte for medowe: the ſixte is arable grounde, apte to beare
Corne: The Seauenth for Wooddes, that may bee felled and lopped at their
encreaſe: The eyghte for ſhrubbes and Buſhes: The nynthe for woodes that
bea­reth Maſte: For it muſt needes bee a good grounde why­che hathe the more
parte of all theſe commodities.

The Iuniper Trees doe with their Beries nouriſhe the winter Fowles; where wyth
alſo Capons being feddeIumper. and crammed, doe nowe a dayes furniſhe out the
Tables and make the ſame more elegante: and the W [...]o [...]there­of beinge
burned, ſendeth forth a ſwete ſmelling Smoke, and odoure moſte holſome in
Sommer to expell, & dryue awaye all euyll and noyſome ayres.

No man can denye, but that the maſte of Cheſtnuttes is profitable: For it is
not onely good for beaſtes to fe [...]de vppon, but alſo for a mannes whole
houſholde. ThysCheſtnutte. Nutte is ſo couered and harneſſed as it were with a
pric­kinge ſhelle, that it can ſcarce bee taken oute of the ſame without
hurtinge of a mannes handes: and therfore the countrye people, were wonte to
burye the ſame certayne dayes in pyttes or hoales, within the earth, tyll
ſuchtime as the vtter moſte pylle of the Nuttes opened of it ſelfe, and ſo
oute of euerye Shell, there commeth  [...]woor three Kernelles. This Tree
groweth verye bygge, and is profitable almoſte in euerye reſpecte for
buyldinge: and of it are made verye good Tubbes, and Wyne or Oyle [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=75) Ueſſelles,
whiche the Carpenters of oure tyme doe call the Queene of all Trees, becauſe
it is coumpted good al­moſte for all purpoſes and vſes: wherefore not onelye
for fruite and wood, but alſo for tymber, it is to be accoump­ted a chiefe and
ſpeciall wood.

How neceſſarye Fyre is, not onely to the nouriſhment of mans lyfe, but almoſt
vnto al vſes, euery mā may eaſe­lye iudge: Therfore very yll ſhould any
choyſe of habita­tion be, if it eyther ſtande farre diſtaunt from
Woodes,Wooddes and vvood ground neceſſarye. or altogether lacke the commoditye
thereof. For we ha­ue reade and ſeene in our tyme, that citties by the enemye
beſieged, haue beene forced of neceſſitye to yelde, for de­fault and wante of
wood.

Therefore that Countrye ſoyle is to bee choſen for ha­bitation, whiche
aboundeth with fire woode, whiche is ſo to bee vſed and appointed, that euerye
Seauenth yeare, parte of the ſame Trees maye be cutte downe and lopte, and
that there maye bee enoughe to ſuffice the vſe of all the whole people: for
that which is cutte downe, had nedeFyrevvvod. to haue Seauen yeares growth,
before it bee cut agayne, that the younge Setttes, and ſhrubbes therof may
grow freſhe agayne, to their full Syſe and Skantlinge.

The Woode whiche ſerueth for Tymber to Buylde Houſes, and Shippes wythall,
muſte more diligentlye bee looked vnto, preſerued and kepte, and to bee
clenſed euerye yeare from Thornes, Bryars, & Brambles, that they hynder not
the newe Gryffes, and ſpringing plants from growynge to their full heighth,
ſyſe, and  [...]igneſſe.

At the Springe of the yeare Trees do burgein, and be ſtow all their Sappe and
ſtrength, vpon bowes and bud­des: and therefore become they weake and
exhauſted, asMayne tymber trees for buyl­dinges & ſhips the bodies of women
that are greate wyth Chylde, are feebler, weaker, and ſlenderer of ſtrength
then others, & when their time of laboure, or chyldebirth cōmeth, they become
for a tyme vnweildy and weake, tyll they haue wt good Cawdels, & nouriſhments,
recouered their former ſtrengthe agayne.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=76) Euen ſo
trees whyle they burgeyn and beare leaues, and afterwards while they nouriſhe
their fruites yet vnrype, are of leſſe ſtrength and force: but whē in Autumne
their fruites or beries are ſhaken of, and that their leaues doe fall, the
rootes do take agayne vnto them all their whole ſappe, and ſtrength, and ſo
are reſtored vnto their former perfect ſoliditie.

Thales Mileſius preferred water as the principall and chiefeſt of al other
elements: for mans nature can eaſ [...]yer beare wt the want of any thing,
thē of water: for admit y• Water. corne fayl & be not to be had, yet ye
profitable encreaſe▪ cō ­ming of young ſetts, and trees, may ſupplie &
adminiſter ſufficient prouiſion wherwith to ſuſtayn lyfe. We may defende lyfe
with fleſhe, by hauking, by fiſhing, with her­bes and rootes: but where water
is wantinge, there can no foode neyther bee had nor preſerued, fitte for
mannes ſuſtentacion: and therfore we accompte that country al­together
vnhappye, whiche eyther lacketh water, or hath water vnholſome and corrupt.

Moreouer it was a manner among the Egiptians, and of thē very ſtreitely for a
long tyme obſerued, that beforeCeremoniall cuſtome of the Egiptians tou­chinge
vvater. all the houſes and temples of their goddes, there ſhoulde be ſet a
potte with water, to thende that they that wente into the Temples might
therewith be ſprinckled, and fal­ling down to the ground with their hands
(lift vp to hea­uen) might geue thankes vnto the maieſtye of God, who had
boūtifully bleſſed & relieued them with moſt holſom water. And furthermore
wee reade of certayn countries by meanes of waters onely ennobled and made
famous, as the mountayne Thiliadus amongſt the Moloſſians, whi­ch Theopompus
extolleth, and ſayth, had an hundred brid­ges.Countries fa­mous through
vvaters. Magneſia is coumpted far more famous, by reaſon of the excellency of
a Well, which the Poets do there te­ſtifye to be dedicated vnto the Muſes,
becauſe whoſoeuer dranke out of y• ſame, became therby ſwete breaſted &
clearer to ſinge. Neyther is it to be mernayled at foraſmuch [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=76) there be founde
innumerable vertues of waters, partelye by apparaunt, & partely by ſecrete &
obſcure reaſon: Of the Sringe in Arcady, whiche the Inhabitauntes called
Clitorius, which maketh ſuch as taſte of the Liquor ther­of, ſtraightways to
abhorre al drinking of wine, foreuer.

Uitruuius ſaythe that there is a Well in Paphlagonia, whiche ſemeth as though
it were myxt wt wyne, inſomuch that they which drinke therof are made dronke:
The lykeSpringes of vvonderfull qualities. Nature and qualitie the ryuer
Liceſius in Thracia, is re­ported to haue, on the banckes whereof manye tymes
the traueylers and wayfaring perſons are found dronken, & ſleepinge. The citty
of Epheſus alſo hath Springes, not farre from it, the waters wherof ſeeme
mingled with vy­negar, and therfore are moſt acceptable vnto ſicke perſōs.
And Strabo the Geographer, wryteth that there is a wa­ter at Hieropolis, ſo
apt for dyinge of Wolle, that if y• roo­tes of herbs be ſtieped & mixed
therein, it maketh as Ori­ent & gorious a colour, as if it were Scarlet, or
purple.

There bee alſo whiche wryte that at Tharſis, a Cyttye in Cicilia, is a Ryuer
called Cydnus, where perſonsBathes. that are bathed, and a certayne tyme
waſhed, are eaſed of the goute. Moreouer Pomponius in his Coſmographye
wryteth, that one of the two Iſlandes called Fortunate, is notable and famous
throughe ye ſinguler vertue of two ſeueral ſprings, of whom who ſo taſteth of
the one, cānot but laughe continuallye, and the onely remedy for theym that
bee in that caſe, is to drincke of the other. There is alſo another Springe at
Suſis, in the countrey of Perſia, whiche looſeth, and ſhaketh out the teeth of
thoſe yt drinke therof: but to ſuch perſōs as do waſhe thēſelues therwith it
is moſt holſome: And ſo they ſaye there is a Lake in Aſſyria, neare vnto the
which groweth a ſlimye, glewiſhe, and bytuminous pytch [...] earthe, of the
ſame quality: wher­upon if a birde light, ſhee is ſtreightwaye lymed and tyed
faſt, from flyinge any furder. This kynde of Lyquor if it once be ſet on fier,
can neuer be extinguiſhed, nor quēched
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=77) but onely by
throwing duſt therevppon.

A [...]l whot waters haue a medicinable force and vertue aboue other waters,
although they be of their proper na­ture cold: but becauſe they do flow or
haue courſe throu­gheHoate vvater. the hoate and ardent vaynes of the Earth,
therfore they come for the warme, which notwithſtanding, cannot long remayn
ſo, but be in ſhort ſpace cooled: for if by Na­ture they had heate in them,
they wold not ſo ſone become colde.

And ſurely vnto me it ſemeth a thing wonderfull, that there are waters
ordayned by the prouidence of god, me­dicinable, and able to cure all diſeaſes
incident vnto mor­tall men, which do not in their curing, vexe the diſeaſed
perſons with ſly [...]er ſauces, Receipts, druggs, and bitter dilutions,
neyther torment them, with fyre or toole: but with a moſt ſweete bathe &
waſhing, do reſtore them into their priſtinate health. Neyther haue y•
Springs, whiche ryſe from ſulphereous or brimſtony ſoyle, theſe vertues only:
but thoſe Springs alſo, wt paſſe & haue their courſe through allomye ſoyle,
which doth cure the laſke, & reſo­lucion of y• ſinewes: they are very good alſ
for them that haue yll digeſtiō, and yll ſtomackes: Finally they do per­forme
that thing which Aſclepiades ſaid, was the office of a right good phiſician:
y• is to ſay, to cure ſafely, ſpedely & pleaſantly: & bituminous waters alſo
haue their vertues: which rather by drincking, thē by bathing, do helpe y•
diſ­eaſed perſōs, for they do make the belly ſoluble, wtout any payne or
griefe, & do cure almoſt all the inward diſeaſes of the body by purgation: &
ſometime the paynfull wrin­ginge of the intrayles and guttes, when they be ex
[...]lcera­ted, & whē that excoriacion or bloudynes floweth frō thē, are
herby reſtored vnto their former health. There is al­ſo a Nitrous kinde of
colde water, the drinking whereof doth purge, & diminiſheal vnnatural acceſſes
of the body & ſpecially the humours or ſwelling of the throate, or the kinges
euill: ſuch allomy, & ſaltiſh nitrous Springs yeld forth for the moſt part an
euill ſmell & reliſh: for their ori [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=77) ginall, being
from the very loweſt partes of the earth, do paſſe through, the boate ardent
haynes of the ſame.

Thoſe that haue written of huſbandry, do ſay that eue­rye kinde of pulſe,
being caſt into water, and ſet vppon the fier, doth trye the ſame water very
well, they be quickly & ſpeedely boyled. Certayn of the auncient Phiſicians
affirmed that kind of water to be beſt, which is lighteſt, or els y• which
being ſet on the fyre, will ſooneſt be boate, ſo that it be cleane and pure, &
vnmoſſye. Al water that is fetchte frō the mooriſh or fenny groūds, is
vnholſome, & ſo is al y• doth not runne, but ſtandeth ſtil, or els y• whiche
runneth through ſhaddowye places, and darcke canes, where the Sonne geeueth no
ſhyne: but worſt of all is ſnowe dryce water, as certayne auncient wrytens,
haue holden opiniō. Cornelius Colſus doth thus wryte of waters: Rayn water is
the lighteſt water y• is: next is Spring or Wel water,What kindes of vvaters
bee beſt. then ryuer water, and laſte of all is pytte water, then de­ſcribeth
hee ſnow or yce water, and that ſtandinge water is heauye, but the heauieſt of
all others (ſayth hee) is that which is taken out of a mooriſh or fenny
ground. He that throughlye conſidereth the nature of theſe thinges, wyll
wyllingly prouide holeſome liquor for the vſe of himſelfe, and his fellowe
Cittizens.

The beſt ſituacion for a City is y• which is not farre di­ſtant frō the ſea,
or frō ſom great & nauigable riuer, throughe which may be tranſported &
caryed out thoſe things, wherof we haue to great ſtore, and ſuch thinges may
bee brought vnto vs, wherof wee ſtand in neede. Surelye the mouthes or entries
of ryuers, haue great oportu [...]ye  [...] their flowings & pleaſant tydes,
do not only enere [...] pleaſure, & becom moſt holſom for all cattle, ſithēs
they may goe eaſly, without any courſing, & vebemēt reſiſtāce▪  [...] water,
but alſo do make the fields & paſtures therūt [...] ad­ioyning more rancke
and fruictfull. There is great diuer­ſitie in ryuers, & euery of thē hath not
cōmodity alyke: for y• riuer Nilus is coūpted y• moſt fertile & fruitfulleſt
riuer of al others, it floweth through Egipt, wt great fertilitye: for when it
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=78) [...]o hath
ouer flowe [...] the whole Lande all y• Somer tyme, it goeth backe agayne into
his Chanell, and leaueth the fieldes fatted wit [...]m [...]dd [...] ▪ and
very fruitefull for any til­lage, inſoma [...]h that the inhabitauntes there
haue ſcarce­lye any neede of the labour of Oxen, or of the helpe of anye huſ
[...]ā  [...]men, to manure the ſame any further, then only to caſt th
[...]ir ſee [...]e theruppon. And this do I iudge, is to be attributed vnto
Nature her ſelfe, the beſt Parente of all thinges: For ſithens Egipt was
deſtitute of  [...]eawe, and rayne, Nature in ſupplie thereof gaue thereunto
this ry­uer, whiche ſhould bee able to geeue nouriſhmeutes vnto Corne and
Plantes. For the deuine prouidence of God, hath appointed innumerable courſes
of riuers, for the vti­litye of the Lande, and Soyle, through which their
courſe lyeth: becauſe no countrye ſhoulde be altogether without the helpe and
furtherance of nature. For the increaſe of ye ryuer Nilus, doth greately
benefite and helpe that coun­trey, becauſe through the great ouerflowing
therof, many hurtfull beaſtes breeding there, are thereby diſpatched &
drowned, except they ſpedely flye for refuge vnto y• higher places: vnto
whiche Countrye alone, theſe profites and commodities are incident, that it
neyther hath any clou­des, nor cold windes, or any thicke exhalacions: the
water thereof is very ſweete, inſomuche that the Inhabitantes there, can
eaſely lyue without wyne, and can drincke the ſame water with great pleaſure.

I ſuppoſe the vicinitie or nearenes of the Sea maketh much better for the
preſeruation and ſafe keeping of a cit­tye,Nearenes of the Sea vnto a Cittie
cōmodious. both for the vſe of ciuil lyfe, and alſo for the gathering
together of ryches, wherewith citties are merueylouſ [...]ye en [...]eaſed:
but thoſe Citties are farre more harder to bee beſieged, which the Sea waſheth
vpon, ſeeing that to the ſiege and expugnacion thereof, is required not onelye
a greate power by Sea, but alſo a greate Armie by land. Wherof i [...] the one
be wanting, the Citizens maye eaſelye ou [...]come the other hoaſte, when as
it ſhalbe harde for y• [[Page
70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=78) armie by lande
to ſende any ſuccoure, vnto the Nauye by Sea: on the other parte, the
multitude or companye of ſea Souldiers may eaſely be profligated, and
vanquiſhed by horſemen. Therfore conuenient and oportune hauens, muſt bee
carefully, and wyſely choſen out, by all thē that would found and ſtabliſhe a
Cittye.

Small fieldes and little Arable groundes, eaſely bringeth dearth of Corne,
which ſurely is the cauſe that thy­ther is ſmall recourſe of people: for
people pynched with penury, and famine, be afrayde to mary, neyther
deſirethPenurye. to haue anye chyldren, wherefore in ſuch a coūtry they do
nothing encreaſe: yea rather the poorer ſort, hauing re­ſpect to their
needines & famine, doe forſake their coun­trye, and ſeeke to plant themſelues
in ſome pleaſaunt and fruitfuller ſoyle elſwhere, eſpecially if their own
coūtry, be ſo ſtreite & narow, that it be not able to feede cattle: for next
vnto corne, cattle whiche greately encreaſeth fleſhe, Mylke, and Cheeſe, doe
beſt nouriſhe. As for fiſhing mee thinckes is not greatly to bee wiſhed for,
partely becauſe that fiſhes doe geeue yll nouriſhement to the bodye,
andFyſhinge. agayne do make mennes bodyes weake and ſickelye, whi­che thing I
maye proue by Homers teſtimony, who neuer made his warriours, and Souldiers,
which encamped by the Sea ſhore, to taſte or feede vpon fiſhe at any tyme: and
agayne becauſe, I doe alwayes ſee the Fyſher­man to be chillinge colde, bare
and needye.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=79)

## 8\. THE VIII. BOOKE, DIS­courſinge of Buyldings, VValles, Gates, Caſtles,
Fortreſſes, Garriſons, Lybraries, Churches, & other Monu­mentes of a Cittye.

AUngells whiche from the very natiuitie and birthe are ap­poynted vnto all
men, are called the meſſengers of truth, which do ſome­time forſhew & tell
vnto holy & inno­cent men, eyther ſleeping or waking, ſuch predictions &
happes of thinges to come, as by euent after wardes are founde true.

A place that ſtandeth high, or which hath readye wyn­dinges & turninges, or
which ſtandeth eyther vppon the Sea, or ſome great ryuer, needeth farre leſſe
laboure and coſt: for where as the place is well defended by the natu­rall
ſituatiō of it ſelfe, it nedeth the leſſe walles: but plain countries or
places not highe, muſte be ſuccoured, & hel­ped with labour, and charges
otherwiſe for defence. Re­garde alſo muſt be had of the height, and thicknes
of the walles: for when the walles be very highe, they are
eaſlyFortifications. ſhaken, & battred down with engins and Gonnes: agayn
where they are too low, they are eaſely conquered, & ſka­led by the enemie
with ropes, & ſkaling ladders. Forty or fyftye cubites high is of many cunning
Architects, & ſkil­full fortifiers allowed: in the toppe wherof, that thicknes
is ſayd to be ſufficient, whiche maye ſerue for two armed ſouldiers to go ſide
by ſide, without hindring, one thother in meetinge,

Moreouer alſo there muſt be had very diligent conſideration of the Gates of a
citty, for by meanes therof it chā ­ceth ſometimes, y• by ſodeyn vprores ye
townes be taken, & ſacked, or when the townſmen, & citizens returne or flye,
the enemies being mingled among thē maye ſurpriſe the Gates.

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=79)As Romulus
at one incurſion inuaded and tooke ye City of the Fidenatians, for hee was
purpoſed after that he had ſpoyled their fieldes, to harrye the countrye,
dryue awaye his pray, & ſo to haue diſcamped wt his hoaſt: but whē the
Fidenatiās iſſued out of theyr city, there was betwene thē a ſkirmiſhe,
wherin they being weaker were diſcomfited & put to flyght. And therupon
Romulus purſuing and chaſing them, ruſhed into the citty together with theim
that fled, as if they had bene al of one company: & ſo wan ye city which he
planted with Romaynes, & brought vnder hys owne ſubiection: Regarde therfore
muſt be had, that the wayes of the Gates be not direct or ſtreight &
forthright, but turning & wynding many ways to deceiue ye enemies.

There hath bene no ſmall diſputation amongeſt theim which haue wryttē of
ciuil ſociety, whether any tower orCaſtles in cit­ties. Caſtle, be fitly to be
placed in a free citty, in which thinge this is to be conſidered, whether it
do more good or euill, amongſt free cittizens, to haue a ſtrong Fort cōmitted
to the credite, and keeping of a fewe: And if we wyll truelye iudge of and
throughly reuolue the monumentes of olde hiſtories, wee ſhall fynde, that
mocōmon weales, & eſtates haue bene ſubuerted, & ouerthrowne, by negligence &
tre­chery of them y• haue bene the rulers, & captaynes therof, thē haue bene
preſerued: & yet notwtitſtāding, Rome was takē, & fired by the Frēchmen,
but by y• defēce of the Ca­pitoll was in parte ſaued, and at length wt golde
boughte peace. But Ariſtotle affirmeth, yt a caſtle is vnto a good cōmon
wealth, vnprofitable & daungerous: & yt it geueth oportunitie vnto Tyranny,
who doubteth▪ Tymotheus that notable Oratour of Corynth playnly affirmed that,
y• citye which is kept by the garriſō of a caſtle, cannot light­lye be
without tyranny.

Pyrrhus kinge of Epyrotes on a tyme came to Athens, & was with curteous
hoſpitalitie of the citizens receyued: he after viewe taken of that cittye,
aboūdinge wyth exce­dinge greate ryches, and whiche was the mother of all
laudable Artes and Diſciplines, was broughte into the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=80) caſtle of
Pallas, & there did his ſolempnities with deuoute reuerence, beholding with
greate admiracion the Caſtle how ſtronge & impregnable it was both by naturall
ſci­tuaciō, & alſo by artificial fortification: at length whē he was ready
to depart, and was now come into the market place, hee rendred greate thankes
vnto the Rulers of the Cittye, which accompanied him, for the confidence &
fide­litie, which they repoſed in him: & finally warned theym that they
ſhoulde neuer thence foorthe, geeue libertye and leaue to any king to enter
into their caſtle, leaſt after ſuch entraunce and view, ſome peraduenture
vſinge that good oportunitie and holde, ſhould take the vauntage, and ther
upon inuade their cittie: This counſell was very well ly­ked of the Athenians,
as they whiche well knewe, howe daungerous a thinge it was for Cittizens to
ſuffer, ſtoute and valiaunt men to enter into their chiefe fortreſſe: and ſo
from thence forwardes, they kepte the Gates thereof more diligently.

Priuate houſes are to bee builte, if it may be along the highe ſtreetes, on a
rowe, and of lyke proportion and ma­kinge:Order of buylding priuate houſes for
ſo they beautifie and adorne the cittie. Neither let them buylde any thinge
too much outward, thereby to hinder any highe wayes: for wee muſt ſo liue,
that a pry­uate houſe muſt be deſcribed to ſerue the vſe and comme­ditye of
the whole familye. Neyther let any vacant or vnprofitable place be therein,
and ſo the very view & ſighte thereof, ſhall bringe the more ornament
thereunto: for as Cicero ſayth: The gorgeouſneſſe of a mannes houſe
aug­menteth the dignitye of the perſon dwelling in ye ſame.

And I iudge the couetouſnes of theym to be worthye of greate reprehenſion, who
flowinge and aboundinge inComely buyl­ding in a cittye greate wealth and
ryches, neuer beſtow any coſte in buil­dinge, becauſe they wolde ſpare their
mony, and fill their Cheſtes for their poſterity: wheras if our Aunceſtors had
folowed any ſuch order, wee ſhould vntill this day in our Citties haue had
ſheperdlye cabins, & ruſticall Cotages.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=80)A Lybrary
ought to be erected in ſome holſome & quy­et place, neyther ought we to ſuffer
our Cittizens to beeLibraries. defrauded and diſappointed of ſuche benefite:
for if places of exerciſe which make for the health of mens bodyes, be in many
citties with ſuch carefulneſſe and coſte erected & appointed, how muche more
ought a Lybrarye to be fur­niſhed and ſet forth, which is the foode of a wel
nurtured mynde, and the exerciſe of a freee or well inclined nature. And if
they that got the mayſteries or priſes in games, de­ſerued great honours
(inſomuch that ſtanding in the companie, they were crowned with the garlande &
crowne of Uictorye, and at their returne into their owne countrye, were like
triumphant victers, caryed in chayres or Wa­gons, & were alſo demed worthy to
be maynteyned wyth meat, drinke, & apparell, at the publique charges of ye
cy­ties perpetually) howe much more are excellent learned men to bee had in
eſtimacion, which do further and helpe the common weale aſwell in diſcipline
and manners, as alſo in their wrytinges, by committinge all thinges vnto
memory, which in tyme to come, maye profite their poſte­ritie▪

Let ſuch a place bee choſen for a Lybrarye, whoſe pro­ſpect may be Eaſtwarde,
for the eyeſight requireth mor­ning light: for if it ſhould eyther haue
proſpect ſouthward or weſtwarde, the wyndes blowinge from thence, woulde with
their moyſte heate, and warmeneſſe, corrupte vo­lumes, and engender Moothes,
whiche conſume, and eate Bookes. Lette the walles within the ſame bee
handſomely poliſhed and trymmed, & let them be ſet oute and beautified with
greene colour, for all greene thinges are good for the eyes, and make the
ſighte thereof ſharpe, and quicke.

Ptolomeus king of Egipt is highly commended, who fi­niſhedThe Lybrarye of
Ptolomeus had 40000 volumes. and furniſhed a Lybrary at Alexandria, to his
ine­ſtimable charges and induſtrye, in which librarye, there were forty
thouſād volumes: al which bookes, were de­ſtroyed
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=81) ſtroyed by
caſualtye of fyre in the battle that Caeſar had a­gaynſt Achiles lieutenaunt
of the kinges warres: for whē as the kinges Nauy beinge by chaunce
withdrawen, was commaunded to bee fyred and burned: the flame thereof catched
into a part of the cittye, and ragingly burnt all y• houſes wherein the bookes
were layde. In whiche fire good learning and diſciplines doubtles had a
miſerable & lamentable wracke. For the wryters of all Nacions and countryes
did earneſtly endeuour and ſtryue to conueygh their bokes thither, as it had
bene into a Theatre & Man­ſion of wiſdome and learning: of which librarye, if
ſo mu­che as the ſteps were extant, they ſhould ſurely eaſe vs of greate
labours and traueyles, and with the lighte of An­tiquity, would clarifye and
lighten the obſcure darcknes of lettres and diſciplines.

We muſt alſo with greate regarde foreſee, that ſacred houſes or churches be
edified and buylded, in  [...]itte, & opor­tuneChurches. places of the citty,
wherin we muſt firſt and chieflye conſider this, that of churches and temples,
ſome be made for the moſt commodity of the citizens, ſome for the vſe of them
that forſaking the world, geue themſelues onely to contemplacion, which houſes
would be in ſome out Cor­ner or ſolitary place, where they may not be
interrupted and troubled with the buſie tatlinge and ciuile tumulte, of the
multitude, & therfore muſt be ſet out of ye cōpany & reſort of men, and out
of the ſight of priuate houſes: and either be buylt in the territories, or els
without the wals of the citye. But thoſe that are ordayned for the publique
vtility of the Citizens, oughte to bee ſcituated in a fayre rowme & place,
eyther in the harte of the Cittye, or in the places that be beſt inhabited and
peopled, to thintente the citizens may conuenientlye thither repayre daylye
wyth their wyues and children: but thoſe churches which theyCathedrall
churches. call Cathedrall churches, wherof the biſhopp of the Sea hath the
rule and aucthority, all Architectes thinck moſt expedient to be buylded vpon
an high ground in the midſt [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=81) of the cittye,
that out of it the greateſt part of the walles of the cittye may be viewed
euery where round about: for within the guarde and protection therof, the
whole cittye, ſeemeth to conſiſt, and thither vppon holye dayes all men flocke
together as it were vnto a ſpectacle of deuine and ſpeciall matters. As for
places in the churches and hou­ſes of prayer or preachinge, where deuine
miſteries are to bee celebrated, let them be ordayned, ſo farre as may bee,
beſt for the miniſters and congregation: and if it may cō ­ueniently,
Eaſtwarde: but if the nature of the place wyl not ſo ſuffer it, let it be ſo
and in ſuch ſort, that it may ſtād in the full fight of the greater part of
the churche, wherin if they take aduiſe of the ſkilful Architectes to ouerſee
the workemanſhippe, they ſhall buylde all thinges commodi­ouſlye, and
orderlye: neyther ſhall they greatlye ſtande in nede of any my wryting or
preceptes thereto, ſithens the deuiſe and reaſon of buyldinge requireth rather
a liuelye inſtructor, then a dead directer: moreouer yt is true, why­che as a
common prouerbe is wont to bee ſpoken, that an vnſkilful maiſter or owner, cā
a great deale better builde in his owne court, or vpon his owne grounde, then
a moſt learned & ſkilful worckmaiſter in an­other. For mans diligence & long
cōſi­deratiō of y• owner or maſter, ſurpaſ­ſeth the deuiſe and ſkill of the
Artificer.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=82)

## 9\. THE NINTHE BOOKE entreating of warres, and Martiall diſcipline, Of
Municions, Ordenaunce, Artillerie, Victuals, Muſ­ters, Lieutenantes,
Generalles, Captaynes and Souldiers: Of peace and Warre with the circūſtances
therof.

THere is nothinge vnto mannes nature better then to be wyllinge, neyther any
thing greater, thē to be able to benefite and helpe many▪ But foraſmuch as ye
ſeueral wealth of many perſons particulerly is but ſlēder and ſmall, y•
although they would neuer ſo gladly, yet can they not extend liberalitye and
requitall towards them that well deſerue: Onely kinges and princes may be
liberall, bountiful & nobly mynded.

Chilo the Lacedemonian, who was one of the ſeauen wyſe Sages of Greece was
abundantly enriched, in a maner with all kindes of vertues, yet in nothing
more, then in beneficence and liberality: & therfore when as he was come to
extreeme olde age, oftentimes (as it were reioy­cingly)Liberalitie in
Captaines and Generalles moſt cōmendable & expedi­ent. he was wont to ſay, yt
in all his lyfe tyme, he dyd neuer any thing ingratefully: No vertue doth more
cō ­mende and adorne Capitaines, Generalles, and Gouer­nours of Armies, then
Liberalitie, whereby they keepe their Souldiers conſtant and obedient in
perfourminge their dueties, and alſo thereby allure and winne their ve­ry
enemies vnto them, throughe hope of Benignitye, and franckneſſe.

The firſt onſet and claſping together of the Armies in fighte, is alwayes
coumpted daungerous, and difficulte: for true is that ſentence of Scipio: That
there appeareth greater courage and hautines in him that inferreth peril
[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=82) and
aduentureth to geeue the onſet, then is in him that re­defendeth: But after
that open warre be denounced, and that euery man prepareth home warde out of
his fieldes, to ſticke to his ſafety, and to ſtand circumſpectly vpon hisThe
firſt onſet in battell moſt daungerous. garde: then they come together in
their warlike order, & then they appoint their ſcoutes, and marſhall their
ſoul­diers, euery man taketh ſtomacke and courage vnto him: he beholdeth and
ſeeth his enemie, neyther thincketh he it good and conuenient to bicker
diſorderly, and Skirmiſh­inglye, but orderlye and in good arraye: and then
thoſe matters whiche feare ymagined to be daungerous, reaſon doth teache to
bee farre leſſe, and not ſo muche to be doubted: then euerye man determineth
withe himſelfe what is nedefull to bee done, neyther bee they taken
vn­prouided, nor rceiue the foyle at their enemies hands, but are euery daye
more and more emboldened and encoura­ged, and by theſe meanes they commonly
carry away the victorye, which were prouoked with iniurye afore: & thus do
they many tymes reuenge themſelues vpon their ene­mies, and deliuer their
countrye from all thraldome and Bondage.

But the order of waging battle is farre more ſtreite, and needeth deeper
councell: Neyther is it ynough for vsWaginge bat­tell. to conſider that wee
goe to fight in a righteous quarell, & for iuſtlye demaūding our own right: &
yt for good cau­ſes warre may well be waged and proclaymed: But we muſt alſo
conſider what our power is, & of what power & ſtrength, our aduerſaries and
enemies are, what manner of Souldiers we haue, what partakers & confederates,
what tributaries we haue, and howe they bee affected to­wardes vs: to what
ſumme our cōmon ſtocke or treaſury amounteth to: for it is a thing odious and
hatefull, to le­uie tribute vppon priuate perſons, and is a thing that ve­rye
ſoone breedeth and getteth the enuie of the citizens. Wee muſt alſo conſider
how ſtrong, how well fortified, & how wel victualled the ritty is, with what
garriſons the
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=83) townes and
Caſtles within our Iuriſdiction, be maynteyned and kepte, and what ſtore of
municion and ordinaūce we haue in our armary: theſe & many ſuch like, are
before hād to be perpēded & waighed, & which are thē chiefly ac­knowledged
and beſt knowen, when the gates of the cy­tye being ſhutte, the enemie is kept
out, and driuen backe from the walles with ſlynges, arrowes, and gonſhot.

Aduiſe, valiauntnes, and knowledge in matiall mat­ters, bee of greate force
and do much good in warres: butAſſured peace better then cō ­queſt hoped for.
fortune, chiefly excelleth al the reſt, wherfore that ſentēce of Hannibal
vnto Scipio is true, where he ſaythe: that the euentes of thinges neuer leſſe
agree and fall oute, accor­ding to our purpoſes then in warre: and therfore an
aſſu­red peace is better and ſafer, then a victorye, which we do but hope for:
alſo wee muſt yelde ſomewhat vnto ye mul­titude and vulgar ſorte, whoſe
credence always hangeth vppon fortune, and many tymes folow the myndes of men
mingled and gathered together, out of ſundry countryes, whome no zealous
pietye or affection towards their coū ­try, no feare of god nor religiō
kepeth in awe, but are on­ly there to allured wt hyre, & ſtipendary wages.

All conſultation of warres to be made vpon others, al­though it be good for
many purpoſes, yet in a free Cittye it is daungerous: for when the matter is
referred to the Senate, they do not all agree in one opinion, ſome follow the
truth, & ſome frame thēſelues according to thopinion of the cōmon people, &
bee people pleaſers, aduaūcinge & ſetting foreward ye ſide, which the vulgar
ſort beſt allow­eth, & therfore the moſt part are deceiued: for there is
no­thinge amongſt mortall men ſo vnſtable & waueringe, as the mindes, willes,
& opiniōs of the citizēs, which not on­ly being diſalowed of (as Cicero
ſayth) are angry or gre­ued, but alſo oftentimes do repine & grudge at
thinges, yt be wel done & by right & equity: therfore a wiſe man wyll
aduiſedly deliberate, & conſider ech circūſtance, before he abſolutely geue
his conſent, to thenterpriſing of making [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=83) warres, leaſt
that he lay ſuch a burden vpon his ſhoulders vnder which he may fall downe.

Labienus a man fortunate, and ryche, who of his owne proper coſtes and charges
builded out of the ground, the town called Cingulum in Pice [...], tooke part
too earneſtlye wt Pompeius, wherfore he could not hope for any fauour or
pardon at ye victors hands, although (in deede) moſt mer­ciful. For whēther
was an emparle & treaty of peace be­twene the Souldiers of Caeſar, & the
ſouldiers of Pompei, this Labienus with a loud voyce, exclaymed & cryed oute
ſaying: Sirs, leaue of to make any further taulke of in­treaty for peace: for
except you firſt haue Caeſars head frō his ſhoulders, there can be no peace
at all amongeſt you.

Nothing can be more daungerous in a free citty, then for a man to promiſe that
he will be the aucthour & ryng­leader of warres, which thing ſurely euen they
in mine o­pinion ſeeme to doe, which openly in the counſel chamber auerre yt
warres are expedient to be taken in hand. Solon Aucthors of Warres. was
accoumpted a very wyſeman, yet be (becauſe he wold not frely geue ſentēce, yt
it was requiſite to make warres againg the Megarians, for the recouery of
Salamine, ſodē ­lye fayned himſelfe madde, and beinge diſguiſed in appa­rel
like a fole, prouoked the Athenians to fyght. When ye matter fell out well,
and that they had wonne Salamyne, they al cōmended & wel allowed of his
coūſell, & deuiſe in yt behalfe: Now Solon al this while, vnder ye ſhield of
fayned madneſſe ſhrowded himſelfe, that if the matter ſhould not haue come to
paſſe as he before had told them, and as hee would haue it, yet therby hee
myght purchaſe pardon for his wordes and deedes.

It is oftentimes called in queſtion, whether it be goodWarring for enlarging
Em­pyres. to make warres, for y• encreaſe & propagation of dominiō &
Lordſhippe, when any occaſion of conqueſt is offered: or elles whether, it bee
better to bee quiet, and to lyue in peace: many argumentes may be brought and
alleadged on both partes.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=84) But we
rather encline vnto peace.

Glorious truelye is Martiall dealinges, and I cannot tell whether there bee
any thing more noble: and no mā can denye but all greate dominions and noble
EmpiresPrayſe of War fare. haue bene purchaſed and gottē by the attempt of
warrs. Without all doubte the renoume and names of all moſte noble and
flouriſhing citties, ſhould for the moſte part bee buryed in darcknes, were
they not made famous by mar­tiallRome and A­thens. feates: Neyther hath the
Citty of Athens attayned ſo great fame or renowme, which hath merited to haue
ye name of the mother of all Artes & diſciplines, as Rome hath done: which was
in tymes paſſed, the Imperial ſeate of the whole vniuerſall worlde, althoughe
neyther of the twayne woulde ſeeme to lacke the others prayſe and
com­mendation. For Rome it ſelfe excelled in the ſtudies of all good Artes and
Sciences, and Athens lacked the glorye of warfare: for eyther of theſe Citties
bare greate Reue­rence vnto the ſtudies both of warre, and peace, and hono­red
Minerua both armed and vnarmed: but we (as I ſaid before) do rather commend
peace, & do eſpecially deſire toPeace better then Warre. inſtruct our citizens
in the ſame, becauſe it leadeth more ſafelye and ſurelye vnto the tranquillity
of mynde: And therfore lyuing content with the territories and coūtries which
we already enioy, let vs not enter into any warres but onely ſuch as is
neceſſarye, or if at any tyme we do en­ter into the ſame, let vs as ſpedely as
wee can, ſeeke ſome way to brydle and qualefye our deſires: which thing euen
armed Hanniball ſeemeth to ratify, when as he ſayd vnto Scipio in this maner:
It had bene very good if the Gods had geeuen that mynde vnto oure
predeceſſors, that you might bee contented with thempires of Italy, and wee of
Afrique.

Uayne glory and vayne deſire of ſoueraignitie, manye tymes ſo enflameth men,
that they be contented wyth noVayne glorye, and ambition. territories or
boundes, neyther take they any felicitye in peace.

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=84) Curtius
wryteth that them baſſadours of Scythia ſpake theſe wordes vnto king
Alexander: If the Goddes hadVayne glorye and ambition noted in Alexander.
geeuen vnto the a body, agreeable to the great greedines and ambition of thy
myude, the whole world it ſelfe wold not ſuffice to conteyn thee, thou wouldſt
with the one hād touch the Eaſt, and with ye other, the Weſt: and hauinge
obtayned all this, thou woldſt yet moreouer know where and in what place, the
renoume of ſuch a ſtately maieſtye ſhould be enthronized, & thus deſireſt thou
ye thing, which thou canſt not comprehend: From Europa thou trauey­leſt into
Aſia, and out of Aſia agayne into Europa, finally if thou get the vpper hand,
and ouercome all humane cre­atures, and men lyuing, then wilt thou make warres
wt wooddes, cloudes, ryuers, wylde beaſtes, and dumbe cre­atures: what
thinkeſt thou? doeſt thou not know yt greate trees do grow long tyme, and yet
in one howre ſpace they are pluckt vp by the rootes? Hee is a foole that
looketh after the fruites of them, and meaſureth not the height of the tree,
wherof they grow: take heede leaſt whileſt thou ſtryueſt to come to the toppe
of the Tree, thou fall to the ground with the ſame boughes, whiche thou layeſt
holde vpon.

Oh miſerable ſtate and condicion of man. Oh deceiue­able expectatiō, which
mortal natures haue in this world Why are we ſeduced and caryed away with ſuch
greedye ambitiō, ſythens wee euidently ſee that all our goodes, & whatſoeuer
worldly benefites els which we poſſeſſe & en­ioy, are mutable, trāſitory &
frayle, and yt nothing is to be deſyred ſauinge onely vertue.

What do the ſubuerſions of Citties gottē by conqueſt, or otherwiſe auayle?
what do whole Empyres themſelues profite vs? but that onelie when wee enioy
them, wee doe alwayes lyue carcking and carefull? For true is that ſen­tence
of Iulianus Caeſar, who at the beginning of his raign being troubled with
tumultuous ruflyng in France, ſaid: That hee had gotten nothinge by being
Emperoure, but
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=85) onely that
hee lyued thereby, euer buſie and occupied.

If we take in hande any warres, wee muſte firſte fore­thincke whome we may
auctoryze, & make the chiefe Ge­neralleGouernours, & generalles in [...]
Warres. and Capitayne: for if wee will iudge arighte in this behalfe, truly
there can bee nothing found more rare or difficulte, then a good Generall &
Capitayne.

Philip king of Macedony ſayd that he meruayled why the Athenians did euery
yeare choſe new Generalles, and Captaynes of their warres, ſithens he in all
his lyfe time had founde but one good Capitayne, namely Parmenio.

Cicero ſuppoſeth that fower thinges oughte to bee in aFovver ſpeciall thinges
requi­ſite in a chief­tayne. chieftayn or gouernour of warres: y• is to ſay,
knowledge or ſkyll in Martiall matters: Ualiaunce: Aucthoritye: & felicitie:
and vnto theſe he addeth further: Uertues (ſaith hee) appertayning vnto a
Generall or chiefe Capitayne, are Trauell & Labour, Fortitude, and Courage in
daun­gers, induſtry in his dealinges, quicke diſpatche in brin­ginge things to
paſſe, and aduiſement in forecaſting wyth prouidence, which way to worke his
matters.

All men knowe that Fortune lyeth not in oure power but is to be craued by
prayer, at the handes of God: but vertue and wyſedome, ought we to haue at our
ſelues.

Cambyſes (as Xenophon reporteth) aduertiſed his ſonne Cyrus, that Captaynes of
warres ouer and aboue alother ſouldiers, ſhoulde enure thēſelues to abyde
heate & drou­ghte, and in wynter the ſtormes and cold: & to be always at one
ende in all laboures and daungerous aduentures: for aſmuche as the trauelles
are not ſo greuous vnto the Captayne, as to the common ſouldier: for hee that
is a Chiefetain or Generall, ought to meaſure and by due cō ­ſideration to
weighe in his mynde, that fame and commē ­dation in doing of exploytes, doth
very much appertayne vnto him.

And it is expedienc for him that hath the Gouernmēt of an armed hoaſte, to
enure young men to exerciſe, ſome times to goe aboute the watches: to ſee his
ſouldiers vic­tualled: [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=85) to ſee the Corne
tryed: to puniſh fraude & deceipt in y• meaſure therof,  [...]o puniſh
faultes, to be alwayes pre­ſent at the beginning: to heare y• complaintes of
his ſoul­diers: and to ſee the ſicke and diſeaſed to bee looked & pre­uided
for. There are alſo other vertues almoſte innume­rable, appertayning to a
Generall, mētioned by ſuch per­ſons as haue wrytten of war like affayres.

Souldiers that tranſgres or make offences, are to be puniſhed, and with feare
of the lawes to be reſtrayned: as thoſe which ſkatter and wander abroade at
randon from the Campe, and ſo come agayne to their tentes, and ſuchSouldiers
offē dinge hovv to be puniſhed. as gyue the ſlyppe and goe their wayes,
raūging abroade a long while, and afterward are brought agayn: For as y•
ſouldier which firſt fleeth is to bee executed & put to death for example of
the reſte: ſo likewiſe is hee to bee puniſhed which ſhall do a thing in
warres, that his Captayn ſhall prohibite, or which obſerueth not y• charge
enioyned him, yea although hee otherwiſe worthely behaue and acqui [...]e
himſelfe: in which reſpecte Manlius Torquatus in all ages is commended, who
commaunded his owne ſonne to bee beheaded, becauſe hee preſumed to fight
againſt his com­maundement, and yet he fought ſtoutly and valiauntly in
defence of the common weale.

Generalles and Captaynes, ſhall do much more good, with good example of their
lyfe and conuerſation, then wt the Cenſure of maners, or with anye kynde of
crueltye. For Xenophon bringethe in Cyrus diſcourſinge by waye of oration, in
maner to this effect; The chiefe worke or par [...] of a prince or gouernour
is to ſhew himſelfe a man of ho­neſte conuerſation, and moreouer to looke that
[...]u [...]h as  [...] vnder his charge, & at his cōmaūdement▪ may proue
ver­tuous & good men: & it is the duty of a Souldier to obay his captayne▪
willingly to take in hande al labours al ad­uentures, & daungers, not to fight
but in araye, and according to preſcription, to loue his weapon, to haue
[...]yll in warfare▪ and to ſet more by his honour, dignitye, & good fame,
then by any thing vnder the Sonne.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=86)The lawes of
the Lacedemonians were verye ſeuere & ſharpe in martiall matters, wherein (as
Marcellinus de­clareth) thoſe Souldiers were ſharpely puniſhed, whiche when
the armie was rancked, & ſet in aray, durſt be ſeene to ſhroude thēſelues
elſwhere, vnder anye roofe or ſhead.

Wryters report that Scipio walkinge aboute with his friendes, vſed to eate
onely cheate bread wtout any thingeHardneſſe of fare. ells: and ſo do
Hiſtoriographers wryte y• M [...]ſiniſſa king of Numidia vſed to dyne, who
being lxxxx. yeares of age, vſed to dine ſtāding or walking before his tēte
or pauiliō. Suche crymes ſpeciallye haue their originall from the chiefe
Gouernours, and them that bee in aucthority: for ye ſouldiers do imitate the
faſhiōs and natures of thoſe that haue chiefe rule and gouernaunce ouer them:
for if ye cap­taynes bee good, they trayne their ſouldiers to goodnes, but if
they be yll, they then make their ſouldiers apte and prone to yll: for the
multitude of the common ſouldiers, are ſone infected.

Souldiers are to be taught (by the example of Marcꝰ Cato) to be fierce and
couragious againſt their enemies, & to ſhewe themſelues gentle towardes their
friendes and Confederates, fearefull to doe iniuries, but readye and prompt to
reuenge wrongs to them offered, and to deſire nothinge more then prayſe and
glorye, whiche in deede is a verye goodlye perſwaſion: for thoſe that bee
deſi­rous of prayſe, doe not ſhonne nor refuſe anye trauelles, neyther
ſhrincke they or withdraw themſelues from anye perilles or daungers, but being
inflamed with deſire of glorye, do nothing doubt to hazard thēſelues in all
great aduētures & daūgers. Souldiers alſo muſt be puniſhed that haue done
amiſſe: for too muche lenitye and fauoureOffences to be p [...]rdoned, and
hovv to be pu­niſhed. doth make them more procliue and prone to offend: and if
it fall out that very manye haue offended, yet muſte wee not for feare, pardon
or diſpence with all, but muſt puniſh thoſe that are in the greateſt fault:
for if many be puniſh­ed, they are to be ſent and diſtributed to receyue their
ex­ecutiō [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=86) in diuers
places.

Marcellus vpon a tyme openly perceyued and ſawe Lu­cius Bantius Nolanus, a man
very bold and factious, ſolli­citing and ſtirringe the towneſmen there, to
reuolte and turne vnto Hanniball, & yet durſt he not put him to death, for
feare of the Nolanes: wherfore he called him vnto him with fayre wordes,
prayſing him openly as a worthy ſoul­dier, and exhorting him, to holde on and
continue his good ſeruice and faythful loyalty, & to be willing ſtyl to beare
out that warfare with him. And that the cittizens ſhould y• better credite y•
he was in ſuch fauour wt his capitayne, Marcellus gaue him a goodly fayre
Courſer, by meanes of whiche curteſie and gentleneſſe, he chaunged and
alte­red the euyll mynde and trecherous diſpoſition of Lucius, and thence
forwarde found both him and all his retinewe and crew, truſty and faythfull.

Many holde opinion y• a Generall of an Army oughte not to combate and fight
hande to hande with his enemy,Combat hovv it is allovvable in a captayne.
except in tyme of great neceſſitye, and that it is ſufficiente for him to
performe thoffyce of a Capitayn and leader, & not of a cōmon ſouldier. For
they ſay y• citties haue bene vtterly ſacked, and whole hoaſtes ſlayn down
right, or at leaſt diſcomfited & put to flighte, by the raſhneſſe of their
Capitaynes and Generalles: for whyle they purſue after euery particuler
enemie, they forſake and leaue the mayn hoaſte at all aduentures, and whyle
they ſtudye to take heede of one mannes blow, they pull vpon their own
hea­des, the whole mayne force of their enemies, not conſide­ringe howe that
their owne daungers bringes with it the generall calamitye and ſpoyle of the
whole hoaſt.

Scipio Africanus to certayne men which ſayde that heeOne politike & ſkilful
captain more vvorthe then a great ſort of commō ſouldiers. was no great
fighter, wiſely aunſwered ſaying: My mo­ther brought me foorth into this
worlde a Capitayne and a Generall, not a fighter or common Souldier: thereby
meaning that victorye and conqueſte, conſiſteth rather in thexperience and
wyſedome of one, then in the weapons,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=87) and ſtrength
of manye: Cyrus (as Xenophon mentioneth) aſked Cambyſes how a victorye might
beſte bee gotten, to whom hee thus aunſwered: hee that would winne & haue the
vpper hande and victory, muſt entrappe and take hysHovv to ouer­come the
ene­mie. enemies by all manner of pollicie whatſoeuer, eyther by ſecrete
ambuſhes, or deceipte and fraude, yea by rapine, theft, and pylfery they muſt
be ſpoyled, robbed & impoue­riſhed: for nothing is to be pretermitted, which
may in a­nye reſpecttend to the ſubduing, & vanquiſhing of a mans enemies: a
very lye in conuenient tyme by the chiefe cap­tayne made, hath ſodenly
obtayned the victorye: as that of Ualerius Leuinus, who with a loude voyce
cryed outeA very. Lye ſô­time auailable that he had ſlayne Pirrhus, and
therewithall to make the matter more credible, helde vp his ſword all bloudy,
with the bloud of a certayne Souldier whom a little before he had killed, with
which ſurmiſed lye, the Epyrotes beinge ſodenly aſtonied, ran away as faſt as
they could, weping & tremblinge into their tentes.

Demoſthenes the greateſt oratour among the Greciās,Demoſthenes vvyſe excuſe
for his runnīg avvaye. atchieued manye warres, and was in a greate battell at
Cheronea, wherein Philip of Macedonie ouercame the A­thenians, out of which
conflict Demoſthenes by flight and running away ſaued himſelfe: this thing
being by way of reproche afterwarde layed in his diſhe, after the death of
Philip, he excuſed himſelf, by reciting this notable verſe.

The partie vanquiſhed weepes and wayles,

But the partie vanquiſhing by death quayles.

Iulius Caefar as hee in worthye exploytes ſurpaſſed allIulius Caefar valiaunt
and learned. men, ſo alſo did he excell almoſt all the Romaynes in La­tine
eloquence. The knowledge alſo of hiſtories is com­modious and profitable for
them which haue the conduc­tion and gouernaunce of armies, both becauſe in
takinge counſels and aduiſes, by the euent and Fortune of other mens former
happes, moſte firme examples are learne, [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=87) and agayne
becauſe the vertue that is prayſed in others, doth allure and moue vs to
obtayne the lyke: and feare­full Cowardiſe beinge reproued doth make men
become more valiaunt: and I cannot tel whether the knowledge of warfare may by
anye other diſcipline be better helped, then by peruſinge hiſtoricall
Monumentes, by which we are taught and inſtructed to doe all thinges well and
or­derlye, whiche may eyther be ſpoken or thought by man. Nothinge newe and
ſtraunge, nothinge wonderfull, no­thinge vnhearde or vncouth, can happen vnto
the Chief­tayne, whiche hath verye good knoweledge and experi­ence in
Hyſtories.

Warlike order and arraye, Diſcipline of Souldiers, good reſpecte and ſtudye in
inuadinge, and bewaringe theSundrye good poyntes inci­dent and mete to be
knovven of a good Captayne. enemie, ſkyll in Marſhallinge the armie in righte
order of arraye, knowledge when to begynne the Skirmiſh, when to leaue, how to
plant Ambuſhes and ſtales, & how to take heede of the lyke, whiche place is
fitte to bee cho­ſen, whiche platte is moſte commodious to bee firſte
pre­uented and gaygned, which agayne is to bee left vnto the enemie, howe and
whiche waye to geeue the onſette and charge, and how to reſiſte and ſtande at
defence, with in­numerable other poynctes, which ſcarce bee comprehen­ded in
longe diſcourſe, by what other meanes canne they more eaſely bee learned, then
by peruſinge ouer Monu­mentes and recordes of Hyſtories.

Among all ſortes of men, there can be nothinge foundNothing more rare then a
perfect Generall. more rare then a perfect Captayne and Generall, whiche if
hee be not to be found in the Citty, he muſt bee ſent for from other places:
for it is better to fighte well and fafe­lye protected vnder a ſtraunger
Captayne, then in daun­ger and hazarde of lyfe vnder the gouernment of our
na­tiue Citizen.

Hee that hath the charge and aucthoritye ouer a citty, & in the tyme of warre
is alſo to loke to vrbane affayres & ought to employ
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=88) employ very
greate diligence, and to looke narowly vnto his charge, that the Cittye do not
ſuſtayne any detrimēt or damage: and as (like a capitayn in ye campe) he
ought to perfourme his office, ſo like a wiſe gouernour oughte he to exerciſe
and trayne his ſouldiers within the walles of the cittye, that with ydleneſſe,
niceneſſe, ſittinge in the ſhade, and other delicate and tender cockrings of
the city they be not effeminated. And ſōtimes it ſhall behoue hym­ſelfe in
perſon to viſite the wardes, and goe throughe the watches, and not to commit
all thinges to the diſpoſition of them whom he maketh maiſters of the watches
vnder him, who in deede ſhall kepe their watch much more dili­gently and
carefully, if they ſtand in feare and awe of him that is chieferuler ouer them
al, and ſee him to be watch­full and vigilant. For there be which ſuppoſe,
that thoſe perſons are moſt ſharply to be puniſhed, which negligēt­lye looke
to their watch and warde, leaſte by ſleepe, ſlouth and negligence of one man,
the whole citty ſhould periſh,Puniſhmente for the vvatch which committeth all
things to the diligence of thoſe few perſons: wherfore hiſtories do highly
commende Epami­nondas the Thebane, who in time of greate diſtreſſe & daū
­ger, viewing & ſurueighing in proper perſon the watches, thruſt his ſword
through one of the watchmen whom hee found ſleeping, ſaying theſe wordes: A
deadman I found hym, a deadman I leaue him.

Neither is it to be meruayled at, that Epaminondas be­inge otherwiſe a
capitayne gentle and mercifull, dyd vſe and pracciſe ſuch ſeuerity vpon a man
ſleeping, ſeeinge yt wee doe ſee how throughe ſuch negligence, whole cities
haue bene ſackt, ſpoylde, & burnt. wherupon Virgil ſayth:

Inuadunt vrbe ſomno vino (que) ſepultam.

VVith wyne and ſleepe, the Citie careleſſe made,

The enmies do with force af armes inuade.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=88)By reaſon
of this policie & diligence Alcibiades aboue others is prayſed: For when the
Athenians were by the Lacedemoniās be ſieged, he gaue warning vnto y•
watch­men that they ſhoulde well marke the light which hee in the night ſeaſon
out of the tower or Caſtle, would ſhewe them, and yt at the ſight & beholding
therof, they ſhould al­ſo holde vp an other light: and if any were founde
remiſſ [...] or negligent in doing accordingly, hee ſhoulde aſſuredlye ſuffer
puniſhment therfore, by meanes wherof hee made the watchmen to become moſt
diligent and warye.

Alſo there ought always to be ſcoutes & eſpialles to geueScoures of a Cittye.
warning in the night ſeaſō by ſome becon or flame of fire whē the enemies
approched, & in the day tyme by ſmoke. Neyther ought men to be ſuffered to goe
out at y• gates, into their fields, tyl yt ſcoutes haue throughlye ſearched &
tried, yt they may ſafely go about their huſbādry. Neither let the ſame
Scoutes continewe in their turnes, any long tyme, but dayly let freſh mē
ſuccede in their rowmes, leaſt with too much traueyle and tediouſneſſe, they
happen to handle their charge more negligently.

It is alſo very commodious and profitable that chiefe rulers, and ſuch as be
in aucthoritye, eyther at home or in warrs abrode, where ſom daūgerous
matters do chance, ſhoulde goe forthe abrode in their own perſons to ſee the
ſtate of thinges: by the example of Marcellus, who to his College or fellow in
office ſayd theſe wordes: Let vs our ſelues goe with a fewe horſemen to make
ſearche how the caſe ſtandeth, for the thing manifeſted vnto our eyes, ſhal
more certaynly direct our aduiſe and counſel what is beſt to bee done: For
Plato wylleth Princes▪ of cōmon weales to goe forth and ſee how thinges frame
abrode, and wyth them to leade their children on horſebacke, thereby to en­ure
them with leſſe feare to abyde the viewe and ſighte of their enemies.

The auncient cuſtome that the Frenchmen vſed is ve­rye profitable, to learne &
vnderſtand of al thinges which
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=89) the enemie
doeth and pretendeth: whiche cuſtome manye naciōs & princes in our tyme alſo
do vſe to put in practiſe, which is y• ſome witty perſōs may be appointed to
learnEſpialles abro­de very neceſ­ſarye. what fame and cōmon report goeth
abrode, and to make wayfaring perſons (wil they or nil they) to ſtay, and of
thē to learne and ſifte out what newes euery one of thē hath heard or
knowen: let them enquire of them, oute of what coaſts or countries they came,
and whither they mean to goe, & let them compell them to declare aſmuche as
they know [...] of their pretence to come. But yet ſuche newes, flying▪ tales
and reportes, they may not alwayes credite: for many do tell lyes, and do
faigninglye aunſwere accor­ding to the wyl and humour of him that aſketh the
queſti­on, and ſo leaue the demaunders as wiſe (for any certain­tye) as they
were before: but if the demaunders, and ſif­ters out of theſe matters be
circumſpecte and wyſe, they ſhall eaſely be able to boult and trye oute the
truthe, and thereby their councelles and aduiſes, which are to be day­lye
taken in hande, ſhal by ſuch examinacion bee much the better furthered.

Let alſo the Lieutenant or Gouernour of a Cittie and Citizens, be very
diligent and circumſpect in the ſafe ke­pinge and gardinge of the Gates, the
Reyes whereof let him keepe himſelfe, and let him ſet in good order the
wat­chesGates muſt di­ligently be lo­ked vnto. and wardes dulye: let him alſo
take heede, that hee be not deceyued and diſſembled withall, vnder the colour
of his owne ſouldiers, or beguiled by the counterfeicting of an other knowen
ſpeach. For Hānibal ſurprized many cyties in Italie by apparelling and arming
his ſouldiers lyke Romaynes, ſending before him ſuch of his Souldi­ers as by
longe continuance in the warres coulde ſpeake the Latine tongue. Many ſubtile
ſhiftes and deceipts are deuiſed in the entraunce of the Gates of a Cittye,
whiche are to be taken heede of. For ſometyme the Enemyes for the nonce and of
ſet purpoſe, doe make their Beaſtes and Cariages to falle downe, or elles
their Waynes that [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=89) carye greate
huge Stones, to breake and falle in pieces, and thereuppon the Enemies beinge
ſydaynlye at hande (whyle the Gates cannot well bee ſhutte) the townes are
eaſelye taken. The Maſſilians fearing this thing, by the good Inſtytucions and
Ordynaunces of their Common wealthe, did ſo keepe and warde their Citties in
tyme of Peace, as if they had then beene continuallye vexed and troubled wyth
warres: Wherefore vpon the holy dayes they were wonte to ſhutte the Gates of
their Citties, to keepe their Watches, to ſee their Souldiers in good ar­raye
ſtandinge vppon the Walles, to muſter and take a note of their Straungers, and
other war like affayres beſide.

Reuoltes and Runnagates, are not to bee receyued or intertayned into the
Cittye: for Synon the Grecian, being gentlye interteyned, was deſtruction of
the Troianes. And Zopirus the friende of Darius king of Perſia,
percey­uingeFugit [...]ues and runneavvayes. the Kinge to waxe wearye with his
long beſieging of Babilon, and beinge without all hope of wynninge it, cutte
of his owne noſe and his owne eares, and fledde a­way thēce vnto the
Babilonians, where he vttring many ſlaunderous and reprochefull wordes,
agaynſt his kyng, promiſed them that hee woulde deliuer into their handes the
victorye, and be auenged on him. They beleeuing hysCloaked trea­ſon vnder
flat­tring vvoides. ſmothe words, made this Zopirus their Generall Capi­tayne,
& deliuered vnto him theyr power, whiche when he had receyued, incontinently
hee betrayed & deliuered both the Cittye and the whole hoaſte vnto Darius. So
alſo Sextus Tarquinius fayning hymſelfe to haue fledde awaye from his fathers
Hoaſte, becauſe hee was (as hee fayde) beaten with roddes, and comming to the
Cittye of Gabij, (then beſieged) perſwaded theym to ioyne in lyke hatred with
him againſt the kinge his father, and being by them appointed chiefe
Capitayne, hee ſtraight wayes betrayed the Cittye, into the handes of his
ſayde father.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=90)It is alſo
daungerous to retayne manye ſtraungers & Aliens into the cittye: both becauſe
euerye multitude of people, that is gathered and peeced together oute of
ſun­drye nations, is vnquiet and oftentimes, of a ſmall mat­ter or quarell
ſtirreth vp  [...]umults & hurlyburlies: but al­ſo becauſe it is the parte of
a madde man, to deuide thereDaungerous to haue manie ſtraungers in a cittye.
thoſe thinges amongſt many, which he knoweth not whe­ther they wyll ſuffyce to
the mayntenaunce of a fewe.

Unto this Sentence may bee aptly applyed that ſame precept of Cambiſes king of
Perſians, which hee gaue vnto Cyrus his ſonne, where he ſayth.

No man ought to ſtaye tyll pouerty oppreſſe,

But rather to prouide in tyme of wealthyneſſe.

Alexander of Macedonie beſieginge Leucadia, ſuffered all the borderers and
neighbours thereaboute to flye thy­ther for refuge and ſuccour, that they
being many, might ye ſoner conſume the victualls, which being ſpent, he eaſe
lye obtayned the victory. Antigonus ſemeth to haue vſed the like deuiſe
againſte the Athenians, who hauinge deſtroyed their Corne fieldes, departed
thence, and wente awaye in the tyme of ſeede ſowinge, that if they had anye
remaynder of Corne yet left, they might beſtowe ye ſame vpon ſowinge: & ſo
makinge his returne thyther agayn ye nexte ſpring, ouer came and ſpoyled all
the Corne beinge nowe ſprouted and ſhotte vp: and ſo by famine broughte them
to agree to any thing, euen at his own pleaſure.Forein ſouldi­ers vntruſtie.

The multitude alſo of ſouldiers is greately to bee fea­red, this haue the
Carthaginians apparantly taught: for when they had made peace with the
Romaines, the mer­cenarye ſouldiers, which were in number about 20000. which
fought againſt the Romayns, conſpired together, and reuolted & fled from the
Carthaginians, and beſide this, e [...]ueygled and ſeduced all Africa: and
there vpon be­ſieged Carthage, and coulde not be kept from ſcaling the [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=90) walles, had not
the greate labour and induſtry of Hamil­car then chiefe Captayne of Carthage
bene the greater.

Let a Chiefetayne make diſpatche and haſte in thoſe matters that he is bent
and fullye perſwaded to doe: For ſpeedye expedition is the beſt compaignion in
warfare: in which thinge Alexander of Macedonie is eſpecially com­mended,
becauſe in expedicion and ſpedineſſe, bee ſurpaſ­ſedSpede and ex­pedition a
nottable furthe­raunce to vva [...] like affayres. the celerity & haſte of all
other Capitayns: and he had ſo framed his footemen, that they were as ſwyft
and nimble on foote as horſes: wherfore Darius the king being by hym purſued,
chaſed and perſecuted, greuouſlye complay­ned that he had no tyme of reſpite
geeuen him to pawſe & conſider how to withſtād the alacritie of Alexander,
who oftentimes couragiouſly traueyled, with great Iourneys night and day to
entrappe his enemies at vnwares, and to ſet vpon them ſodenly and vnlooked
for.

Let alſo the chiefe Capitayn of the warres do his mat­ters cloſely and
ſecretly, and let him not open and diſcloſe his ſecretes vnto any man, by
thexample of Metellus, whoSecrete hande linge of affay­res. (as Plutarch
mēcioneth, thus anſwered a certayn frēd of his, which demaunded of him what
he would doe y• nexte day followinge: If this my coate which I weare (ſaythe
hee) coulde vtter foorthe and openlye declare my ſecretes and determinations,
I woulde ſtraighte wayes put it of, and burne it to aſhes. And Iulius Caeſar
purpoſing to trāſ­porte and ſend his armie another waye, toke his Iourney
ſecretelye, and diliuered to ſome one man his tables, ſig­ned withe his hande,
dyrectinge theym at a certaine time and place to bee readye, and in good araye
of battle to doe what hee ſhoulde commaunde theym: and nowe and then
commaunded he notes to be wrytten vpon ſtones ly­ing in y• high ways, wher his
ſouldiers muſt paſſe, where by he gaue them by certayne watchwords, directly
to vn­derſtande what waye was nedeful and beſt to be taken.

As it is the parte of a good phiſitian to leaue no hurte­full thing in the
bodye of his Patient: ſo is it the parte of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=91) a good
Generall to remoue and take awaye whatſoeuer ſhall hynder the proſperous
eſtate & preſeruation of thys his aucthoritye: for oftentimes it falleth oute
that a ſmall ſparcke of fyre being neglected and not looked vnto, cau­ſeth a
greate flame, as the prouerbe ſayth. And that ſen­tence of Marcus Cato is to
be holden for an Dracle, wry­tinge thus in his Booke of Warfare: In other
mattersTvvo ſpecialle precepts in dy­  [...]ecting vva [...]e fare. (ſayth
hee) whatſoeuer is miſdone, maye bee redreſſed or afterwards at more leaſure,
amended: but in warre, we muſt not admit the promiſe of any amēdement, for
faultes committed: becauſe preſent puniſhment ought out of hād to folowe the
offence. For the reuenger of ſlouthe and Ignoraunce is euermore at hande ready
and preſt, which is neuer fauouringe or pityfull towardes the enemy that
offendeth.

There are two preceptes whiche ſeeme to conteyne in them the whole diſcipline
or Arte of Warfare, the one is that there bee but fewe Gouernours and
Commaunders & the ſame able well to gouern, and thē alſo ſuch as haue paſſed
through al yt degrees of warfare, wherby by obei­inge aforetime theymſelues,
they haue the better ſkyll to cōmaund others. They which haue theſe things,
it cānot be choſen, but that they ſhall eyther obtayne the victory, or els an
honeſt and honourable peace: but to them whi­che fayle in theſe thinges, no
power or Force can ſuffice for their defence, but they ſhalbe caryed headlonge
with a blynde rage to their vtter ruine & deſtruction, euen lyke brute
beaſtes.

Clemencie and mercifulneſſe towardes their Subiec­tes and vnderlinges, both
greatly ſet forthe the commen­dacion of Generalles and Captaynes, and maketh
theirClemencye in Generalles moſt commendable. noble actes more famous: Cicero
affirmeth that, they are to be receiued into fauour and protection which with
ſub­miſſion caſt downe their weapons and betake themſelues to the mercye of
the Generall, yea althoughe the Ordy­nance and Engine haue ſhaken or battred
down the wall. [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=91) And Caeſar was
wont to ſay, yt nothing pleaſed him better then to ſpare the ſimple ſorte of
people, neyther is this vertue to bee omitted towardes thoſe whiche are
ouer­come and vanquiſhed: For ſlaughter, Luſte, Crueltye, and euerye example
of outragious Pryde towardes thoſe that bee in diſtreſſe and miſerye, hath
beene alwayes ac­coumpted deteſtable and horrible: great commendation did
Marcus Marcellus wyn, who before he would gra [...] the Spoyle of the wealthy
Cyttye Syracuſe, vnto hys Souldiers, wept, and by an Edict commaunded that no
manne ſhoulde hurte or Iniurye any Freeman of the Ci­tye. Liuius maketh
mention that the Spoyle of that Cittye was ſo excedinge greate, that there
woulde haue beene ſcarcelye the lyke in CARTHAGE, whyche was of Power and
equall Strengthe alwayes to encoū ­tre wyth theim.

In myne Opinion this note or Precepte is expediente to bee geeuen, that wee
ſhoulde farre more eſteeme of aFevv vvel trayned better thē a greate num­ber
of vnſkil­ful peaſauntes ſmall Number of Souldiers, beinge trayned vp and
ex­ercyſed in the Feates of Warre, and ſooner ſhoulde they gayne the Uictorye,
then of a greate multitude whyche are bothe vnſkilfull and Ignoraunte, who doe
open and as it were make a readye waye to their own deſtruction, who are
afrayde of euerye Tryfle, and rather take care for flight, then for glorye or
renowme: therefore the olde precepte willeth a man that lacketh an olde beaten
ſoul­dier, to take a Nouiſe, as yet vntrayned.

For ALEXANDFR after the death of his father PHILIPPE, wythe Fourtye Thouſande
tall armed Souldiers, that had bene by his father notablye and ſkil­fullye
trayned in Feates of Warres, ouercame ſundrye and innumerable Hoaſtes of his
enemies, that wythſtode him, and ſubdued verye manye Regions and countries of
the worlde vnder his Subiection, and compelled them to become vaſſayles vnto
hym.

What ſhall wee ſaye of the Romayues, who beinge
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=92) diſcēded
frō meane beginnings yet by vertue and prowes onelye and by Martiall ſkill,
did conquere all the whole world? Is it not a thing to be meruayled at, that a
num­ber of heardmen and ſheepeheardes ſhould inuade Italy, a countrye moſte
mightye aboue all other Regions, and daunte and ſubdue the Germaynes, and all
Fraunce: diſ­piſing the largenes of their Bodies, and the number of their
hoaſtes, and beſides this ſhculde alſo  [...]ame & bringe in ſubiection the
Spaniardes, whiche were righte fearce & cruell warrioures, and ſhoulde
conquere and vanquy­ſhe yt Africanes, which were the wylieſt & wealthieſt
per­ſons vnder the ſonne: and moreouer ſhoulde ouerreache ye wyſedome and
cunninge of the Greekes, and finallye be­come Lordes of the whole worlde?

In the choyſe and muſtering of perſons apt for ye war­res, wee muſt firſt and
formoſt haue a reſpecte vnto yt age of the perſon, which ought to be younge
and tender: For boyes and ſtripelinges, doe far more eaſelye learne
thoſeYongmē moſt apteſt to bee taught and trained invvarfare thinges whiche
are expedient: and doe better frame themſelues to thinges wherin is no
difficulty, while their mē ­bers are not yet ſtyffe and hardened, neyther
growne to their full ſtrengthe and perfection: for they  [...]itte a horſe
better, & they hādle yt raynes nymbler then aged perſōs with ſtowpinge
bodies, whoſe lymmes be ſtiffe and har­dened. And furthermore lightſomneſſe in
leapinge vp & downe, ſwyfteneſſe in running, and quickneſſe in caſting, is
more eaſie for the bodye, which yet is tender and gren [...], then for a body
that is growne vnto ful ſtrength.

Surely Plato prince of al Philoſophers helde opinion that younge men were to
be choſen for the warres, at theAge of Soul­diers. age of twentye yeares, and
Seruius Tullius Kinge of the Romaynes, was of opinion to chooſe them at
ſeauentene yeares olde, at which age he called them Iuuenes, becauſe they were
perſon [...]sable to helpe, and ayde their Country and common wealth. Some
others doe wryte that the firſteyeares of Pubertie, that is when the hayres
doe [[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=92)
beginneth firſte to grow▪ is the beſt tyme to chooſe one y• wee woulde haue to
proue a worthy ſeruitour▪ But the ſouldiers which are taken vp being aboue the
age of  [...] yeares, are ſeldome cōmodious. And when they handleVnfitneſſe
of Souldiers. their weapons, (becauſe they doe it vnhandſomelye) they are but
made laughing ſtockes vnto others, & oftentimes becauſe of their
vnweildyneſſe, they are by y• old  [...] quipped, which ſaythe: that they bee
as fitte for warfare as an Oxe to beare a Packeſadle: therfore it were  [...]
to exempt ſuche, and remitte them to ſuche Artes as they haue bene brought vp
in, then to preſſe theym to the war­res, where they will ſerue to ſmall
purpoſe, except it be in greate neceſſitie: for then we reade that priſoners
and ma­lefactors haue bene lou [...]ed out of priſon and ſet at liberty, &
bōdmē alſo in this caſe to haue ſerued for ye preſēt turn. Cornelius Celſus
wryteth, that a ſquare bodyed perſonage is moſt ſeruiſable, & hee prayſeth a
mediocritie of breadth and length: becauſe talneſſe whiche in youth is
comelye,Stature▪  [...]ſ [...] commendable for a Souldi­er. is by nature ſone
conſumed and brought to an end by Old age. But as ye ſtature which tendeth
vnto mediocritye is firmer, ſtronger, and of longer continuaunce [...] ſo on
the o­ther part, a ſlender bodye is coumpted weake and ſeeble▪ and a fatte
bodye is thought to bee dull and vnweildye: not withſtandinge I knowe that
ſome doe heſte allowe of ta [...]neſſe in a Souldier▪ wherup [...] the
Romaynes a  [...] their liuelye and couragious ho [...]ſemen [...] and in
their firſte Bādes & Cohortes, ſuffered  [...]one to ſerue but thoſe that
were in ſtature ſixe foote, or very neare there vnto.

Neither am I ignoraūt that Alexander and his hoaſte by reaſon of their ſmal
ſtature, were at their comming in­toSmall ſtature of Alexanders Souldiers.
that country, derided and laughed to ſ [...]o [...]n [...] of the Scy­thians,
which were very tal perſons, but win a ſmal tyme after, the Scythians learned,
that manlineſſe and courage, & not talnes & height was to be conſidered in the
eſtemie. For it many tymes comes to paſſe that little perſons, and men of
ſmall ſtature, proue & are found y• beſt warriours.
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=93) Therfore we
muſt not ſtand vpon this poynt, to conſider how tall a man bee, but how ſtrong
hee is▪ yet notwith ſtā ­dinge the confirmation and well knitting of the
mēbers together, may geeue great tokens of ſtrength in man. Let therfore a
younge man, that is to bee employed thysBeſt bodilye proportion & [...]eacture
for a Souldier. way, be wel vi [...]aged, and ſtreight bodied, round necked &
handing ſome what downwarde, quicke eyed and watche­f [...]ll▪ chearely
countenaūced, broade breaſted and broade s [...]ouldre [...], ſtrongly
drawned in his armes, and firmly cō ­pact in the ioyntes of his fingers, long
armed, ſtrong El­bowed, ſlender be [...]lyed, bygge hypped, his legges rather
ſlenderlye then ro [...]udlye Cau [...]fed, and Strongelye fo [...]ed.

Moreouer in leuyinge and muſteringe Souldiers, we muſt conſider in what
country they were borne and brou­ght vp. For albeit in euerye place there bee
borne aſ­well Daſt [...]rdes as valyaun [...]e and ſtoute perſons, yet
not­withſtandinge the aſpect of the Heauens, furthereth mu­cheThe countrye
muſt be reſ [...]ec­ted vvhere a ſouldier hathe hene bred and borne. vnto the
Courage and Strength of the perſon: and the North coūtries are better in this
reſpect, thethe Ea­ſterlye: But euerye temperate Countrye is reputes and taken
as beſte.

A Souldier is better to be taken out of the Countrye then out of the Ci
[...]ie▪ as all the auncient wryters which haue wrytten of Warrefare doe holde
Opinion: and not without good cauſe [...] for the Countrye youth being
har­dened, and Sunne burned, ſuffering and enduring duſte, Rayne, and Snowe,
feedinge vpon brown Breade, and wylde bearyes, can abyde farre more eaſely to
lye abrode,City ſouldiers can ſuffer rayne, ſhowers, and ſtormes, can
continewe to rume, through the ſtippery and durtye fieldes al bare foo­ted,
which no horſe can paſſe for myre & fowlneſſe, muche better then tenderly
brought vp yongmen can, which ha­ue bane cockered and nycely effeminated with
town deli­cacies, and pleaſures of the Citty, who cannot ſleepe ex­cept they
may lye vpon a ſoft feather bed, where no noyſe [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=93) muſt diſquiet or
trouble them, and being no [...]hable to en­dure eyther heate or colde, are
euer p [...]wling in their ſto­macke, they neuer haue good appetite to their
meate ex­cept they may haue the delicate diſhes of the Citty fare, & dreſt
after the City faſhion, euer ſeeking for the fineſt bro­thes and viandes,
neyther can they bee at hartes eaſe if they want their olde domeſticall
blandimentes. Furder­more nature her ſelfe preſcribeth this vnto mankind, that
bee leſſe feareth wounds or death which hath leaſt know­ledge of delyces and
pleaſures in this lyfe.

The Lacedemonians deſerued greate prayſe and com­mendation in warfare, whoſe
lyfe if wee do  [...]e holde, wee ſhall finde y• they euen tyll the age of
[...] ſtate▪ wereLacedemoniās hovve they ly­ued. occupied and buſied in the
fieldes and in hunting and al­wayes lyued very ſtrictlye and hardelye.

The Auncient Romaynes eſteemed the care of warre­fare and huſbandrye as one:
and the ſelfe ſame perſons y• in tyme of Peace played the Huſbandemen, dyd
[...] tymeRomaynes eſteemed vvar­fare and huſ­bandry both a lyke. of Warre
ſerue for Sauldiers: Whereuppon  [...] Cincinnatus, was called from the
Ploughe,  [...]bee Dicta­tor, & after the victorie gotten ouer his enemies, he
ſurrē ­dred his rowme and dignitie, & retourned to his Oxen▪ & ſmall plotte
of Lande which hee had at home. So like wyſe Fabricius after hee had exp
[...]ed Pirr [...] oure of the Coaſtes of Italy, and Marcus curius▪ S
[...]named De [...] ­tatus hauinge vanquiſhed the Sab [...]es betooke
themſel­ues agayne to their fieldes. Alſo Curius Marcus longe tyme after, was
a Capitayne choſen out of the Country, and yet was hee ſeuen tymes Coſull▪ and
wyth manye and greac victories was his fame ennobled▪ and ſo hard [...] ­ned
was hee in labour and paynes taking y• when he offe­red his legges (beinge
ſwelled) to the Surgeon to bee cutte of and launced, he did it with no more
feare, t [...]rn he would haue geuen a Carpenterr a piece of Timber to bee
ſquared: This laſte of all is to be concluded, y• the harder and paine fuller
that the Trades bee which men doe com­monlye practiſe and followe, the
ſtronger and ſtouter
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=94) doe the ſame
make the Souldiers: and the nycer and finer that they bee, the more doe they
weaken courage and a­bate valiaūtnes. For it is not to be loked for, yt cur
doggs which come peaking out of Tauernes and Typling hou­ſes, ſhould geue the
onſet vpon a Lybbard or Lyon, nay, they wyll rather ſtreightway return to y•
licking of their diſhes agayne.

The exerciſe of hunting is very good, whiche differeth much from ruſticall and
warlike affayres: for Xenophon when hee determined to followe the warres of
Cyrus, dydHunting a good exerciſe. firſt with greate care and diligence learne
to ryde, & hunt, affirming that he was an vnprofitable Souldier, which was not
in both theſe exerciſes greately enured and prac­tiſed. For the Romains
(becauſe their Yongmen ſhould not geeue themſelues too much to pleaſure, or be
marred with idleneſſe and eaſe in corners and bynookes) made a goodly field
for exerciſe, which they called Campus Mar­tius, wherein the Games and
exerciſes of Armes were ce­lebrated and kept, not only for the Spectacles and
ſights of Fencers, and ſwordplayers, but alſo for the vſe and ex­erciſe of
Souldiers: and thereat were preſent certayn yt inſtructed & trained the ſame
ſouldiers, which were with the cōmon charge and prouiſion recōpenſed withe
dou­ble ſhares of grayne and corne: becauſe they ſhould y• bet­ter and
diligentlier (being enflamed with reward) trayn and teache the ſame Souldiers.

It would aſke a longe diſcourſe to make rehearſall of all Martiall exerciſes,
& orderly to diſcribe ye rules & me­thodesTrayninge of Souldiers. thereof, to
ſette down preceptes how young ſoul­diers ſhould be trayned, howe they ſhoulde
behaue them­ſelues in auoyding and declining weapons comminge to­wardes them▪
and how to deale prudentlye and manfullye in ſtryking agayne, howe they ought
to playe the partes of Souldiers throughly in euery poynte: how they ſhall
handle the ſhielde or Target: how to ſet and pytche theyr ſtakes, obſerue
their array in marchinge, and kepe their [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=94) ſtandinges, all
which thinges rather ſeeme to appertayn vnto him that wryteth of warfare, then
vnto him whiche entreateth of ciuill ſocietye.

Plato ſetteth downe in order, that no man ſhoulde haueWhat age is lavvful for
one to be a Gene­rall. aucthoritye in the warres, before hee were thirtie
yeares of age (although there were otherwiſe in him, approued and tryed
manhoode and valiaunce, and that hee were al­ſo euen at thoſe yeares ennobled
or made famous for ſom martial exploytes) This age did the Athenians think
law­full and fitting for warlike offices, althoughe ſometimes they derogate
frō this law, eſpecially in Alcibiades, who in his adoleſcencie, was ſo
highly in the peoples fauour, y• whereſoeuer hee walked abroade, all the
Cittizens caſte their eyes onely vppon him, and no man ſo well eſteemed
amongſt them al, as he was. For before hee was of law­ful age, hee was made
Lieutenaunt generall of the war­res againſt the Syracuſians, vnto whom
notwithſtandinge were adioyned two Colleges, farre elder then himſelfe, that
is to ſay Nicias and Lamachus, to thende they might more ſafelye prouide for
the publike weale. Alſo Octauius Caeſar at the age of xviii yeares was elected
Emperoure,Octauius Cae­ſar. Cicero perſwading the ſame vnto the people of
Rome, but afterwardes when he handled ſome matters againſt the mynde and
lykinge of Cicero, he was ſory for that whiche before hee had done, and
repented his former counſell and aduiſe which hee had geuen for his
aduauncement & elec­tion, and thereupon wrate an Epiſtle, wherein he
exclay­meth againſt himſelfe, that he had playd no wiſemannes parte, but
confeſſed that the common wealth was by hym and through his meanes deceyued.

Farre more ſafer is an armie or hoaſt committed vntoOlde beaten Souldiers are
to bee prefer­red before youngmen. olde beaten Souldiers, then vnto youngmen,
whoſe firſt aduiſemēts and counſells, are more fearce and vnſtayed, and who
doe leſſe forſee and conſider the incerteintye of chaunces, becauſe Fortune
neuer at anye tyme decey­ued them: but Old men with quyet mindes do foreſee
ma­nye [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=95)
thinges, and preuent before hand h [...]lve to encounter with Fortune: and
where nede is of ſtonte perſons, they do the ſame, not ſo willingly, as dryuen
there unto by ne­ceſſitie, & will rather chooſe to dyeun fight, then in
flight.

Alexander Kynge of Macedonie beinge twenty & one yeares of age loſte his
father Philippe by Deathe, and becauſe hee woulde ſeeme to bee no leſſe the
Heire and Succeſſor of his kingdome, then of his worthyneſſe and glorye, when
as hee had taken on him the Gouernmente of the armie left him by his father,
he dyd not chooſe vnto him thoſe compaignions, which he had bene brought vp, &
conuerſant wtal, neither youthful yonkers: but old tried & beaten ſouldiers:
many of thē ſuch as were alreadye diſ­charged & diſpenced wt al frō folowing
the warrs any  [...] ­ger, who aforetime ſerued his father, & had abidē many
a ſharpe ſtorme vnder him: in which doing, he ſemed rather to haue choſen
maiſters & capitaines of warres thē ſouldiers: and he cōmitted not the
orderinge & diſpoſinge of hys Battls, but vnto thē yt were Lx. yeres of age,
which ſure lye was the cauſe, that he alwayes vanquiſhed the  [...], and
obtayned the victory, & with a very ſmall hand of mē ouercame ſixe hundred
thouſand of the Perſians: & if hee had not bene by death preuented, he ſurelye
woulde haue ſubdued the whole worlde.

The Tribune or Marſhall of the fielde, ought to bee a man moſt valiaunt and
couragious, in prowes and Mar­tiall Cheualrye exactlye trayned: the rulers
alſo of euery particuler Crew and Band, which haue ſo many men at their
commaundemente, ought in their offyce to bee per­ſens moſt graue, becauſe that
in the abſence of the Gene­rall, they ſupplye his rowme. He alſo that hath the
char­ge and office of pitching the Tentes & encamping, oughtEncamping. of all
others to bee moſt ſkilfull, & one by long experiēce and practiſe in warres,
throughly tryed and experienced. For he ought diligently to view and ſurueigh
the nature and condicion of the place, that hee maye choſe the ſafeſt & [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=95) moſt cōuenient
partes for the  [...] to campe in that there  [...] his Souldiers might bee
eaſely by the enemie aſſaulted and diſplaced, neyther by meanes of a Ryuer
ſurrounded and drowned▪ or elles by the too much neareneſſe of wood growing
thērabout, toChoyſe of ground for pit­ching of tents & encampinge bee
conſumed and fyred whiche thinge happened vnto Craſſus in the ciuile warres,
who throughe ſuche careles ouerſight, was with all his armie almoſte burned
ſoden­lye by the fyre, that his enemies had ſecretely enkindled. So did
Camillus alſo deſtroy & ſpoyle the campe & tentes of the Volſciās by fiering
the wood yt was neere vnto thē.

Moreouer let a Generalle foreſee that there bee ſtoare enoughe of wood, of
forage & of water: let them alſo haue an eaſie egreſſe abroade into the
fieldes round about thē,Surueighors of vvorkes. and a ſafe returne and
egreſſe backe agayne to the campe. Neither ought ye Surueigher or chiefe
ouerſeer of work­men to lacke long experience, vpon whom chiefly reſteth all
the charge, to ſee yt nothing be wanting to ye hoaſt yt is nedeful, eyther for
aſſault & battry, or for repulſing or de­fence. This man ought to haue in a
readineſſe Carpēters, Ioigners, Rafterers, & Maſōs, for ye contriuing &
makīg of engines, & woddē towers, battring pieces, croſbowes, Slinges, &
other ſorts of gunnes beſide▪ and briefly to c [...] ­clude, ye auncient
perſons muſt be appointed rulers ouer y• army, & the younger ſort muſt be
honored with other dig­nities, & ſpecially ſuch as haue more glory & prayſe
when the caſe falleth out well & with good ſucceſſe, thē daunger if it ſhould
fall out otherwiſe, or that Fortune ſhoulde de­ceiue them. Reward & puniſhment
are to bee demed & taken as two Gods in a common wealth, and in
MartiallRevvarde for vvel doinge & puniſhmēt for euil doing. affaires
eſpecially accoūpted moſt neceſſarye: for neyther ſhall it be ſufficient for
a Captayne to keepe his ſouldiers at cōmaūdemēnt, and in obedience for
feare of puniſhe­ment: except alſo the hope of glory & reward do quicken &
pricke forward ye courage & fortitude of ye ſouldier: & ye de­ſire of renoume
doth of it ſelf particulerly preſcribe ſuch things as neither the leaders nor
captaines thēſelues, cā
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=96) by any
poſſible meanes directe or teache: For ſurely hope is a right greate affect
and mocion of the mynde, whiche oftentimes ſtirreth vp and moueth men to do
thoſe things which ſeeme to excede the ſtrength & ability of man, & which
otherwiſe could not by any reaſon or meanes be perſwaded.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=96)

## Appendix A The Table.

A.

  * Abſtinence frō ciuile bloud­ſhed. Folio. 63.
  * Adultry puniſhed. 37.
  * Age lavvful for a generall to bee choſen at. 87
  * Age of Souldiers. 48.
  * Alexanders frends vvere his trea­ſures. 28
  * Alexander his vvyſe example in vvatching. 29
  * Annia a vvidovv, her aunſvver as touching mariage the ſecond tyme. 43
  * Appiꝰ Claudius his violence. 62
  * Apt names for Citizens. 65
  * Ariſtotles aduife touching ſilēce to Caliſthenes. 52
  * Aſſured peace better then con­queſt hoped for. 75
  * Aſtronomie. 13
  * At vvhat yeares an officer maye be choſen. 65
  * Aucthors of vvarre. 76

B.

  * Banquetting. 57
  * Bathes. 69
  * Better to bee vnborne then vn­taught. 47
  * Beſt bodilye proportion and fea­ture for a ſouldier. 85
  * Bluſhing in children a ſigne of good nature. 45
  * Bricke vvalles in Babilon. 10
  * Btibery a filthy thing. 26
  * Biſhops named kinges by Romulus. 24.

C

  * Careleſſe princes. 1
  * Care for Scholemaiſters. 11
  * Caſtles in cities. 72
  * Cato his diſtinctiōs of groūd. 67
  * Cato, one of fevv vvordes. 52
  * Cauſes neceſſary for mariage. 35
  * Certen hādicraftſmē neceſſary. 9
  * Cenſor vvhat it ſigniſieth. 28
  * Ceremonial cuſtōes of Egipt. 68
  * Choyſe of a vvyfe. 38
  * Chaſtity in a vvoman. 41
  * Cheſtnut tree. 67
  * Cheriſhing of children. 45
  * Children of dul vvytres. 46
  * Children hovv longe they are ſo reputed. 55
  * Choiſe of groūd for building. 66
  * Choiſe in buying lande. eodem
  * Choyſe of grounde for pitchinge of Tentes. 88
  * Ciuility vvhat it is. 48
  * Cicero and Saluſt at diſſentiō. 59
  * Citty Souldiers. 85
  * Clemency commendable. 83.
  * Cloaked treaſons. 82
  * Combatte. 74
  * Cōfortable to haue children. 35
  * Communalty of Rome. 64
  * Commodities of learning. 46
  * Commodity by concord. 49
  * Comelye building in a city. 72
  * Cōſiderations for magiſtrates. 26
  * Conſiderations for children. 43
  * Concord in a Realme. 44
  * Concord in muſicke. 50
  * Compariſon of a commō vveale vnto a Ship. 49.
  * Complayntes of Suters. 63
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=97)Countries famous throughe vva­ters. 68
  * Continuall toyling. 18
  * Coūtry muſt be reſpected vvher ſouldiers be borne. 85
  * Corporall exerciſe. 17
  * Corruption of Iudgement. 25
  * Couetous man good to none. 40
  * Couetous man, an hōgry dog. 40
  * Couerouſ [...]es. 58
  * Coſtly funeralles. 58
  * Curioſity of a ſimpering prikme­dainty 42

D

  * Daunſinge. 43
  * Daungerous to haue many ſtraū gers in a citty. 8 [...]
  * Darius dranke muddy vvater. 56
  * Death eſc [...]e [...]d by thraldom. 27
  * Death to thē that leaue childrē behinde them leſſe greuous. 35
  * Death of theim that vvante iſſue brought into obliuion. ibidē
  * Demoſthenes. 79
  * Difference of humane ſociety. 3
  * Dyet. 14
  * Dioniſius. 53
  * Diogenes. 53
  * Diſcōmoditie of ſt [...]dig vvater. 66
  * Domeſtical. diſcorde. 42
  * Duties of Iuſtice. 21

E

  * Egiptian lore. 11
  * Eight kindes of puniſhments v­ſed by the Romaines. 27
  * Eloquence. 15
  * Enuye. 62
  * Epaminond [...]s. 18
  * Epaminondas neuer maried anye vvife. 47
  * Epicutes. 57
  * Equalitie in a citty cauſeth con­corde. 5
  * Equality in choiſe of a vvife 38
  * Eſpialles very neceſſary. 81
  * Example of ſocietie in birdes. 2 [...]
  * Exerciſe of mannes lyfe. 8
  * Example of deſtenie. 13
  * Example of Milo. 18
  * Example of Polidamus. ibidem
  * Example of temperaunce. 21
  * Exāple of the huſbands loue. 36
  * Example of the vviues loue. 46
  * Example of cockring childrē. 46

F.

  * Fauour & mercy of conquerours 64
  * Faire and ſmoth vvordes. 63
  * Fevv vvell trayned Souldiers, better then a great number vnſkil­full. 84
  * Flattery muſt be eſchevved. 53
  * Firſt reaſon of Societye inſtitu­ted. 3
  * Firſt dutie of Iuſtice. 6
  * Firſt earthly treaſures of men. 28
  * Firſt loue is moſt ſtedfaſt. 43
  * Firſt onſet in battle daūgerous. 75
  * Fovver ſpeciall regardes in mans lyfe. 20
  * Four Cardinall vertues. 50
  * Foure thinges belonginge to a Chief [...]ayne. 77
  * For vvomen to knovve the full time of going vvith childe & vvhen to be deliuered. 45
  * Fortifications. 7 [...]
  * Forrein ſouldiers vntruſty. 8 [...]
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=97)Fruite eaters.  [...]4
  * Fyrevvood. 68
  * Fiſhiug. 71
  * Fugitiues and runnavvayes from the armie. g [...]

G

  * Gaggling of a gooſe ſaued Ro­me from beinge taken by the enemies. 29
  * Gardens and Orchardes. 6 [...]
  * Gates. 81
  * God the principall aucthor of al good lavves & procedinges. 23
  * Good houſholders.  [...]
  * Good Artes and Sciences, to bee cared for. ibid.
  * Good counſellours. 23
  * Good exāples by Romaines. 26
  * Good order for corne. 30
  * Good order for the church. 31
  * Good order for high vvayes. ibid
  * Good order for Conduites. ibid
  * Good parentes bringe vp good children. 38
  * Good mother, good nurſe. 44
  * Good report for vvell doing. 50
  * Good citizen, good huſbande.  [...]1
  * Good vvay to procure a ſtomake 56
  * Gouernours in vvarres. 77
  * Grammer. 12
  * Gratitude 52.
  * Gourmaundiſe 55

H

  * Hard bringing vp of youth. 17
  * Hard thing to choſe a vvyfe. 38
  * Hardneſſe of fare. 78
  * Hee that obayeth vvell ruleth vvell. 21
  * Honosalit arres. 3
  * Hovv a common vveale proſpe­reth vvithout magiſtrates. 19
  * Houſholders. 32
  * Hovv the maiſter ſhould entreat his ſeruauntes. 33
  * Hovv a healthful man diſpoſeth his ryme. 45
  * Hovv to deale vvith children. 45
  * Hovv Bacchꝰ vvas made a god. 51
  * Hovv Architas qualified his āger 54.
  * Hoat vvater, 69
  * Hovv to ouercome the enemy. 9
  * Humane care. 3
  * Hunting. 86
  * Hurt of flatterers. 53
  * Huſbandry. 7
  * Huſbādry, purueighour of manie neceſſaries. 57
  * Huſbandmen. 60

I

  * Iuniper trees. 67
  * Imitation of Nature. 1
  * Inuention of Muſicke. 14
  * Infancy of children. 45
  * Inconuenience of anger. 53
  * Indians maner in burialls. 58
  * Infamy of Cenſors. 26
  * Innocency. 27
  * Iſis a Goddeſſe. 91
  * Italy. 66
  * Iulius Caeſar. 79
  * Iuba. 60
  * Iuſ [...]ice. 21

K

  * Kings of Egipt. 11
  * Kindes of vvaters. 70

L.

  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=98)Lacedemonians. 86
  * Lavves made not obſerued 4
  * Lavv amongſt Thegiptians. 8
  * Lavv a ſilente magiſtrate. 21
  * Lavvyers vnſaeiable. ibidē
  * Leuiyng Tributes. 28
  * Liberality in Captapnes. 74
  * Lybraries. 73
  * Lybrary of Ptolomeus. ibidem
  * Lotos a tree. 32

M.

  * Magiſtrates. 21
  * Manquelling. 23
  * Mans age. 54
  * Mans age deuided by ſeuen yea­res. ibidem
  * Mannes lyfe compared to the 4. ſeaſons of the yeare. 55
  * Mā may not vviſh for lōg life. ibi.
  * Manner of apparel. 57
  * Mayne timber trees 68
  * Merchauntes. 8
  * Memory in children the beſt to­ken of vvitte. 45
  * Metellus his oracion concerning mariage. 36
  * Moderate dyet and meaſurable apparell. 41
  * Modeſt aunſvvere of a chaſt Lady 43
  * Moderation in Dyet. 5 [...]
  * Moneta a monendo. 28
  * Monumentes. 58

N

  * Nature in chyldren ought to be carefull for their Parentes in olde age, 35
  * Naturall mothers are naturall­nurſes, 44
  * Naughty members in a commō vveale. 64
  * Neareneſſe of the Sea commodious to a Cittye, 70
  * Nobles. 5
  * No vvitty Citizen vvithout lear­ninge. 12
  * Not good to do any thing vvhile anger laſteth, 54
  * No place for Loiterers in a common vveale. 6
  * Nothinge more rare then a per­fect Generall, 80
  * Nightvvatches in a citty, 28
  * Nightvvatchers charged. 29
  * Nightvvatches preuent manye daungers. 30

O

  * Obedience vnto Iuſtice. 4
  * Occaſions of contention amōg Citizens to be reformed. 25
  * Octauius Caeſar. 87
  * Offences in Souldiers, 78
  * Olde men. 55
  * Old beaten ſouldiers, 87
  * Oligarchia. 4
  * One politique Capitayne more vvorthe then a greate ſorte of vnſkilfull ſouldiers, 79
  * Orderly inſtruction of the man to his vvyfe 39
  * Ordering the members of chyl­dren. 44
  * Order of buildinge houſes. 72
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=98)Ouerſeers of the lavvs. 24
  * Ouerſeers of houſholde affaires. 32

P

  * Pauſanias of Macedonia. 62
  * Paynting. 10
  * Peace better then vvarre 76
  * Pecunia, a pecore. 28
  * Penury of corne & victualles. 71
  * People bred in cold countries. 67
  * People of the ſouth part. ibidem
  * Periury. 52
  * Perſians truſty in keeping coun­ſell. 22
  * Periander a buggerer. 62
  * Phiſicke. 14
  * Philoſophie. 16
  * Phocion. 31
  * Pinching pouertie putteth men to their ſhiftes. 20
  * Piety of Alexander. 27
  * Poetes neceſſarye in a common vveale. 16
  * Puniſhements for the vvatch. 80
  * Poſſeſſion of Landes. 32
  * Pouertie not relieued. 60
  * Prayſe of Titus Veſpaſianus for his gouernment. 1
  * Praiſe of his bountie. 51
  * Prayſe of ſome princes. 2
  * Prayſe of Iulius Caeſars bountie tovvardes learning. 17
  * Praiſe of Adrianus Caeſar. 31
  * Praiſe of Africanus for his boun­tie 51
  * Prayſe of vvarrefare. 76
  * Pretor vvhat it ſignifieth 25
  * Prodigality and ryot of Albidius. 56
  * Prudence 21

R

  * Raſhe ſpeache. 52
  * Raſhneſſe of anger. 53
  * Reaſons of regarde in a commó vveale. 9
  * Reaſon ought to rule our affecti­ons. 50
  * Repiners at other mens vvel do­inge. 62
  * Remorſe of the Maiſter tovvar­des his ſeruauntes fidelity. 33
  * Revvarde for vvel doing and pu­niſhment for euill doing. 86
  * Rich men vnlearned 46
  * Riottous perſons reclaymed. 47
  * Riottous perſons. 56
  * Riot and couetouſnes. 57
  * Rome and Athens in olde time the mothers of Artes and Scien­ces. 76
  * Romaines eſtemed vvarfare and huſbandrye both alike. 86

S.

  * Safe layde vp ſoone founde. 41
  * Sauegardes of a Cittye. 28
  * Secretes betvvene man and vvife ought not to be reuealed. 39
  * Scithiās maner in burying their kinges. 58
  * Scoutes. 21
  * Scouts, vvatchers and vvarders. 28
  * Secrete handling of affaires. ibid.
  * Semyramis. 58
  * Seigniorie of Venice. 22
  * Silence 52
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=99)Seueritie of Iuſtice. 64
  * Senate in doubt. 63
  * Senators diſcharged. 26
  * Shameles aūſvvere of a a ſhame leſſe ſtrompet. 37
  * Small ſtature of Alexanders ſoul diers, 85
  * Smellfeaſtes. 56
  * Societie of citizens. 2
  * Societye humane profitable by procreation. ibidem
  * Society humane vvherunto it tē ­deth. 49
  * Socrates. 36
  * Solons lavv for the childe that is not vvell prouided for by the parents. 47
  * Solons lavv for puniſhing adul­terye. 37
  * Some vvomen delyghting in fil­thy talke declare the filthines of their poluted minde. 37
  * Spiritualty ought to be maynreyned by the lyuinges of the churche. 60
  * Sundrye good poinctes meete to be knovvē of a good capitaine. 80
  * Spede and expedition a notable furderaūce vnto vvar like affay­res. 83
  * Springes of vvonderfull quality in forreyn countreys 69
  * Stature moſte commendable for a Souldier. 85
  * Straungers. 61
  * Streite girding. 44
  * Studies of vertues & diſciplines. 3
  * Such men, ſuch familye and ſer­uauntes. 32
  * Surueighours of vvoorkes. 88

T

  * Thebes 10
  * To keepe touche and perfourme promiſe, is commendable. 21
  * Tvvo precepts to be obſerued by the huſbande tovvardes the vvife. 39
  * Tvvo kindes of learning not preiudicial for the childe to practiſe, at one inſtaunt. 46
  * Tvvo ſpeciall preceptes in direc­ting vvarfare. 83
  * Trade of liuing. 34
  * Trayning of Souldiers. 86
  * True ornamentes of a vvomā. 41
  * True citizens. 61
  * Triptolemus. 49
  * Tribes or vvardes in a citty. 26
  * Times to be conſidered in peace and vvarre. 24
  * Time doth alter both the perſon and his properties. 24
  * Time or age for man and vvomā to mary. 38

V

  * Vayne traffiques. 8
  * Vaine glory and ambition. 76
  * Venetians admitr no ſtraungers to beare rule among them. 22
  * Venetiās alter nothing af [...]rtime ordayned by their predeceſſors and elders. ibidem
  * Vndecent geſture, in a Senatour put to repulſe. 23
  * Vertues the guides of eiuile ma­giſtrates. 21
  * Vertuous children. 41
  * Vnfitnes of ſouldiers. 85
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=14585&page=99)Vnneceſſary expences muſt be forborne in funeralles. 57

VV

  * VVater. 68
  * VVaging battle. 57
  * VVarring for enlarging empire. 76
  * VVell vſing of hired ſeruāts. 34
  * VVidovves marying again make men ſuſpecte they do it for luſt. 42
  * VVhat thinge is moſt difficult in the lyfe of man. 2
  * VVhat a ciuill man is. 44
  * VVhat kinds of vvater is beſt. 70
  * VVho be mere Perſons to be made magiſtrates in a com­mon vveale. 20
  * VVho be meteſt for vvatchers. 29
  * VVorckmaiſters and deuiſers of vvorcks. 10
  * VVomē ſtomach to haue their huſbands kepe an h [...]rlot. 37
  * VVomen vvith childe. 43
  * VVomē ought to be reſtrayned from gadding abrode. ibidē
  * VVoman to ſaue and kepe that is brought home. 35
  * VVorthy acts of Hercules. 50
  * VViſe vvomē feare euil reports. 41
  * VVife, no ſtomacker nor reſiſter. 42
  * VViſe man vvill do no ill nor ſuffer any to be done by his vvil. 51
  * VVicked demaund of a vvoman. 43

Y

  * Youngmē muſt be exerciſed. 48
  * Young men hovv long they are ſo reputed. 55
  * Youngmē moſt apteſt to be tray­ned in vvarfare. 8 [...]

Finis.

[Home](/)

Patrizi, Francesco, 1413-1494.. Date: 1576  

