---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Poor Robins opinion of the present blazing star, appearing in the north-east
part of the heavens, this present year, 1677 which is far more remarkable than
any before of that nature, by reason of the strangeness of its position.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52335&page=1)

Poor Robins Opinion of the Preſent Blazing Star, Appearing in the North-Eaſt
Part OF THE HEAVENS, This Preſent Year, 1677.

Which is far more Remarkable then any before of that NATURE, By Reaſon of the
ſtrangeneſs of its POSITION.

LONDON, Printed for D. W. in the Year 1677.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Poor Robins Opinion of the preſent Blazing-Star appearing in the North-Eaſt part of the Heavens.

[[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52335&page=2)

## 1\. Poor Robins Opinion of the preſent Blazing-Star appearing in the North-
Eaſt part of the Heavens.

I Think I need not fear Credit from the world, ſince they are ſo ſenſible of
my Judgment in Judicial Aſtrology, which I think is equal to any that have
writ before me, or ſince; For I think I have had as good a gueſs at things,
and ſpoke as much Aſtrological Truth as Lilly or Booker of black Monday.

I'le warrant you upon this occaſion if any Sadneſs or Miſ­chief ſhould fall
out, which God divert, though with Reverence and fear I ſpeak it. How they
would tell ye they foreſaw it a hundered years ſince, as they did the burning
of London by Noſtre Dame, Mr. Lillies Hierogliphicks, &c. which was never
heard of before.

But for my part as I have always told truth, and was leſs miſtaken then any of
my function, ſo I deſire to continue. For 'twas always my ſaying, if a Winter
proved cold, warme Cloaths, a good Fire, and good Proviſion was the beſt
remedy.

I Confeſs Mr. L—had the good Luck to get a Meddel from the King of Sweden, but
for all that he could not tell the Coun­try man who S—at his door.

Like Gipſies we tell people their fortunes, or as People at a Lottery get
money.

I hope the people will have more wit then to believe us, and to have more
diſcretion then to be frighted.

However Since from General obſervation that things of this Nature does not
happen without Relation to further E­vents, and that they are Meſſengers from
common experience of the moſt High, it ought to be the care of every perſon to
pre­vent the Probable ſad conſequence, for by common experience we find that
after theſe occaſions hath hapned, National miſeries.

[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52335&page=2) VVhich to
effect is for every man to ſweep his won door, ac­cording to the Engliſh
Proverb.

For we find it uſual when Men have Committed any enor­mity, and are
diſcovered, they would feign eaſe themſelves of the burthen of their follies,
and either extenuate it in themſelves, or unjuſtly lay it upon anothers
ſhoulders.

VVhen a general Calamily happens (or ſevere Judgment) though before our
Vanities were not regarded, the great and Righteous Judge by his Ambaſſadour,
Conſcience, the accuſing faculty doth truly inform us it is from the occaſion
of ſin (from which we cannot receede nor deny,) yet forſooth we would feign
make ſome body elſe the Author of our own infirmities, and wickedly lay them
at other doors.

The great danger of which, if Men did but rightly conſider (they would ſhun
with dilligence Immaginable) for whilſt I charge my fault upon another, I do
not purge my ſelf, and therefore my Sin remains, and the cauſe not being taken
away, the effects conſequently muſt continue.

And with great amazement I find for the moſt part they would lay at their
Princes door, not only fooliſhly to hope to quiet their own uneaſie
conſcience, but make him to bear the Scandal of their Infirmities.

But let ſuch Men have a care, for if Kings and Queens, ac­cording to the
Opinion of our Divines, be the Nurſing Fathers and Mothers of their Countries,
we muſt have a great regard to their Perſons and Honours (and above all
things) to take a Reverend care of expoſing their infirmities, for whatever
evil we ſhould here of them, if it prove falſe, to convey it to others, is a
moſt damnable Crime.

But ſhould it prove true, we ſhould like Shem and Japheth take a Garment and
lay it upon our Shoulders, and go back­wards and cover the Nakedneſs of our
Father, for fear like Ham on the contrary, we ſhould Merit a curſe, which may
be intal'd upon our poſterity to the end of the VVorld. The Common indignities
and affronts done to their Royal Perſons being not the Leaſt occaſion of our
uſual diſappointments and Judgments.

VVe have a common ſaying in England to our Children, for faults repeated
before we correct them, you had fair warning.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52335&page=3) God
Almighty never Puniſhes or afflicts without being highly Provoked, and before
he puts it in execution, trys us by all means to avoid his chaſtiſements (if
Poſſible) and to that end often times intimates to us his diſpleaſure by ſome
extraordi­nary occaſion, becauſe he will not deal with us according to our
ſins, nor Reward us after our iniquities knowing us to be but duſt.

VVhich may be taken from the preſent Meteor or appear­ance, and therefore 'tis
great Prudence in us all by a holy habit and diſpoſition to oppoſe and
overcome thoſe threatning calamities which we may reaſonably expect as the ſad
effects of our preſent condition.

This commet or Blazing-Stars firſt appearance or riſing is in the North-Eaſt
Part of the Heavens, it is in Colour Red and bloody, But the Poſition
different from any that this Age hath produced, The extremity or tayle being
erect or upwards.

VVhich may ſignifie that by lifting up our hands▪ and hearts to God in devont
Prayer and repentance we may avoid thoſe evils it portends, which to effect,
Let us fear God and honour the King.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1677  

