---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# The life and death of Mris Rump. And the fatal end of her base-born brat of
destruction, with her own first hatching and bringing forth from the Devils
arse a peake, it being the only place, from whence this illigitimate bastard
or monster had its nativity.

## Table of contents

  * 3\. EPILOGUE.

# [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=163783&page=1)The Life
and Death of Mris RUMP.

# And the Fatal end of her Baſe-born brat of deſtruction, with her own firſt
hatching And bringing forth from the Devils Arſe a Peake, it being the only
place, from whence this illigitimate Baſtard or Monſter had its Nativity.

## 1\.

The Names of the chief Actors, in this Tragical Scene.

  * Devils Arſe.
  * Mris. Rump.
  * Mulciber Black-ſmith of Hell
  * Vortiger.
  * Etheldrid,
  * Edricus.
  * Cain.
  * Oliv. Cromwel
  * Reynolds,
  * Pride.

## 2\.

Enter the Devils Arſe and Mris Rump.

Devils Arſe.

HA, ha, ha, Hoop, what comes here, a Brat of my own bringing forth?

Mris Rump.

Zounds thou lyeſt, I am no Monſter like thee, I ſcorn to looſe the leaſt title
of my uſurped Honour. Am not I the powerfull mighty and invincible ſtamp of
Tyranny, to whoſe ſhaddow all muſt and ſhall bow, or elſe expect the terrour
of my Thundring Ordinances, Votes, and De­clarations, how dareſt thou to
queſtion my impregnable Force to whoſe Com­mand Armies were ſubject.

Devils Arſe.

What force haſt thou? Wilt thou deny me, thy own Mother from whence thou hadſt
thy firſt Birth, breath, life and being was not I the firſt Arſe, or ſtump
from whence all miſery befell man, did not I ſeduce the Woman to the
deſtruction of all men? and am thy own creator?

Rump.

No my name is beyond thy ſtinking Pedigree, is not Rump an Honour­able name.

Devil Arſe.

And is not my name the very ſame, but one of better narure.

He ſpits at her.

Mrs. Rump.

What! doſt thou ſpit at me?

Devils Ariſe.

Would it were mortal poiſon for thy ſake.

Mrs. Rump.

Oh curſed Varlet, the very ſcent of thy ſtinking Salliport would infect a
Toad.

Devils Arſe.

Out of my ſight, thy very breath infects my eyes.

Mrs. Rump.

Some diſmall Fiend confound the ſubſtance of thy Helliſh ſhape.

Devels Arſe.

Art thou like bloody Nero to murder me thy own mother? who didſt thou learn
this cruelty of.

Mrs. Rump.

None but thy ſelf?

Devils Arſe.

It is true I cauſed Cain to murder a fourth part of the whole would, I his own
Brother.

Mrs. Rump.

And with theſe bloody Pawes I murthered my own King; And world do my Gen.
Monck too, were I in place again.

Devils Arſe.

Out Devil murther thy King?

Mrs. Rum.

I and would murther thee too, wert thou a King.

Devils Arſe.

I had rather be a Pedlar, far be the thought of it from me; but where is thy
Conſcience?

Mrs. Rump.

In the Exchequer, had it not been ſo, I had never embrewed my hands in blood
for curſed gold. But is there no more Murtherers but I?

Devils Arſe.

Here comes many more of your Comrades:

Enter Vortiger, Etheldrid, Edricus, O. Cromwel, Reynolds & Pride.

Vortiger.

I murthered my Soveraign Lord and King Conſtance, and many more beſides.

Etheldred, I murthered mine own Brother Edward to poſſeſſe his Crown, and
ſubtily cauſed all the Danes in one general banquet to be ſlain,

Edricus.

And I murthered my King Edmond Iron-ſides.

O. Crom.

Did not I go before you all? I can ſcarce number the Catalogue of my murthers
plots and treacheries; I murthered Hewet, Love, Slingsby, and many more,
beſides I cauſd Sindercomb to be poyſond, and to clear my pre­tended innocency
layd it on himſelf. And I gave Tythes to the Prieſts to make all amends. I
alwaies ſtool a Gooſe and ſtuck down a Feather. Nay rather then leave my old
Trade of Murder, I hangd many of my ow Souldiers, as I did a Drummer in
Ireland, for taking a Mutton from the enemy, and two at Eden­burgh in
Scotland.

Reynolds.

And I (through thy perſwaſion after I had ſwore fealty) murthe­red Thompſon
and many of the Burfordians.

Pride.

And I becauſe the blood of men could not ſatisfie me murthered the harmleſs
Bears on the Bankſide.

Mris Rump.

And I think thou art well requited?

Pride.

Indeed I find ſo for I did not only murder the Bears, but pinch the poor of
meaſure while on earth, but have it large enough in Hell.

Mris. Rump.

I and good reaſon too, you have your firing free Noble Colonel.

Pride.

I but though firing be cheap, water is dear, there's never a Tankard-bearer in
Hell; therefore I have little hope of helpe.

Cain.

What pratling's here? Did not I teach you all to murder?

Enter Mulciber. I brought all theſe to my Forge, and I think they have acted
their parts.

Exit omnes.

Mrs. Rump.

And what have you all done that I have not been forward in, I have deſtroyed
all Laws, Break Oaths, Covenants, committed, Sacriledge, murders, Plunderings,
and would have done more, had not I been prevented, by a company of Secluded
Malignants of my own creating. And ſhall not I be received to ſit in Council
among you.

Devils Arſe.

I But firſt ſetting by all Ceremonies, Mrs. Rump, is not my name more Ancient,
and I more Honourable, art not thou a brat of my own Hatching?

Mrs. Rump.

No, I come of noble blood; which I have gained by noble mur­ther, the Scarlet
die of which lies ſtill in my ſtained Conſcience; But yet not thy Brat.

Devils Arſe.

Grim fiend thou lyeſts for the very ſubſtance of thy deformed ſhape, was
fram'd in Hell, by Mulciber Blackſmith, who Anvell'd thee out of my horrid,
Black, and putrifi'd, Excrements.

Mr. Rum.

I charge thee be gone, If not I ſhall force thee to an Oath of Abjuration, and
if that be performed thou maiſt by thy perjury become one of my Counſel.

Devils Arſr.

What doſt thou intend to ſwallow up my blood as thou didſt the blood of thy
Soveraign Lord and King?

Mrs. Rump.

I do ſo, my delights in nothing more then Martyrings Kings, and to have my
hands ſmoaking in the blood of Princes; Oh the Son of him, who was the
ſacrifice of my youth! his eſcape is the chiefeſt of my torment, who now is
like to be advanced to my deſtruction.

Devils Arſe.

Thou Dam'd Hedgehock, what repent now its too late for that. Thou maiſt now
travel with thy late born Babe of Reformation at thy back in a blancket like
an old Iriſh Bennoot: but whoſe there Mulciber.

Enter Mulciber.

I come, I come, I come, Whats here to be done, a piece of my own work, Ile
finiſh it? come away thou lowſie Rump, now will I have thee to my Anvel; and
beat thee into a better form that thou maiſt ſeem ſome what.

Mrs. Rump.

Oh good Sir, where ſhall I go?

Mulcib.

To Hell the fitteſt place for thee, Earth is not to be peſtered up with ſuch,
comberſome bundles of baſeneſſe, I ſhall Anvill the into ſome better form
quickly.

Mrs. Rump:

Will no dungeon ſerve turn, but that ugly loathſome and miſe­rable place of
torment?

Devils Arſe.

No place but one?

Mrs. Rump.

What place doſt thou mean.

Dev. Arſe.

I mean that ſtinking poyſonous place called the Ile of Jaqueſes, where the
black horrid excrements of all ſinners may Float upon thy loathſome Soul, and
ſmother thy loathſome Brat of curſed, Uſurping and Tyrrannical Reformation to
Eternity, as a Revenge on thee for thy cruelty committed on thy Right and
Lawful Soveraign Lord the King.

Whilſt thus he made an end of ſpeaking Mrs. Rump (much tortured in
con­ſcience) with her ugly Deformed, Monſtrous, and horrid Brat without a
head, who had feet like a Bear, and bag at the Belly full of falſe Oathes,
Papers, and Engagements, being more Ar—then Body, with a gaſhly countenance
gave a terrible ſcreek, and departed the world in a flaſh of Lightning, and
being con­verted to a ſtinking vapor vaniſhed away, and was no more heard of
ſince, whereby her Funeral could not be ſolemnized.

## 3\. EPILOGUE.

YOu that have ſeen this ſtinking Lump of Earth,

Conceal her Name, ſince her prodigious Birth

Is not worth minding, for her fatal fall

Was great, I, and her Vertues none at all;

Shee's not worth eating boyld or roaſt at Supper,

Who had her Birth and Name from Plutos Crupper.

Of's very Excrements, you all may tell

By Mulciber her Corps was forgd in Hell.

Let all Spectators now together jump

Upon this noyſome, beaſtly, ſtinking Rump,

And ſay, here lyes interr'd a clod of Clay,

Who killd her King, her God and Soul away,

She ſold, and that for Naſty Pelf,

But now Old Bawd ſhe is defunct her ſelf.

Since ſhee is dead and gone good People all

Lament in Sack at this her Funerall.

Curſd be the Divils Ar—from whence did Spring

This helliſh Rump, to Murder Charles Our King:

Yet by his Son we ſhall true Peace enjoy

Singing with Eccoes loud Vive Le Roy.

## Appendix A

LONDON, Printed for Theodorus Microcoſmus. 1660.

[Home](/)

Date: 1660  

