---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Memorabilia mundi, or, Choice memoirs of the history and description of the
world by G.H.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=1)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=1)

Memorabilia Mundi: OR, Choice Memoirs, OF THE HISTORY AND DESCRIPTION OF THE
WORLD.

By G. H

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be ſold by F. Smiih at the Elephant
and Caſtle without Temple-Bar. 1670.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=2)

## To the Right Honourable John Earl of Dover, Viſcount Rochford, Lord
Hunſdon, &c.

MY LORD,

I Approach your Lordſhip with the ſame hardineſs as they who ſatisfie
themſelves, that the ſincerity of the Giver may attone for the little value of
the gift; having learnt this preſumption from Hiſto­ry, where I find that
great Princes have look'd kindly upon mean obla­tions, and thereby rendred the
ge­neroſity of their acceptance more il­luſtrious, by the duty and obedience
of the Preſenters.

Nor with this trick of moral ſto­ry would I be thought to wind your Lordſhip
into the reception of a trifle, but that I carry a braver de­ſign in it; that
is, on this occaſion
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=3) to make a
publick acknowledgment of the many and great favours (and of one eſpecially
above the reſt, the o­verflow of your nobleneſs) which you have been pleas'd
to confer upon your unworthy ſervant. For (my Lord) the ſenſe of them
hitherto, bounded within the narrow knowledge of my meanneſs, hath ſeem'd to
me a kind of guilty concealment, and almoſt tantamount to a denyal of them,
till I was able to render this happy and open declaration to the world, of an
humble and obſequious gratitude for thoſe favours done me; and ſo done, that
your generous affability in diſ­ſpenſing them may for ever condemn the rough
cuſtom of the age, whoſe haughty ſtate in doing kindneſſes, does moſt commonly
turn their bread into ſtone.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=3) And though I
know, that thanks alone is no payment ſterling; yet ſince to the greatest
Beings for the greateſt and moſt laſting benefits we can ſcarce make any
better return. I hope it will not ſeem ſtrange, if I preſent your Lordſhip the
memory of your own goodneſs to pay your ſelf. For where the obligation exceeds
poſſibility of requital, the ſawſineſs of attempting to ſatisfie, is
infinitely worſe than the humble acknowledg­ment of ſtill owing.

My Lord, I offer to your view a piece, that dare not ſtand the teſt of your
Judgment, but would humbly ſhelter near your goodneſs, & which (when your
Lordſhip takes breath from your other more weighty both publick and private
affairs) may [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=4)
ſerve to entertain you in the leſs ſerious part of the day; The matter is
leaſt mine, the form & compoſure I may own a whole ſhare in; ſo the Bulloin of
the Indies (if the alluſion be not preſumptuous) becomes the Kings coin, after
it has receiv'd his stamp & image. And as after view­ing the ſcatter'd
pleaſures of a large and fair Garden, ſome ſatisfaction is receiv'd from the
contracted ſcent and beauty of a poſie; ſo if I have here at all juſtified the
compa­riſon, whatever error may have paſt in the choice or ordering of the
flow­ers, I hope your Lordſhip will pardon to

My Lord,

Your Lordſhips moſt humble and moſt grate­ful Servant, G. H.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=4)

## TO THE Moſt Accompliſh'd LADY, Mrs. DOROTHY RIVERS.

Madam

SInce for Perſons of Your Quality and Merit, it is uſual to ſuffer Afflictions
of this Nature; there is now a neceſſity that you un­dergo Your Fate, which is
ſo much the ſadder, in that all thoſe Excellencies which in you ſhine in their
Meridian, and might command Reverence from the moſt Savage World, ſerve only
to incourage my Rudeneſs, and with me to become acceſſory to your own
Per­ſecution.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=5) But it may be
(Madam) after an humble Acknowledgment of the guilt, that Goodneſs of Yours
(which ex­cepts no Sinners) may be gain'd to think the Crime Venial, and that
par­ticular Condeſcenſion which hath here­tofore ſhowr'd Obligations upon Your
moſt humble Servant, may ſtretch out Your ſaving Hand to receive a Preſent,
that would live onely in and by Your favour.

'Tis true (Madam) that the Worth­leſſeneſs of the Preſent might very well have
diſpirited the boldeſt attempt in this kind▪ had I not conſidered that I
ſhould thereby better Conſult for Your Glory, when the World ſhall take notice
that my greateſt Ambition hath been not to raiſe Trophies to my ſelf by
Writing well, but only to pay my juſt and reſpectful Devoirs, and that by
publiſhing Your Names and Vertues, I might ſhew a Pattern of all that is
Excellent and Good; which (Madam) if I ſhould ſtrive to embelliſh
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=5) with what Art
of Words can add to render any thing Illuſtrious, yet would all fall far below
the Dignity of the Subject, and I ſhould be conſtrain'd at length to leave it
as altogether unaffa­ble.

If then (Madam) what is wanting to the true payment of Juſtice and Obliga­tion
to Your Vertues, Your Goodneſs will allow my Zeal of owning to ſupply, pleaſe
to accept this trifle as the beſt Teſtimony I can at preſent make of it, which
when receiv'd into Your choice Cloſet, and ſometime turn'd over by Your fair
Hands (when you pleaſe to give Your own quainter thoughts leave to reſt) will
give me juſt cauſe to call my ſelf the happyeſt man living, and for ever fix
me

Madam Your moſt humble and moſt obedient Servant.

G. H.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=6)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=6)

## TO THE READER.

I Preſent you (Reader) with a novelty, which if your pallate be not wholly
vi­tiated, may generally reliſh well with you. For the variety of the matter
you may call it a kind of Olio, the ſeaſoning of which hath coſt me both time
and expence; and though it be not of the choiceſt rarities, it is done at
leaſt according to the beſt of my skill. If by this ſlender attempt I may
pro­voke any better able more handſomely and regularly to couch a ſubject
attended with ſo much both profit and pleaſure, I think I have done the kind
and induſtrious part of
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=7) the world no
ill office, who will (though but for this reaſon) let paſs without rigid and
ſupercilious Cenſure the mean Eſſay of him, whoſe ardor to ſerve them, hath
ren­dred him leſs ſeeing in the examination of his own ability. Yet would I
not be con­ceiv'd to know my ſelf and value my pains ſo little, but that I may
merit ſome thanks, at leaſt from the well tempered meaſurers of mens
intentions: however ſome there will be (and thoſe not a few) whom I could wiſh
(becauſe I love my ſelf well) might be won to my ſide) but I fear my ſingle
ta­lent of perſwaſion will never be able to gain them; for being ill-natured,
and therefore doing nothing themſelves but miſchief, they carry an intenſe
hatred to thoſe that would humbly do good, nay though it be done never ſo
perfectly. What quarter then my poor offering (being ſenſible to how many
exceptions it may be lyable) is like to find among them I well know, but have
heart enough not much to fear; e­ſpecially hoping among the Candid Ingeni­ous
ſuch reception as will amply remunerate
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=7) me for all
the ill uſage I may meet with elſewhere.

Here is a taſt then (to you kind Reader I ſpeak it) of what in ſo uſeful a
Subject might be performed by a more judicious pen, Analects of the Hiſtory
and Deſcripti­on of the World, not ſo choicely nor methodi­cally handled as
might be expected, but yet may ſerve to refreſh your memory after the tedious
and ill way of other mighty Vo­lumes. It were a worthy employ for any that
hath parts and leiſure to go through with it (in a more acute and accurate
man­ner, not emitting ought memorable) to ex­tract from thoſe numerous Records
of Hi­ſtory all ſuch ſhort Memoirs as may tend either to inſtruction or
delight. And as he will thereby infinitely oblige both theſe, whoſe way of
Education may have leſs qua­lified them to diſtinguiſh the Stars in ſail­ing
on the vaſt Ocean of Story; and thoſe alſo, whoſe confinement in time or coin
may diſenable them for ſuch expenſive ways of knowledge: So ſhall he in
particu­lar find me the moſt acknowledging of all
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=8) his Servants,
muſt eſteem mine moſt happy faults, that have been to him incentives of
aſpiring to the true glory of Writing better.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=8)

## ERRATA.

PAge 1\. line 4\. dele utra (que) p. 4\. l. 20\. r. Cteſiphon p. 12\. l. 2\.
r. happy; p. 25\. l. 4\. dele from Eaſt Frizeland, to Weſtphalia, then r.
Weſtphalia is moſt famous, &c. p. 31\. l. 16\. for of the r. and p. 32\. l.
11\. r. Earl Floris, p. 41\. l. 19\. r. Perſians, p. 52\. l. 5\. r. Lines, p.
57\. l. 11\. r. any, p. 59\. l. 12\. r. third, p. 60\. l. 19\. r. Shoals, p.
67\. r. not maly, but maly, p. 75\. l. 13\. r that, p. 78\. l. 6\. r.
injoyned, ib. l. 21\. r. and at, p. 81\. l. 4\. r. rich, p. 82\. l. 7\. dele
of, p. 83\. l. 21\. r. far from, p. 84\. l. 3\. r. Iſicles, ib. l. 17\. r.
Lewelyn, p. 91\. l. 23 r. not wherein, but where in, in p. 93\. l. 2\. r.
enricheth this, ib. l. 14\. r. Ruyters, p. 100\. l. 13\. r. notwithſtanding
they, p. 108\. l. 12\. in piramidy-wiſe, r. pyramid-wiſe, ib. l. 1\. dele of,
and the comma after wonders, p. 109\. l. 12\. r. Shotland, ib. l. 19\. r. ever
pleaſing, p. 112\. l. 23\. r. Gods, p. 114\. l. 7\. r. necks were, p. 116\. l.
9\. r. Agincourt, p. 118\. l. 13\. r. Cyrenaean, p. 120\. l. 16\. r.
Ecſtatick, p. 126\. l. 2\. r. of Arabia, p. 129\. l. 22\. r. wanderers, p.
134\. l. 6\. r. Herodian, ib. l. 12\. r. more barba­rous then the Axiacan, p.
147\. l. 7\. r. murtherer, p. 149\. l. 5\. r. Savour, p. 162\. l. 11\. r ſhe
pleaſe.

Other Literal eſcapes there are, which the kind Reader may correct as he
paſſes.

## Table of contents

  * To the Right Honourable John Earl of Dover, Viſcount Rochford, Lord Hunſdon, &c.
  * TO THE Moſt Accompliſh'd LADY, Mrs. DOROTHY RIVERS.
  * TO THE READER.
  * ERRATA.
  * 1\. Memorable things Noted in the DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD.
    * 1.1. AFRICA.
    * 1.2. EƲROPE.
    * 1.3. AMERICA.
    * 1.4. GREECE.
    * 1.5. GERMANY.
    * 1.6. BOHEMIA.
    * 1.7. FRANCE.
    * 1.8. The Low-Countries.
    * 1.9. Spain.
    * 1.10. ITALY.
    * 1.11. HUNGARY.
    * 1.12. DENMARK.
    * 1.13. POLAND.
    * 1.14. PERSIA.
    * 1.15. Bermudas ISLAND.
    * 1.16. In the Sommer Iſlands.
    * 1.17. Out of the Deſcription of Great Britain, theſe Stories following are Remarkable and Pleaſant.
      * 1.17.1. KENT.
      * 1.17.2. SUSSEX.
      * 1.17.3. SURREY.
      * 1.17.4. Hant-ſhire.
      * 1.17.5. Wight Iſland.
      * 1.17.6. Devonſhire.
      * 1.17.7. Cornwall.
      * 1.17.8. Sommerſet-ſhire.
      * 1.17.9. Wilt-ſhire.
        * 1.17.9.1. Aurelius Ambroſus buryed at Stonheng, Anno 500.
      * 1.17.10. Bark-ſhire.
      * 1.17.11. Middleſex.
      * 1.17.12. Eſſex.
      * 1.17.13. Suffolk.
      * 1.17.14. Hereford-ſhire.
      * 1.17.15. Bedford-ſhire.
      * 1.17.16. Buckingham-ſhire.
      * 1.17.17. Oxford ſhire.
      * 1.17.18. Gloceſter-ſhire.
      * 1.17.19. Hereford-ſhire
      * 1.17.20. Worceſter-ſhire.
      * 1.17.21. Warwick-ſhire.
      * 1.17.22. Northampton-ſhire.
      * 1.17.23. Rutland-ſhire.
      * 1.17.24. Leiceſter-ſhire.
      * 1.17.25. Lincoln-ſhire.
      * 1.17.26. Nottingham-ſhire.
      * 1.17.27. Darby-ſhire.
      * 1.17.28. The County Palatine of Chester.
      * 1.17.29. Lancaſhire.
      * 1.17.30. York-ſhire.
      * 1.17.31. The Weſt Riding of York-ſhire.
      * 1.17.32. The North and Eaſt Riding.
      * 1.17.33. The Biſhoprick of Durham.
      * 1.17.34. Cumberland.
      * 1.17.35. Northumberland.
      * 1.17.36. Man Iſland.
      * 1.17.37. Holy Iſland.
      * 1.17.38. Farn Iſle.
      * 1.17.39. Garnſey.
      * 1.17.40. Jerſey.
      * 1.17.41. Caermarden-ſhire.
      * 1.17.42. Glamorgan-ſhire.
      * 1.17.43. Monmouth.
      * 1.17.44. Brecknock-ſhire.
      * 1.17.45. Radnor-ſhire.
      * 1.17.46. Cardigan-ſhire.
      * 1.17.47. Merioneth-ſhire.
      * 1.17.48. Denbigh-ſhire.
      * 1.17.49. Flint-ſhire.
      * 1.17.50. Carnaervon-ſhire.
      * 1.17.51. Angleſea-Iſland.
    * 1.18. Out of Scotlands General Deſcription.
    * 1.19. Out of the Deſcription of Ireland.
    * 1.20. Out of the Deſcription of the Civil Wars fought in England, Wales, and Ireland.
    * 1.21. Out of the Deſcription of the Turkiſh EMPIRE.
    * 1.22. China.
    * 1.23. Out of the Deſcription of the Kingdom of TARTARY.
  * 2\. A GENTLEMAN In his Travels TO BOHEMIA, Hath theſe Rare Obſervations following.
    * 2.1. The City of Hamburgh. The priviledges of their grand hang-man.
    * 2.2. Their manner of executing Thieves and Murtherers upon the Wheel▪ I ſhall name one for a preſident.
    * 2.3. There manner of beheading.
    * 2.4. Strange Torments and varieties of deaths.
    * 2.5. A Pretty Story.
    * 2.6. Hamburgh a free City.
    * 2.7. The Womens Habit.
    * 2.8. Men and Women draw Carts, their Office.
    * 2.9. The Lawyer a bad Trade.
  * 3\. THE Lamentable Deſtruction, OF THE Ancient and Memorable City and Temple OF JERUSALEM; Being deſtroyed by Veſpaſian, and his Son Titus.
  * Appendix A THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=9)

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=9)

## 1\. Memorable things Noted in the DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD.

IN our Deſcription of the World there are four parts, into which the World is
divided; Europe, Aſia, Africa, America utraque.

We will begin firſt with Aſia, for in Aſia did God himſelf ſpeak his
miracu­lous work of the Creation: There was the Church firſt collected, there
was the Saviour of the world born, Cruci­fied and Raiſed again: Indeed the
great­eſt [[Page 2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=10)
part of Divine Hiſtory was there written and Acted; There was the firſt
Monarch, and Monarchies of the World in Aſſyria, Perſia, Babylonia, Media. The
firſt people of the world received their being in Meſopotamia, and the ſeveral
tongues of the World their Original in Babylonia: Theſe are parts of Aſia, and
were in the firſt ages bleſt with God's own holy Preſence, Exodus the third;
and the footing of Angels, Exod. 14\. However, now it is left (for her
In­fidelity) to the puniſhment of a Prophe­tical Curſe that long before paſſed
up­on her, and is delivered up into the hands of Turks, and Nations that
Blaſpheme the Creatour, and there­fore doth not flouriſh in that height as
heretofore.

Now add together, that this Re­gion was at firſt the Paradiſe of the World,
and indeed ſtill enjoyeth a fer­tile Soyl and temperate Air, and that it
exceeds in compaſs the two other parts of the old World, to which ſhe was
[[Page 3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=10) the
Miſtreſs for Arts and Sciences; Yet is it not at this day ſo well peopled in
proportion, as this little Europe, which came many hundred years after; for
this we need ſearch no further cauſe than God's juſt Anger: Yet hath he not
ex­erciſed upon her, only by Miraculous and Immediate Puniſhment from Hea­ven,
but hath ſuffered (as it were) her own Creatures, over which Man at the firſt
had the Rule) to turn head upon their Lords, and poſſeſſe their Habitation,
for it is ſo over-run with wild-Beaſts, and cruel Serpents, that in many
places they live not without much danger.

In this; though the Nation ſuffer for their Monſtrous Irreligion; Yet the
Earth which did not offend, reſerves her place, and abounds with many
excellent commodities, not elſe-where to be had; Myrrhe, Frankincenſe,
Cinamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Pepper, Musk, Jewels of great eſteem, and
Minerals of all ſorts; It breeds Elephants, Camels, [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=11) and many other
Beaſts; Serpents, Fowl wild and tame, and ſome have added ſuch Monſtrous
ſhapes of men, as paſſe all belief.

In Aſia were the ſeven Churches which St. John mentioned in the Apo­calips;
now ſcarce is it inhabited but to­ward the Sea-ſide, and that by a baſe and
abject people, ſuch as are both lazy in their life, and odious Idolaters in
their Religions, for the moſt part Mahu­metans.

Here Epheſus it ſelf the Star of Aſia, that as well for her Reli­gion as her
miraculous Temple,This is within the compaſs of that one part which bears the
name of Aſia pro­pria. ſet the world at gaze upon her: It was raiſed in the
middle of the City, Modelled out by Cteſifon, but was 220. years in build­ing,
and was ordered in ſuch a ground, that no Earth-quake ſhould move it; It was
425. foot long, and 220. broad, and 127. Pillars, given by ſo many ſe­veral
Kings, whereof twenty ſeven [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=11) were moſt
curiouſly graven, all the reſt of Marble poliſhed. In this City St. John the
Evangeliſt is ſaid to have gone down into his Grave alive, there be who yet
queſtion his death.

Armenia minor, which is one of the Provinces of Aſia minor, is by moſt thought
to be the Land of Ararat where the Ark reſted, And there is great ſtore of
Oyl, and excellent Wine.

Arabia Foelix in Aſia major is account­ed the fruitfulleſt Country in the
World. In this Arabia is the City Medina, where Mahomet is Intombed in an Iron
Cheſt, ſupported only by a Roof of Adamant, without other Art to keep it from
falling to the ground.

Cyprus a place heretofore Conſecrated to Venus, to whom both Men and Wo­men
performed their Sacrifice naked, till by the prayer of Barnabas the Apoſtle,
the Temple was ruined.

Trojus Reports, that the Fathers of this Iſle had wont to proſtitute their
Daughters to Mariners for money, [[Page
6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=12) whereby to raiſe
them a portion againſt they could get them Husbands; but Chriſtianity
corrected thoſe Barbarous Cuſtoms.

### 1.1. AFRICA.

IN moſt parts ſhe hath ſcarce plenty ſufficient to maintain Inhabitants, and
where there is, we ſhall meet with multitudes of Ravening Beaſts, or other
horrible Monſters, enough to devour both it and us: In a word, There is no
Region of the World ſo great an Enemy to Mans Commerce; there is ſuch ſcarcity
of water, that no Creature almoſt could live, had not Nature provided
thereafter, that the greater part of them endures not drink in the very midſt
of Summer: And if (as ſometimes they be enforced by ſuch as take them) they
ſuddenly periſh. Thus we ſee how God gives a property [[Page
7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=12) to each place,
that may make up her defects, leaſt it ſhould be left as well by Beaſts as
Men.

Their Land is full of ſandy Deſarts, which lye open to the winds and ſtorms,
and oftentimes are thrown up into Bil­lows like Waves of the Sea, and indeed
are no leſs dangerous. Strabo writes, that Cambyſes his Army was thus
hazarded; a fooliſh Nation in Africa, as they march­ed towards the South, to
revenge them­ſelves upon the Winds for drying up their Rivers, were
overwhelmed with Sand, and ſo dyed in their Graves. It is alſo full of a
venemous kind of Ser­pent, that in ſome places they dare not dreſs their Lands
unleſs they firſt fence their legs with Boots againſt the ſting: Other wild
Creatures there are, which range about, and poſſeſſe to themſelves a great
portion of this Countrey, and make it a Wilderneſs of Lyons, Leo­pards,
Elephants; and in ſome places Crocodiles, Hyena's, Baſilisks, and in­deed
Monſters without either number [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=13) or name: Africa
as it is reported, is full of danger to the Inhabitants, more dye by Beaſts
than by diſeaſes.

But among all theſe Inconveniences, Commodities are found of good worth, and
the very evils yield at laſt their be­nefit, both to their own Country and
o­ther parts of the world: The Elephant a docible Creature and exceeding
uſeful for Battel; The Camel which affords much riches to the Arabian; The
Bar­bary Horſe, which we our ſelves com­mend; The Ram that beſides his fleſh
gives twenty pound of wool from his ve­ry tail; The Bull, painful and able to
do the beſt ſervice in their Tillage: And ſo moſt of their worſt, alive or
dead yield us their Medicinal parts, which the world could not well want.

In one of the Diviſions of Africa, which is Feſſe that hath a City in it with
ſeven hundred Churches, and one of them a Mile and a half in compaſs. In
Morocho is a Caſtle of great fame, for the Globes of pure Gold that ſtands
up­on [[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=13) the
top of it, and weighing 130000. Barbary Duckats.

The Land of Negro is full of Gold and Silver, and other commodities, but the
Inhabitants moſt barbarous; they draw their Original from Chus, and have
entertained all Religions that came in their way; firſt their own, then the
Jews, the Mahumetans, and ſome of them the Chriſtian; For the moſt part they
live not as if Reaſon guided their Actions.

Bornaum, a Country where the people have no proper Names, no Wives pe­culiar,
and therefore no Children which they call their own.

Aethiopia ſuperiour, it is governed by one of the mightieſt Emperors in the
World, called by us Presbyter John, he hath under him ſeventy Kings, which
have their ſeveral Laws and Cuſtoms, Among theſe the Province of Dobas hath
one, that no man marry till he hath killed twelve Chriſtians; Their Religi­on
is mixt, Chriſtians they have, but [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=14) yet differ from
us, for they Circumciſe both ſects; their Oath is by the life of their King,
whom they never ſee but at Chriſtmas, Eaſter and Holy-Rood; Their Commodities
are Oranges, Lemmons, Cittrons, Barley, Sugar, Hony.

Aethiopia inferior, the Government of this Region is under five Kings,
where­of Monomolopa is one, In which is report­ed to be three thouſand Mines
of Gold; Here there lives a kind of Amazons as valiant as men, their King is
ſerved in great pomp, and hath a guard of 200. Maſtives. Cafraria is another
Kingdom whoſe people live in the Woods with­out Laws like brutes. And here
ſtands the Cape of good Hope, about which the Sea is alwaies rough and
dangerous; It hath been eſpecially ſo to the Spaniard, it is their own note,
inſomuch, that one was very angry with God, that he ſuffered the Engliſh
Hereticks to paſs it ſo eaſily over, and not give his good Catholicks the like
ſpeed. In the Kingdom of Manicongo whoſe Inhabi­tants [[Page
11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=14) are in ſome
parts Anthropophagi, and have ſhambles of Mens fleſh, as we have for Meat,
they kill their own Children in the birth, to avoid the trouble of breeding
them, and preſerve their Nation with ſtolen Brats from their Neighbouring
Countries.

Aegypt is another part of the African continent, the places of Note are Caire,
and Alexandria, the firſt was heretofore Memphis, ſome ſay Babylon, whither
the Virgin fled to eſcape Herod's Tyran­ny intended to our Saviour, and bluſh
not to ſhew the very Cave where ſhe had hid her Babe. In a Deſart about forty
miles diſtant ſtand the Pyramides, eſteemed rightly one of the ſeven Wonders
of the World. Alexandria was a magnifi­cent City, and was famous for the
rareſt Library in the world; to the Inhabitants of this Country we owe the
Invention of Aſtrology, Phyſick, Writing on Paper, their Kings names were
Pharaoh toward the begining; Now what the Turk pleaſeth.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=15)

### 1.2. EƲROPE.

EUrope bears the Name of the moſt happieſt Country in the World, both for
plenty of Corn, Plants, Fruits, for Rivers and Fountains of ad­mirable
vertues; For beauty as well of Cities, Caſtles, and Houſes, as Men and Women
of excellent Feature▪ For the Study of Arts, for the ſcience in Reli­gion, and
what ever elſe God hath pleaſed to bleſs his Church with from the beginning.

She wants nothing but what ſhe may well ſpare, Wild-Beaſts which cauſe Deſarts
in the parts where they breed; hot ſpices which fit not our temper, and rather
corrupt our manners, than mend our dyet, precious jewels and the like, which
have brought in a degree of vain and uſeleſs pride, not known before by our
predeceſſors: Yet of Gold, Sil­ver, [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=15) and other
commodious metals, ſhe hath her portion, and in brief is of a very proſperous
temper, yet of ſo ſtrange va­riety, that it is admirable to think that there
is no place in this quarter, but is fit for any man to live in; Inſomuch as
every Country is Inhabited, as is con­firmed by our latter Travellers, though
heretofore it hath been queſti­oned by reaſon of the extream cold to­ward the
Pole.

In Hungaria is the Country of Soli­enſe where the Earth ſends forth ſuch a
ſtench, that it poyſoneth the very Birds which flye over it.

An Iſland in Danubius exceeding fer­tile, and ſo indeed is the whole Coun­try;
The people are generally ſtrong, but barbarous, their Daughters portions are
only a new attyre, and their Sons e­qually Inherit without priviledge of
Birth-right; The Emperour of Germany and the Turk ſhare it betwixt them.

Muſcovia, The whole Region is ſub­ject to the Emperour of Ruſsia: A vaſt
[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=16) Territory
and as wild a Government, for the people are very baſe, conten­tious,
ignorant, and ſottiſhly ſuperſti­tious; they bury their dead upright, with a
ſtaffe in hand, a penny in his purſe, and a Letter to St. Nicholas to procure
him entrance into Heaven.

### 1.3. AMERICA.

AMERICA admits of all variety almoſt, either of plenty or want; Admirable for
the fertility of ſoyl, then again as barren, here tem­perate, there ſcorching
hot, elſewhere as extream cold; Some Regions watered with dainty Rivers,
others again infeſted with perpetual Drowth▪ Some Plains, ſome Hills, ſome
Woods, ſome Mines, and what not in ſome tract or other, yet nothing almoſt
common to the whole, but Barbariſm of Manners, I­dolatry in Religion, and
Sottiſh Igno­rance, [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=16) ſuch as hardly
diſtinguiſheth them from Bruits, elſe they would not have taken reaſonable Men
to be immortal Gods, as at firſt they did, yet what ei­ther God was, or
Immortality, they knew no more than inſtinct of Nature gave them; they had
heard of ſome place or other (God knows where) be­hind ſome Hill, where the
bleſſed reſi­ded after death: And from thence they ſuppoſed the Spaniard came
at their firſt Arrival, but it was not long before the Tyrants cudgelled their
ſimplicity, and by their cruelty appeared to them rather Devils from Hell,
than Saints from Hea­ven.

Yet ſtill the Inland-Countryes retain for the moſt part their Inbred
blindneſs, and worſhip the Sun, Moon and Stars, and they have their other
Spirits, which they call their Zemes, and Adore them in Images made of Cotton-
Wool, which oft-times by the deluſion of Satan ſeem to move, and utter an
hide­ous noiſe, that works in theſe poor [[Page
16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=17) Idolaters a
great awe, leaſt they ſhould harm them.

The reſt of their Cuſtoms are anſwer­able to their Religion, beaſtly; they go
naked, and are very luſtful people without diſtinction of Sex; In many places
they are Anthropophagy, and prey upon each other like Wolves, they la­bour not
much to ſuſtain themſelves, but are rather content to take what the Earth can
yield without Tillage.

Nova Hiſpania, or Mexicana propria is the largeſt Province; It was firſt
poſ­ſeſſed by the Spaniard 1518\. But it coſt them much blood to intitle their
Kings Hiſpaniarum reges. It is an excellent Country, full of all variety
almoſt in e­very kinde uſual with us, and exceeds in rarities full of wonder.
There is one Tree which they dreſs like our Vine, and order it ſo, that it
yields them al­moſt all uſeful neceſſaries. The leaves ſerve them inſtead of
Paper, and of the Vine-bark, they make Flax Mantles, Matts, Shoes, Girdle and
Cordage.

[[Page 17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=17) Peninſula
Peruviana, is the South tract of America, from North to South there runs a
continued courſe of high Mountains, whoſe tops the very Fowls of the Air
cannot reach by flight; And from thence deſcend many admirable Rivers, among
which Maragn [...] and Ar­genteus are moſt famous, the one for his extent, and
the other for his plenty of Silver, The Country is exceeding rich, but the
people differ not much from the worſt of Beaſts; They devour Mans fleſh,
filthy worms, and what elſe comes in their way.

Near to the North-weſt of Peru, was an admirable atchievment performed by our
valiant Country-man John Ox­enham, who by the direction of Moors skilled in
the Country, went to the Land of Pearls, and took from the Spa­niards an
incredible weight of Gold and Silver.

Cartagena a fruitful Countrey which did yield (when time was) to our ſtill
Renowned Sr. Francis Drake, ſtore of [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=18) prize, and 240.
pieces of Ordinance.

Peru a very rich Countrey, abound­eth with Gold and Silver, little eſteem­ed
among the Inhabitants: For by re­port the Spaniard ordinarily ſhoed their
Horſes with Gold. The Inhabitants are ſtrange Idolaters, and worſhip a black
Sheep, Serpents, and other ugly Crea­tures.

Braſile. The Inhabitants are rude, live for the moſt part in the bodies of
Trees, the people are covered with natural hair, cruel laſcivious, falſe and
what not; In this Region is an hearb called Viva, which if you touch it, it
will ſhut up, as a Daiſie in the Night, and will not open till the party that
injured it be out of ſight.

Chile, on the North of Peru; it is there extream cold, inſomuch that many are
frozen to death, and harden­ed like Marble; The Rivers are fed with Snow that
falls from the tops of the high Mountains.

[[Page 19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=18)

### 1.4. GREECE.

GReece, She had once the prehe­minence of Rome in glory, as the precedence in
time; For to ſay truth, ſhe was the wiſeſt of any people that were not
inlightened with the know­ledge of that great Miſtery; She ſet a pattern for
Government to all her ſuc­ceeding ages, and (in brief) ſhe was the Miſtreſs
almoſt of all Sciences: Some there are which (in a ſtrict ac­count) will
except none but the Mathe­maticks, but now the poor wretches ſuf­fer by the
Turks, under whom to this day they are, and are ſcarce permit­ted by that
great tyrant, means of learn­ing to know the name for which they ſuffer.

And beſides the baſe miſ-uſage of the miſ-believing Turk, the very Natives
themſelves are fallen from the noble diſpoſition of their Predeceſſors into an
incredible ſottiſhneſs, and thoſe which [[Page
20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=19) before reckoned
the reſt of the Earth barbarous in compariſon to their Politick Common-wealth,
are now themſelves ſunk below the envy of the meaneſt Nation, and become the
moſt miſera­ble object of pity living upon the earth; indeed, they may hardly
be ſaid to live: They are lazy beyond belief; and igno­rant almoſt beyond
recovery; for they have now no means to bring their Chil­dren either to
learning or manners: Not an Academy in all Greece, their car­riage generally
uncivil, their feaſts rio­tous, and their mirth debaucht; Their Wives are well
favoured, and ſo indeed they muſt be, for they uſe them no longer as their
Wives than they continue to their liking, when they once fade, they are put to
the houſe of drudgery: Their language is the ſame as hereto­fore, but rudely
corrupted, they have no habit almoſt proper, but thoſe which ſerve the Turk
wear their faſhion, the reſt which are under the Venetian, ob­ſerve them in
their Apparel, for they [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=19) are Slaves to
both in their whole courſe.

Yet they retain ſtill a ſhew of the Chriſtian Religion, which was here firſt
ſettled by Timothy to whom St. Paul wrote two Epiſtles, and was af­ter in the
primitive times, profeſſed by diverſe learned and Reverend Divines of their
own Nation, which are with us received as Authentick Fathers of the Church;
St. Chryſoſtome, Baſil, &c.

Thrace. Part of this Province was here­tofore perſwaded, that their Anceſters
did not at all dye, neither ſhould they, but paſſe only out of this world into
ano­ther, to their ſuppoſed God Zalmoxis, once a Scholer of Pythagoras, who
when he had perſwaded them into this Re­ligion, ſeemed wonderfully to vaniſh
out of their ſight, and appeared not any more, but left them fully poſſeſt
that he was the Deity, which muſt after a time entertain them: And this they
expected with that great joy that as oft as one dyed, inſtead of mourning,
they ſet forth Games and Feaſts to congratu­late [[Page
22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=20) his freedome
from the troubles of this earthly condition, and the Wife only, whom he loved
beſt (for they had many) was thought worthy to be killed by her beſt friends
at her Huſ­bands Grave, that ſhe might bear him company in the other World,
the reſt bewailed their neglect, and the reſidue of their life was to them as
a diſgrace. When a Child was born, neighbours were called to bemoan his
entrance into a multitude of calamities, and in courſe they reckoned up, what
he was to paſſe before he could go to their God Zal­moxis, for they
acknowledged no other, but blaſphemed and ſhot Arrows againſt the Heavens as
oft as they heard it Thunder.

They will not admit, that their Government ſhould become hereditary, neither
muſt their King be a Father of any Children; If the King offend, he ſhall not
eſcape their Laws even to death, ye [...] no man may ſet a hand to his
Execution, but by a common deſertion he is allow­ed [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=20) no neceſſaries
to live, and therefore muſt needs dye.

### 1.5. GERMANY.

THey are a moſt ingenious people, famous beyond any others in Eu­rope, unleſs
Belgia, for the invention of many notable and uſeful Engines: The Gun and gun-
powder was firſt brought to light by one Bertholdus Swart a Fran­ciſcan, which
hath almoſt put by the uſe of any other Warlick Inſtrument, in thoſe parts of
the World where the pra­ctice is perfectly underſtood.

The Government of this Germany is Emperial. The right deſcends not by
ſucceſſion, the power of choice was con­ferred by Pope Gregory the tenth, upon
ſeven German Princes, three ſpiritual, and four temporal: Theſe are the Arch-
Biſhop of Mentz, Chancellour of the Empire through Germany; Arch-Biſhop of
Cullen, Chancellour of the Empire through Italy; Arch-Biſhop of Triers, [[Page
24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=21) Chancellour of
the Empire through France. The temporal are, the King of Bohemia, who hath the
caſting voice, on­ly in caſe of equality among the other ſix, His Office is to
be chief Cup-Bearer at the great Solemnity: Next him the Count Palatine of the
Rhene, Arch Sewer to the Emperour; Duke of Saxony, Lord Marſhal and Mar­queſſe
of Brandenburg chief Chamber­lain. Each of theſe perform his own Office in
perſon, upon the day of In­auguration. The Duke of Saxony bears the Sword, the
Count Palatine places his meat on the Table, the King of Bohe­mia bears his
Cup, and delivers it him to drink: Marqueſſe of Brandenburg ſerveth him water
to waſh, and the three Biſhops bleſs his meat; He receiveth three Crowns
before he is fully ſettled into the Majeſty of the Empire. The firſt is of
Silver, for Germany: the ſecond of Iron, for Lumbardy; and the third of Gold,
for the Empire: The laſt is ſet on at Rome, for to this day it pre­tends
[[Page 25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=21) to the
Name of the Roman Em­pire, and gives the title of Caſar, Ro­mani Imperii
Imperat [...]r.

Eaſt-Frizeland; One of the chief Towns of this Region, is Weſt-Phalia; It is
moſt famous for Swine, and ex­cellent Bacon, which is eſteemed with us, one of
the greateſt dainties to com­mend a Feaſt.

In Cullen, It is a received tradition among the Inhabitants, that the bodies
of the Wiſe-men which came from the Eaſt to worſhip Chriſt, are here
Inter­red.

In Cleveland is a City called Aken, where the Emperour receives his Sil­ver
Crown from Germany, and doth great worſhip to a Clout, which they take to be
our Saviours Mantle in which he was wrapped.

### 1.6. BOHEMIA.

THe ſcituation of this Kingdom is almoſt in the midſt of Germany, [[Page
26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=22) there is a
Forreſt called by the Name of Hercinian Forreſt, held in the Romans time, to
be nine daies journey in breadth, and in length at leaſt forty.

The River Albi [...] which hath his ri­ſing in the Hercinian Wood, (if we will
believe Report) there is often found in the Sands, lumps of pure Gold, which
need no other refining, and very pre­cious ſhells of great value, the water
ſupplies that only defect which is to be found in their Land, the earth gives
good corn, and their paſtures breed as good cattel, there is Woods good ſtore
which harbour multitudes of Wild-Beaſts, among the reſt there is a wild Beaſt
which they call Lomi▪ Armed by Nature with a ſtrange defence againſt the
Hounds which follow her, for they ſay ſhe hath a kind of bladder hanging under
her jaws, which in the Hunting ſhe fills with a ſcalding hot water, and caſts
it upon the Dogs with that nimble­neſs that they are not able to avoid or
purſue her, but oft times have their ve­ry [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=22) hair fall off as
from a dreſt Pig.

There is a ſtory paſſeth of one Ziſca a Bohemian Captain (in the difference of
the Huſſites againſt the Pope) that when he had won ſo many Battels, as his
very name began to be a terrour to the Foe, he was not content to be fear­ed
alive, but bethought himſelf how he might ſpeak louder when he was dead; And
therefore will'd his Souldiers, that they would flea him, and make a Drum of
his skin, which he was perſwaded, ſhould ever beat victory before them, as oft
as he was heard (though in a dead ſound) by the enemy, whom he had ſo often
cruſhed, while he was yet living.

A wicked couzenage of Picardus, who poſſeſt great multitudes of theſe ſilly
people, with an opinion, that he could recall them to that perfect ſtate in
which Adam was Created; placed them in an Iſland for that purpoſe, which he
called Paradiſe, cauſed them to walk naked, and named his Sect A­damites:
[[Page 28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=23) Horrible
ſins were committed under that pretence, promiſcuous Whoredom, and Inceſt at
their very Di­vine Service.

### 1.7. FRANCE.

IN ſo great a multitude, we muſt look to find as much variety of Cuſtoms and
Diſpoſitions. It was the report of Caeſar long ſince, and ſeconded by late
Authours, that the French for the moſt part are of a fiery ſpirit for the
firſt on­ſet in any Action, but will ſoon Flag; They deſire change of
Fortunes, and paſſe not greatly whether to better or worſe: Their Women very
Jocund, of a voluble tongue, and as free of their ſpeech, Complemental to
ſtrangers, and win more by their wit than their beauty, one and tother are
great enticers of mens affections: Their Nobility have been reported to be
liberal, but I ſup­poſe that faſhion is now worn out, for ſo it hath been
noted in diverſe, which [[Page
29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=23) reſpect their
purſe more than their ho­nour, and let paſs the Service and De­ſerts of worthy
perſons unrewarded, as if their gracious acceptance were a ſufficient return
of thanks for any Office a man can do them: They are practiſed to this garbe
by their Peaſantry▪ whom they reckon but as ſlaves, and command as their
proper Servants, which the poor ſnakes take as a favour and are glad to be
employed by their betters, that by their protection they may ſtand free from
the injury of their equals. For the meaneſt of them are cruel, and af­fect to
oppreſſe their adverſary, either by open violence or ſuit in Law, though to
their own Ruine. They are very rea­dy to take Arms, and ſerve in defence of
King and Country, they need no more Preſs than the ſtroke of Drum, but are as
raſh in their atchievements; they will not wait upon Councel, but run as far
on, as upon their ſtrength they may, and when they find that fails, they will
as ſoon give ground.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=24)
Aquitania. In this Province was fought the great Battel betwixt our Black
Prince and John of France; where, with eight thouſand he vanquiſhed forty
thouſand, took the King Priſoner and his ſon Philip, 70 Earls, 50 Barons, and
1 [...]000 Gentlemen.

Normandy; where our William the Conqueror was Duke. It was loſt from his
Succeſſors in the time of King John: Her chief Cities are Roan, and Cane,
memorable for the Siege of our Engliſh Henry the Fifth, and Verveille,
Beſieged by Philip the ſecond of France, in the time of our Richard the Firſt.
Which when the King heard as he ſate in his Pallace at Weſtminſter (it is
ſaid) he ſware he would never turn his back to France, till he had his
revenge; and to make good his Oath, brake through the Walls, and juſtly
performed his threat upon the Beſieger.

[[Page 31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=24)

### 1.8. The Low-Countries.

The People are very thrifty, painful, and ingenuous in the invention of many
pretty things, which draw many other Nations to them for traffique, and they
lye as fit for it. They have the name for the firſt Authors of the Compaſs,
Clock, and Printing: They are excel­lent Artificers, for working of Pictures
in Glaſs, for laying Colours in Oyl, for Tapeſtry and other Hangings; in
brief, for any oeconomical commodity, either for uſe or Ornament: And in their
own private families excel any other people.

In the Dukedom of Lutzenburg, Luick the chief City of the Univerſity;
Me­morable for this one ſtory, above any other in Chriſtendome, That at one
time there ſtudied nine Kings ſons, twen­ty four Dukes ſons, twenty nine Earls
Sons, &c.

Geldria. The Province ſtands on the Eaſt of Brabant, and North of Lumburg;
[[Page 32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=25) It is a
very fertile ſoil, eſpecially if it be well tilled, Her Paſtures are
excellent, inſomuch that they feed up their Cattel to an incredible bigneſs
and weight, a re­port paſſeth of one Bull which weighed 3200 pound. It was
killed at Antwerp 1570.

Hague a Village, yet the faireſt in Chri­ſtendome, and ſeat of the States
Coun­cel. The report lyeth upon this Pro­vince, of Margaret Siſter to the Earl
of Floris, that ſhe brought at one birth 36 [...] children, all living till
they were Chriſt­ned.

### 1.9. Spain.

A memorable ſtory of King Rodericus▪ who loſt both himſelf and Kingdome for a
Rape committed upon the Daughter of Julian a noble Gentleman, and at that time
Ambaſſador with the Moors in Africa. When the Father had under­ſtood of his
Daughters unworthy injury, he brought back his Revenge with him [[Page
33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=25) 30000 Horſe, and
180000 Foot, of Moores and Sarazens, which diſcomfited the King, overthrew all
the reſiſtance which he could make, and beſpread the Country with their
Forces, where they and their Poſterity ſtood firm, till with­in the Memory of
ſome living 1630.

This change of State was before pro­pheſied, and concealed in a large Cheſt
within that part of the Pallace, which both the laſt King and his Predeceſſors
were fore-warned not to diſcover: But the hope of an ineſtimable Treaſure made
him tranſgreſs: and when he had entred, there appeared nothing but the
portractures of Armed Moores, with a preſage annexed, that when that part of
the Pallace ſhould be forced open, ſuch Enemies ſhould ruin Spain.

The River Guadiana, which in one place glides under Ground for 15 Miles
together, and gives the Spaniard an oc­caſion (as he will catch at any) to
brag that they have 10000 Cattel daily feed­ing upon one Bridge; yet give them
[[Page 34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=26) their own
ſenſe, the truth may be que­ſtioned: For they have not ſuch plenty of Meat, as
they have of Sauce.

It yields indeeds abundance of Oran­ges, Limons, Capers, Dates, Sugar, Oil,
Honey, Liquoriſh, Raiſons, Saffron, Rice, excellent Sacks, and other Wines,
and in ſome places Sheep, Goats, and ſwift Horſes.

They are extreamly proud, and the ſillieſt of them pretend to a great porti­on
of Wiſdom, which they would ſeem to expreſs in a kind of reſerved State, and
ſilent Gravity; when perhaps their wit will ſcarce ſerve them to ſpeak ſenſe:
But if once their Mouths be got too o­pen, they eſteem their breath too
preci­ous to be ſpent upon any other ſubject, than their own glorious actions.
They are moſt unjuſt neglectors of other Na­tions, and impudent vain
flatterers of themſelves, ſuperſtitious beyond any o­ther people.

In the City Saint Jago, in the Iſland of Gallicia, was St. James the Apoſtle
[[Page 35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=26) buryed,
his Reliques kept, Worſhipped, and viſited by Pilgrims.

### 1.10. ITALY.

MEmorable, for Rhea a Virgin which was cloyſtered up into the Temple of Veſta,
by her Uncle A­mulius Silvius, that ſhe might not bring forth an Heir to
endanger his Title. Notwithſtanding means was found, ſo that ſhe conceived at
once two Children by Mars, and was delivered among her Siſters Veſtals. For
this her ſelf (as the cenſure was upon ſuch Delinquents) was buryed alive, her
Boys expoſed to be deſtroyed.

Italy is a happy Soil, pleaſant and Fer­tile, at all times moderate Weather,
and healthful Air, full of Variety; as Rice, Silks, Velvets, Sattins,
Taffaties, Grograms, Raſh, Fuſtians, Gold-wyer, Armour, Allom, Glaſſes, &c.
The Rich are very Rich, for Wealth will come with much labour in great
abundance: [[Page
36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=27) but the Poor are
extream poor, for they are moſt of them very idle.

Rome retains a 11 Miles round, and 200000 Inhabitants; a great part Fry­ers,
and ſuch odd idle fellows, which pretend to Religion for want of other means
to live, Cloyſter themſelves up to a ſingle life, only to avoid the charge of
Incumbrances of Marriage, not to ſe­parate themſelves from the World or
deſires of the Fleſh; for among them they maintain commonly 40000 Curte­zans
in good Cuſtom, and ſo Rich, that they are able to pay 30000 Duckets yearly to
the Pope. The buildings in which they moſt glory in, are the Church of St.
Peter, the Caſtle of St. Angelo, the Vaticane Library, and the Popes Pallace.
The truth is, their Pride is enough to attire the Whore of Baby­lon, as there
can hardly be any other meant than Rome, She ſits upon the Beaſt with ſeven
Heads, for ſhe was built up­on ſeven Hills, was ruled firſt by ſeven Kings,
and hath been ſince ſubject to [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=27) ſeven ſeveral
forms of Government.

### 1.11. HUNGARY.

HEre are many▪ Waters of excel­lent Vertue, whereof ſome turn Wood into Iron,
others Iron into Braſs; ſome very Medicinal for ſundry Diſea­ſes, others again
ſo peſtiferous, that they kill the Creature which doth but taſte them. The
like is reported of an Hiatus in the Ground, unacceſſable by any but the fowls
of the Air, and thoſe fall ſud­daily dead with the ſtench which aſcends from
it.

It is hard to believe what moſt Geo­graphers report of her Fertility: That ſhe
yields Corn thrice in one year, al­moſt without any Tillage or care of the
Husband-man. Fruit of all kinds in great abundance, and Grapes which make an
excellent, wholſome, and rich Wine; It breeds Cattel in ſuch plenty, that this
one Country, beſides ſtore of her own Inhabitants, ſends Sheep and [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=28) Oxen into
Forrain Nations which lye about her, and might ſay they ſuffice to feed all
Europe with Fleſh. Veniſon is not here any dainties, Does, Hares, Harts,
Goats, Boars, &c. are every Mans Meat, and the Game common, as well to the
Boors as Gentry. And ſo for Pheſant, Partridge, Black-birds, Pige­ons, moſt
Fowl, wild and tame.

The Earth is inricht with variety of Mines, which yields her plenty of Iron,
Steel, Copper, Silver and Gold, Lead ſhe hath not, and ſcarce at all any Tin.

### 1.12. DENMARK.

THe people are valiant and War­like, ſtrong of body, and big boned, and of a
terrible countenane; ambitious of a glorious death, rather than a ſluggiſh
idle life.

Such incredible plenty of Herring (near the Iſle of Scunia) that (ſay they)
are ſcarce able by main ſtrength of Oars to Row out of the Harbour. Here are
[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=28) furniture
for War both by Sea and Land, Armour, Maſts, Cables, Steel, Saddles, &c.

### 1.13. POLAND.

IT is well-nigh paſt belief which is re­ported of their Multitudes of Bees,
ſuch as yield more Honey and Wax, then the people can find room for; they need
here neither Art, nor care of the good Huſwife to order their Hives, but
naturally are their own Guardians, and provide ſo diligently for their own
ſafety within the bulks of Trees; that they eaſily paſs over the hardeſt
winter without hurt.

The Polanders have a good mind to Religion, but cannot faſten upon any one to
their liking; and therefore they will try all Chriſtians, they have been ever
ſince the year 965. but from that time they have ſcarce ſlipt any Error,
Schiſm, or Hereſie, which hath crept in­to the Church. Here are Jeſuits, and
[[Page 40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=29) other of
the Romiſh Sects. Here are Lutherans, and Calviniſts, and Arians▪ Anabaptiſts,
and Antirinitarians, none allowed, but all tollerated: And in­deed Poland had
the Seniority of Am­ſterdam, for that old ſaying; that if a Man had loſt his
Religion, here he might find it. They have one ancient Cuſtom in their
Churches, when the Goſpel is Reading, the Nobility and Gentry un­ſheath their
Swords; and ſtand as it were prepared to defend it with their lives a­gainſt
any which dare violate it.

In Samognia near to Livonia, a people there which is called the Peaſants, who
are moſt of them groſs Idolaters: and are oftimes met in their Woods with
horrid Viſions, and are ſtrangely coze­ned by the Devil, with a belief that
they can Propheſie. The ſilly blaſphemers nouriſh in their Houſe a poor Snake
(like themſelves) gathered out of ſome Ditch, and call it their God Ziemenike.
Their greateſt Commodity is of Honey, which they gather ready made to their
[[Page 41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=29) hands in
their hollow Trees.

### 1.14. PERSIA.

FOr want of lawful Heirs to Camby­ſes their ſecond King, their Prin­ces
conſulted to ſalute him; whoſe Horſe firſt neighed at a ſet meeting up­on the
Court Green before the Sun-riſin. Darius Hiſtaspes was one, and by the
ſubtilty of his Horſe-keeper car­ryed the Crown; for the night before in the
ſame ground, he had coupled a Mare with the Horſe his Maſter ſhould ride,
which when the luſtful▪ Steed miſ­ſed, the next Morning being full of ſpi­rit,
no ſooner had he ſet footing upon the place, but with much eagerneſs he
ſnuffed and neighed after his Mare, and gave the quue to the other Princes to
Proclaim Darius King of the Peſiians. This was he whom the Scriptures call
Ahaſuerus, he was Heſters Husband.

The ancient Perſians Cuſtoms were moſt of them Superſtitious, but they [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=30) held nothing
almoſt in ſo great reve­rence as Water: It might not lawfully be ſoiled, ſo
much as with a foul hand; but to piſs, or caſt rubbiſh, or a dead Carkaſe into
their Rivers, was a kind of Sacriledge. They had many Wives, and more
Concubines; for they were exceeding deſirous of increaſe, and great Rewards
were appointed by their King himſelf, for him that could moſt aug­ment the
number of his Subjects in one year. They ſeldom entred into any Conſultation
of State, till they had well armed themſelves with drink; for then they
thought they ſhould be moſt free to ſpeak what they moſt thought. To ſpit or
laugh before their Prince, was a Crime well-nigh unpardonable: Some ſay that
they bury not their dead, but caſt them forth to be devoured by wilde Beaſts,
and thought him moſt happy which was ſooneſt torn to mammocks: the reſt their
friends bewailed, as ſuch who had lived impurely, and were therefore by this
ſign declared wor­thy [[Page
43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=30) of Hell only,
without any Redemp­tion.

In Aſsyria, now Arzeram ſtands the moſt famous City Ninive, near the River
Tigris, containing full three ſcore Miles in compaſs; they had a Cuſtom to
ſell their Virgins, which were fair and moſt deſired, and tender the price
into the common Treaſury. The homelier ſort were placed in Marriage with that
Mo­ney, to thoſe which would accept of them for gain at leaſt, if not for
Beau­ty.

### 1.15. Bermudas ISLAND.

THis Iſland having been formerly ſhunned by Travellers as moſt dangerous, and
ſeldom ſeen by any, ex­cept againſt their Wills, reputed to be rather a hold
and habitation of Devils, then any fit place for men to abide in; was
diſcovered by Sir John Gates, and Sir George Sommers in the year 1609. they
found there in great abundance.

[[Page 44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=31) Fiſh,
Fowl, Hogs, and other things for ſuſtenance of Man: but no people, nor any
kind of Cattel; Sir John, and Sir George having with them 150 Men, abode there
nine Months: Moſt of theſe Men afterwards returning for England, and making it
known to the Virginia. Company, obtained a Char­ter from His Majeſty, and ſo
hold it. In Mr. Richard Moor the Governours time, he having ſpent three years
of his Government, for the moſt part Forti­fying the Country, &c. A wonderful
annoyance fell out by ſilly Rats: Theſe Rats coming at the firſt out of a
Ship, few in number, increaſed in the ſpace of two years or leſs ſo
exceedingly, that they filled not only thoſe places where they were firſt
Landed. But ſwimming from place to place, ſpread themſelves into all parts of
the Country: Inſo­much, that there was no Iſland, though ſevered by the Sea
from all other Lands, and many Miles diſtant from the Iſles where the Rats had
their Original, [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=31) but was peſtred
with them. They had their neſts almoſt in every Tree, and in all places their
Burrows in the ground (like Connies) to harbour in; They ſpared not the Fruits
of Plants or Trees, neither the Plants themſelves, but eat them up. When we
had ſet our Corn, they would commonly come by troops the night following, or
ſo ſoon as it be­gan to grow, and dig it up again. If by diligent watching any
of it were preſer­ved till it came to earing, it ſhould then very hardly ſcape
them; yea, it was a very difficult matter after they had it in their Houſes,
to ſave it from them; for they became noy ſome even to the per­ſons of Men.
They uſed all diligence for the deſtroyng of them, nouriſhing many Cats wild
and tame for that pur­poſe; they uſed Ratsbane, and many times ſet fire on the
Woods, ſo as the fire might run half a Mile or more be­fore it were extinct.
Every Man in the Country was enjoyned to ſet twelve traps, and ſome of their
own accord ſet [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=32) near a hundred,
which they viſited twice or thrice in a night; they trained up their Dogs to
hunt them, wherein they grew ſo expert, that a good Dog in two of three hours
ſpace, would kill forty or fifty Rats: and other means they uſed to deſtroy
them, but could not prevail, finding them ſtill to increaſe againſt them, and
continued with them till almoſt to the end of Captain Tuckers time (who was
then Governour) but towards the end of his time it pleaſed God (by what means
it is not well known) to take them away;Captain Tucker ſucceeded Mr. Moor
Gover­nour, arriving in May 1616. inſomuch that Wild Cats and many Dogs that
lived on them were famiſhed: Some have attri­buted this deſtruction of them to
the encreaſe of Wild Cats, ſome to one thing, ſome to another; though none
could poſitively conclude this, or that. It remaineth then, as we know God
doth ſometimes effect his will without ſubor­dinate and ſecondary cauſes, and
ſome­times [[Page
47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=32) againſt them: So
we need not doubt but that in the ſpeedy increaſe and ſpreading of theſe
Vermine, as alſo in the preſervation of ſo many of them by ſuch weak means as
they then en­joyed, and eſpecially in the ſuddain re­moval of this great
annoyance there was joyned with, and beſides the ordinary and manifeſt means,
a more immediate and ſecret work of God.

### 1.16. In the Sommer Iſlands.

THere is the Tortoys, which they call a Turckle, which having ſome affinity
and reſemblance with Fiſhes, Beaſts, and Fowls; They are in the ſhape of their
body like a Crab-fiſh, and have four fins, they are as great as three or four
men can carry, the upper part of them is covered with a great ſhell, which
they call a Galley patch, weighing about half a hundred weight, the Fleſh that
cleaveth to the inſide of this being Roaſted againſt the Fier, is [[Page
48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=33) excellent Meat,
almoſt like the Marrow of Beef, but the ſhell it ſelf harder then horn; ſhe
hath alſo a ſhell on her belly not ſo hard, but being boyled it beco­meth
ſoft, like the ſinews or griſtle of Beef, and good Meat. Theſe live in the
Sea, ſpending the Spring time, and part of Sommer about theſe Iſlands, but the
reſidue of the year, is not known where. They are like to Fowl in reſpect of
ſmallneſs, and faſhion of their heads and necks, which are wrinckled like a
Tur­kies, but white, and not ſo ſharp Billed. They alſo breed their young of
Eggs which th [...]y lay. They reſemble Beaſts, in that their fleſh is like
Veal, but more hard and ſolid, and they feed always up­on graſs growing at the
bottom of the water; neither can they abide any lon­ger under water then they
hold their breath, which the old ones will do long, but the young ones being
chaſed to and fro, cannot continue two Minutes with­out coming up to breathe.
Shortly after their firſt coming in, the Male and Fe­male [[Page
49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=33) couple, which is
there called Coot­ing; this they continue ſome three days together, during
which time, they will ſcarce ſeparate though a Boat come to them, nor hardly
when they are ſmit­ten. Not long after, the ſhe Turckle comes up by night upon
ſome ſandy Bay, and further up then the water u­ſeth to flow, ſhe digs a hole
with her Fin in the ſand ſome two foot deep, and there coming up ſeveral
nights lays her Eggs; ſome half a buſhel (which are a­bout the bigneſs of a
Hens Egg, and round as a Ball, and  [...]ch time covers them with ſand very
curiouſly, ſo that a Man ſhall hardly find the place. Theſe Eggs (as it ſeems)
are afterwards hatch­ed by the heat of the Sun, and then by the providence of
God (the means as yet unknown) are brought out of the Earth; for they could
never perceive that ſhe returns any more to them, and yet in likelihood they
remain not long in the Earth after they are hatched, be­cauſe (as is before
ſaid) they cannot live [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=34) without
breathing. Sometimes is ſeen the young ones no bigger then a Mans hand, which
ſome Fiſh will devour. They grow ſlowly, and ſeem to have a very long life;
they'l ſleep on the top of the Water, and were wont to ſleep often on the
Land, till the Country was peopled; they will alſo live out of the Water ſome
three weeks, and that without Meat, but mourn and pine a­way, they are very
witty. Being on the Land turned upon their backs, they can no more without
ſome help or advan­tage recover themſelves, by which means when they come on
ſhore to lay their Eggs, they are eaſily taken, as al­ſo they are when they
are Cooting. But otherwiſe they take them for the moſt part by night, making a
great light in a Boat, to which they will ſome­times ſwim, and ſeldom ſhun; ſo
that a Man ſtanding ready with a ſtaffe in his hand, at one end of which he
hath a Soc­ket, wherein is an Iron leſs then a Mans finger, four-ſquare and
ſharp, with a [[Page
51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=34) line faſtned to
it, he ſtriketh this Iron in­to the upper ſhell of the Turckle, it ſtrikes ſo
faſt, that after ſhe hath a lit­tle tyred her ſelf by ſwimming to and fro ſhe
is taken by it. They will live, the head being cut off four and twenty hours,
ſo that if you cut the fleſh with a knife, or touch it, it will tremble and
ſhrink away. There is no meat will keep longer either freſh or ſalt.

### 1.17. Out of the Deſcription of Great Britain, theſe Stories following are
Remarkable and Pleaſant.

BRitain ſeated in the Ocean, hath her praiſes in honourable Eulo­gies: That
Britain is the Seas High Admiral, and the Fortunate Iſland, whoſe Air is more
temperate then France; whoſe Soil bringeth forth all Grain in abundance, whoſe
Seas pro­duce Orient Pearl, whoſe Fields are the [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=35) ſeat of a Summer
Queen; her wildeſt parts free from wild Beaſts, and her chief City worthily
named Auguſta: So as we may truly ſay with the Pſal­miſt, Our Lives are fallen
in pleaſant places; Yea, we have a fair Inheri­tance.

To the Praiſe of this Iſland, are theſe following Verſes.

England, fierce Land, Worlds Angle, fer­tile Art,

Rich Iſle, thou needſt no other Countries Mart;

Each other Country yet thy ſuccour needs.

England, Joyes Land, be free and Joyous long

Free Race, free Grace, free kind, free Mind and Tongue,

Tet hands paſs tongues for free and Glori­ous Deeds.

[[Page 53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=35)

#### 1.17.1. KENT.

DOver with the Caſtle is account­ed by Mathew Paris the Monk, the Lock and Key
to the whole Realm of England, fatal for the death of King Stephen, and
ſurrender of King John therein hapning.

An accident hapned in the year 1586. the fourth day of Auguſt, in this County
at Mottingham, a Town 8 miles diſtant from London, ſuddenly the ground began
to ſink, and three great Elms thereon growing, were carryed ſo deep into the
bowels of the Earth, that no part of them could any more be ſeen; the hole
left in compaſs fourſcore yards about, and a line of 50 fathams plum­med into
it doth find no bottom.

The City of Canterbury hath been ho­noured with the Preſence and Corona­tions
of King John, and Queen Iſabel his Wife; with the Marriages of King Henry the
third, and of King Edward [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=36) the firſt; and
with the Interments of Edward the Black Prince, King Henry the fourth, and of
Queen Joan his Wife: King Stephen and Maud his Queen was buryed at Feverſham.

#### 1.17.2. SUSSEX.

A Battel was fought at Battle, when the hazard of England was tryed in one
days fight, and Harold the King gave place to his Conqueror by loſing his life
among ſixty ſeven thouſand, nine hundred ſeventy four Engliſh men be­ſides;
whoſe bloud ſo ſpilt, gave name to the place in French, Sangue Lac. And the
Soil after Rain becoming of a red­diſh colour, cauſed William of Newbery to
write, that if there fell any ſmall ſweet ſhowers in the place where ſo great
a ſlaughter of the Engliſh was made, preſently ſweateth forth very freſh bloud
out of the Earth, as if the evidence thereof did plainly declare the voice of
bloud there ſhed, and cryed [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=36) ſtill from the
Earth unto the Lord.

William the Baſtard, Duke of Nor­mandy, making his claim to the Crown of
England, by Affinity, Adoption, and Promiſe, arrived at a Port in Suſſex
cal­led Penſey, with 896 ſhips furniſhed for War the 28th. of September, in
the year 1066. And the 14th. of October follow­ing being Saturday, near
Haſtings in the ſame County joyned Battel with Ha­rold King of England, who in
the Field Valiantly fighting, was there ſlain by the ſhot of an Arrow into his
brains, and with him dyed his two Brethren, and 67974 men beſides. The place
where they fought, ever ſince doth in Memo­ry thereof bear the name of Battel,
where the Heptarchy of the Saxons was brought to their laſt Period. Having all
their Laws altered, their Nobles diſ­placed, and all men diſherited, all
ſeized into the Normans hand, who made him­ſelf Lord of all, and on the day of
Chriſt, his Nativity in the ſame year, was Crowned at Weſtminſter King of
[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=37) England,
which he governed the ſpace of 20 years, 8 Months, and 16 days.

But Places of other Note in this County is, that from Baſham, Earl Ha­rold
taking the Sea for his delight, in a ſmall Boat was driven upon the Coaſt of
Normandy, where by Duke William he was retained, till he had ſworn to make him
King after Edward Confeſſors Death: which Oath being broken, the Baſtard
arrived at Penſey, and with his Sword revenged that perjury.

#### 1.17.3. SURREY.

THis County is ſtored with many Princely Houſes; yea, and five of His
Majeſties ſo Magnificently built, that of ſome ſhe may well ſay, no Shire hath
none ſuch, as is None-ſuch indeed. And were not Richmond a fatal place of
Englands beſt Princes, it might in E­ſteem be ranked with the Richeſt: For
therein dyed the great Conqueror of France, King Edward the third, the [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=37) beautiful Anne
Daughter to Charls the Fourth, Emperour, and intirely beloved Wife to King
Richard the ſecond; the moſt wiſe Prince, King Henry the ſe­venth, and the
Bareſt of her Sex, the Mirrour of Princes, Queen Elizabeth, the Worlds Love,
and Subjects Joy.

In Chertſey Abbey King Henry the ſixth, who was depoſed and made a­way in the
Tower of London, was firſt Interred without all Funeral Pomp; but for his holy
life was imputed a Saint: and laſtly tranſlated, and In­tombed at Windſor.

#### 1.17.4. Hant-ſhire.

NEar Ringwood, from God and peoples ſervice, to Beaſt and Luxury, thirty ſix
Pariſh Churches were converted and pulled down by the Conqueror, and thirty
miles of circuit inforreſted for his Game of Hunting. Wherein his Sons,
Richard and Rufus, with Henry the ſecond ſon to Duke Ro­bert [[Page
58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=38) his firſt, felt
by haſty death the hand of Juſtice and Revenge: For in the ſame Forreſt,
Richard by a blaſting of a peſtilent Air, Rufus by a ſhot taken for a Beaſt,
and Henry as Abſalom hanged by a bough, came to their untimely ends. At ſo
dear a rate the pleaſure of Dogs, and harbour for Beaſts were bought in the
bloud of theſe Princes.

In the City of Wincheſter was Richard and Rufus Interred, their bones by
Bi­ſhop Fox were gathered and ſhrined in little gilt Coffers fixed upon a wall
in the Quire, where ſtill they remain care­fully preſerved.

The Wars betwixt Maud the Em­preſs, intituled Lady of England, unto whom all
the Nobility had ſworn Alle­giance. And King Stephen Earl of Bol­loign her
Couſin German; was proſecu­ted with ſuch variable Fortunes in many conflicts
on both parts, that Stephen himſelf was by her taken Priſoner, and retained in
Irons with other extremities uſed. But the ſucceſs of War altering, [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=38) Maud the Empreſs
to ſave her own life, adventured through the Hoſt of her E­nemy, laid in a
Coffin fained to be dead, and ſo was carryed in a Horſe-Litter from Wincheſter
to Lutegerſhall Vices, and Gloceſter, and thence to Oxford, whence the year
following ſhe eſcaped as dangerouſly by deceiving the Scout Watch in a deep
Snow, Anno 1141.

#### 1.17.5. Wight Iſland.

IT is reported that in the year 1176. and twenty three of King Henry the
ſecond, that in this Iſland it rained a ſhower of bloud, which continued for
the ſpace of two hours together, to the great wonder and amazement of the
people that beheld it with fear.

#### 1.17.6. Devonſhire.

FRom the Port of Plymouth Sir Francis Drake, that potent Man at Sea ſetting
forth in the year 1577. In the [[Page
60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=39) ſpace of two
years and ten Months did compaſs the circle of the Earth by Sea.

Henry Holland, Grand-Child to John Holland, half Brother to King Richard the
ſecond, ſiding with Lancaſter againſt Edward the fourth, whoſe Siſter was his
Wife, was driven to ſuch miſery as it is reported, that he was ſeen all torn
and bare-footed to beg his living in the Low-Countries: and laſtly his body
was caſt upon the ſhore of Kent (as if he had periſhed by ſhipwrack:) ſo
uncertain is Fortune in her endowments, and the ſtate of Man, notwithſtanding
his great Birth.

#### 1.17.7. Cornwall.

BEſides the abundance of Fiſh that do ſuffice the Inhabitants, the Pil­chard
is taken, who in great Skuls ſwarm about the Coaſt: whence being tran­ſported
to France, Spain, and Italy, yield a yearly Revenue of gain unto Cornwall.
There are Rocks that are not deſtitute [[Page
61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=39) of Gold nor
Silver; yea, and Diamonds ſhaped and pointed Angle-wiſe, and ſmoothed by
nature her ſelf, whereof ſome are as big as Walnuts, inferiour to the Orient
only in blackneſs and hard­neſs.

Memorable matters for Antiquity and ſtrangeneſs of ſight, are theſe, at
Boſkenna, is a Trophy erected, which are eighteen ſtones placed round in
com­paſs, and pitched twelve foot each from others, with another far bigger in
the very center. Theſe do ſhew ſome Vi­ctory there attained either by the
Ro­mans, or elſe King Athelſtone. At the foot of the Rocks near unto St.
Michaels Mount, in the Memory of our Fathers were digged up Spear-heads, Axes,
and Swords of Braſs wrapped in Linne, the Weapons that the Cimbrians and
ancient Britains anciently uſed.

There alſo the Wring-Cheeſe doth ſhew it ſelf, which are huge Rocks heap­ed
one upon another, and the loweſt of them the leaſt, faſhioned like a Cheeſe
[[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=40) lying
preſſed under the reſt of thoſe Hills, which ſeemeth very dangerous to be
paſſed under. But near to Penſans, and unto Mounts-bay, a far more ſtrange
Rock ſtandeth; namely, Main-Amber, which lyeth mounted upon others of meaner
ſize, with ſo equal a counter­poize, that a Man may move it with the puſh of
his finger; but no ſtrength re­move it out of his place.

#### 1.17.8. Sommerſet-ſhire.

THis Country, beſides other Com­modities in ſome places is inrich­ed by Lead-
mines, which yields great Plenty, the moſt Marchantable Com­modity that is in
England, and vented into all parts of the World: Some pla­ces are beautified
with Diamonds, as St. Vincent Rock, whereof there is great plenty, and ſo
bright of colour, as they might equalize Indian Diamonds if they had their
hardneſs; yet being ſo many, and ſo common, they are leſs [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=40) ſought after or
commended.

In this Country is the City of Bathe, which takes name of the hot Baths: A
place of continual concourſe for Perſons of all degrees, and almoſt of all
diſeaſes: who by Divine Providence do very of­ten find relief there, the
Springs thereof by reaſon of their Mineral and ſulphu­rous paſſage, being of
ſuch exceeding power and medicinal heat, as that they Cure and Conquer the
rebellions ſtub­bornneſs of corrupt humors.

At Dunſtere, where (as is reported) a great Lady obtained of her Husband ſo
much Paſture Ground in common by the Town ſide, for the good and bene­fit of
the Inhabitants, as ſhe was able in a whole day to go about bare-foot.

#### 1.17.9. Wilt-ſhire.

SAlisbury the chief City, in which every ſtreet almoſt hath a River running
thorow in her midſt. The Ca­thedral a moſt rich Magnificent Church, [[Page
64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=41) wherein are as
many Windows as there are days in the year, as many caſt Pillars of Marble, as
there are hours in the year: and as many Gates for entrance, as there are
months in the year.

##### 1.17.9.1. Aurelius Ambroſus buryed at Ston­heng, Anno 500.

THis ancient Monument was erect­ed by Aurelius, Surnamed Am­broſus King of the
Britiains, whoſe No­bility in the Reign of Vortiger (his Coun­trys ſcourge)
about the year 475. by the Treachery of the Saxons, on a day of parley were
there ſlaughtered, and their bodys there Interred. In Memory whereof, this
King Aurel cauſed this Trophy to be ſet up, Admirable to Po­ſterities. Both in
form and quantity; the matter thereof are ſtones in great big­neſs, containing
twenty eight foot and more in length, and ten in bredth: theſe are ſet in the
ground by two and two, [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=41) and a third laid
Gate-wiſe over-thwart faſtn'd with tenons & mortaſſes wrought in the ſame,
which ſeem very dangerous to all that paſs there under. The form is round, and
as it ſeemeth hath been circulated with three ranks of theſe ſtones: Many
whereof are now fallen down, and the uttermoſt whereof con­taineth in compaſs
three hundred foot by meaſure of aſſize. They all are rough, and of a gray
colour, ſtanding within a Trench that hath been much deeper. In this place
this foreſaid King Aurelius, with two more of the Brittiſh Kings his
Succeſſors have been buryed with many more of their Nobility: and in this
place under little banks, to this day are found by digging bones of Mighty
men, and Armour of large and ancient faſhion. Not far hence is ſeen the ruins
of an old Fortreſs, thought by ſome to be built there by the Romans, when this
Kingdom was poſſeſſed by their Emperours.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=42)

#### 1.17.10. Bark-ſhire.

IN Reading, in the Collegiate Church of the Abbey, King Henry the firſt and
Queen (lay both veiled and Crown­ed) with their Daughter Maud the Em­preſs,
called the Lady of England, were Interred, as the private Hiſtory of the place
avoucheth.

But of far greater Magnificence and State is the Caſtle of Windſor: A moſt
Princely Pallace and Manſion of His Majeſty. In this Caſtle was King Ed­ward
the third born, and here held at one and the ſame time Priſoners, John King of
France, and David King of Scot­land. Neither was it ever graced with greater
Majeſty then by the Inſtitution of the moſt Honourable Order of the Garter,
the invention thereof ſome aſ­cribe to be from a Garter falling from his
Queen, or rather from Joan Coun­teſs of Salisbury, a Lady of an uncom­parable
beauty, as ſhe danced before [[Page
67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=42) him, whereat the
by-ſtanders ſmiling, he gave the impreſs to check all evil con­ceits: and in
Golden Letters imbelliſh­ed the Garter with this French Poſie; Honi Soit Qui
Maby Penſe. The Princely Chappel of Windſor is graced with the bodies of Henry
the 6th. and Edward the 4th. Kings of England; the one of Lan­caſter, the
other of York, as alſo King Henry the 8th. lyeth there Interred.

Finch-hampſted: For wonder inferi­our to none, where (as our Writers do
witneſs) that in the year a thouſand one hundred, a Well boiled up with
ſtreams of bloud, and fifteen days together con­tinued that Spring, whoſe
Waters made red all others where they came; to the great amazement of the
beholders.

#### 1.17.11. Middleſex.

LOndon: This City doth ſhew as the Cedars among the other trees, being the
ſeat of the Britiſh Kings, the Chamber of the Engliſh, the Model [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=43) of the Land, and
the Mart of the World. For thither are brought the ſilk of Aſia, the ſpices
from Africa, the balms from Grecia, and the riches of both the Indies, Eaſt
and Weſt. No City ſtanding ſo long in Fame, nor any for Divine and Politick
Government may with her be compared.

In King Johns time a Bridge of Stone was made over Thames, upon nineteen
Arches, for length, breadth, beauty, and building, the like again cannot be
found in the World.

#### 1.17.12. Eſſex.

IN the year 1581. an Army of Mice ſo over ran the Marſhes in Deug [...]y
Hundred, near unto South-Minſter in this County, that they ſhore the graſs to
the very roots, and ſo tainted the ſame with their venemous teeth, that a
great Murrain fell upon the Cattel which grazed thereon, to the great loſs of
their owners.

[[Page 69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=43)

#### 1.17.13. Suffolk.

RAlph Coggeſhall in the Monuments of Colcheſter, declareth that a Fiſh in all
parts like a Man was taken near Or­ford, and for ſix Months was kept in the
Caſtle: whence after he eſcaped, went again to the Sea.

As ſtrange, but moſt true, was a crop of Peaſe, that without tillage or ſowing
grew in the Rocks, betwixt this Orford and Aldebrough, in the year 1555. when
by unſeaſonable weather a great dearth was in the Land, there in Auguſt were
gathered above one hundred Quarters, and in bloſſoming remained as many more,
where never graſs grew, or Earth ever ſeen, but hard ſollid Rocks three yards
deep under the roots.

#### 1.17.14. Hereford-ſhire.

AT Langley in this Country was bu­ryed Richard the ſecond, that un­fortunate
[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=44) King, who
in the Cell of Fry­ers Preachers was there firſt buryed: but afterwards
removed and enſhrined at Weſtminſter: And in another Lang­ley, near the Eaſt
from thence was born that Pontifical Breakſpear, Biſhop of Rome, known by the
name of Hadrian the fourth (and famous for his Stirrup­holding by Frederick
the Emperour) whoſe breath was laſtly ſtopped by a fly that flew into his
mouth.

#### 1.17.15. Bedford-ſhire.

IN the year 1399. immediately be­fore thoſe Civil Wars broke out between the
Princes of York and Lanca­ſter. The River Ouſe near unto Har­wood ſtood
ſuddenly ſtill, and refrained to paſs any further; ſo that forward men paſſed
three miles together on foot in the very depth of her channel, and backwards
the waters ſwelled unto a great height, which was obſerved by the judicious,
to fore-tell ſome unkind [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=44) diviſion that
ſhortly ſhould ariſe.

#### 1.17.16. Buckingham-ſhire.

A Shridge Town hath been in great repute for the bloud (ſuppoſed out of
Chriſts ſides) brought out of Germany by Henry the Eldeſt ſon of Ri­chard King
of the Romans, and Earl of Cornwal, whereunto reſorted great con­courſe of
people for Devotion, and A­doration thereof. But when the Sun­ſhine of the
Goſpel had pierced through ſuch clouds of darkneſs: it was percei­ved
apparently to be only Honey cla­rified and coloured with Saffron, as was
openly ſhewed at Pauls Croſs by the Biſhop of Rocheſter, the twenty fourth of
February, 1538.

#### 1.17.17. Oxford ſhire.

MEmorable places of Note, either for Actions therein happening, [[Page
72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=45) or for their own
famous eſteem, are the Roll-rich-ſtones ſtanding near unto Eni­ſham, in the
South of this ſhire, a Mo­nument of huge ſtones ſet round in com­paſs, in
manner of Stone-henge, of which fabulous Tradition hath reported for ſooth,
that they were Metamorpho­ſed from men, but in truth were there erected upon
ſome great Victory obtain­ed in the year 876.

Wood-ſtock is a moſt ancient and Mag­nificent Pallace, built to that glory by
King Henry the firſt, and enlarged with a Labyrinth of many windings by King
Henry the ſecond, to hide from his jea­lous Juno, his intirely beloved
Concu­bine Roſamond Clifford, a Damoſel of ſurpaſſing beauty; where
notwith­ſtanding, followed by a Clew of ſilk that fell from her lap, ſhe was
ſurprized and poyſoned by Queen Eleanor his Wife: and was buryed at God-ſtow
Nunnery, in the midſt of the Quire under a hearſe of ſilk, ſet about with
lights.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=45)

#### 1.17.18. Gloceſter-ſhire.

THe Inhabitants in ſome parts of this ſhire, injoy a private cu­ſtom to this
day, that the Goods and Lands of condemned perſons fall unto the Crown, but
only for a year and a day, and then return to the next Heirs, contrary to the
cuſtom of all England beſides.

Glocester City: In this Church the unfortunate Prince, King Edward the ſe­cond
under a Monument of Alablaſter doth lye, who being murdered at Barkly Caſtle,
by the cruelty of French Iſabel his Wife was there Intombed. And not far from
him another Prince as unfortu­nate; namely, Robert Curthoiſe the El­deſt ſon
of William the Conquerour, lyeth in a painted Wooden tomb in the midſt of the
Quire, whoſe eyes were pluckt out in Cardiff Caſtle, wherein he was kept
priſoner twenty ſix years, with all contumelious indignities, until [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=46) through extream
Anguiſh he ended his life.

Barkley Caſtle, where King Edward the ſecond was through his Fundament run
into his bowels with a red burning ſpit.

Tewkesbury the fatal period of King Henry the ſixth his Government, and the
wound of the Lancaſtrian cauſe; for in a Battel there fought in 1471. Prince
Edward the only Son of King Henry, had his brains daſhed out in a moſt
ſhameful manner, the Queen his Mother taken priſoner, and moſt of the
Favourites ſlain and beheaded. And at Alderley a little Town ſtanding eight
miles from the Se­vern, upon the hills to this day are found Cockles,
Periwinckles, and Oiſters of ſollid ſtone: which whether they have been ſhell-
fiſh and living Creatures, or elſe the ſports of Nature in her Works. Let the
Natural Philoſophers diſpute and Judge.

[[Page 75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=46)

#### 1.17.19. Hereford-ſhire

OF rare Note in this ſhire are ſaid to be Bone-well, a Spring not far from
Richards Caſtle, wherein are con­tinually found little fiſhes bones, but not a
fin ſeen: and being wholly cleanſed thereof, will notwithſtanding have again
the like, whether naturally produced, or in veins thither brought, no man
know­eth.

But more admirable was the Work of the Omnipotent in the year 1571. When the
Macley-Hill in the Eaſt of the ſhire rouzed it ſelf out of a dead ſleep, with
a roaring noiſe removed from the place where it ſtood, and for three days
together travelled from her firſt ſite, to the great amazement and fear of the
beholders: It began to journey upon the 7th. day of February, being Saturday,
at ſix of the Clock at night, and by ſeven the next morning had gone forty
paces, carrying with it [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=47) ſheep in their
Coats, hedge-rows, and trees, whereof ſome were over-turned, and ſome that
ſtood upon the Plain, are firmly growing upon the Hill; thoſe that were Eaſt
were turned Weſt, and thoſe in the Weſt were ſet in the Eaſt: in which remove
it overthrew Kinna­ſton Chappel, and turned two High­ways near a hundred yards
from their uſual place, paths formerly trod. The ground thus travelling, was
about twen­ty ſix Acres, which opening her ſelf with Rocks and all, bare the
Earth be­fore it four hundred yards ſpace without any ſtay, leaving that which
was Paſtu­rage in place of the Tillage, and the Til­lage over-ſpread with
Paſturage. Laſt­ly, over-whelmed her lower parts, mounted to an Hill of twelve
Fathoms high, and there reſted her ſelf after three days travel; remaining his
mark, that ſo laid his hand upon this Rock, whoſe power hath poyſed the Hills
in his ballance.

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=47)

#### 1.17.20. Worceſter-ſhire.

IN the midſt of the Quire in St. Ma­rys Church in Worceſter City, reſteth the
body of King John (the great with­ſtander of the Popes proceedings) un­der a
Monument of white Marble in Princely Veſtures, with his Portraiture thereon
according to life.

#### 1.17.21. Warwick-ſhire.

COventry City: The Citizens ha­ving highly offended their firſt Lord Leofrick,
had their privileges in­fringed, and themſelves oppreſſed with many heavy
Tributes, whoſe Wife La­dy Godiva pitying their Eſtates, unceſ­ſantly ſued for
their Peace, and that with ſuch importunacy, as hardly could be ſaid whether
was greater, his hatred, or her love; at laſt over-come with her continual
interceſſions, he granted her ſuit upon an uncivil, and (as he thought) [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=48) an unacceptable
condition (which was) that ſhe ſhould Ride naked through the face of the City,
and that openly at high Noon-day: This notwithſtanding ſhe thankfully
accepted, and performed the Act accordingly injoyed; for this Lady Godiva
ſtripping her ſelf of all rich attire, let looſe the treſſes of her fair hair,
which on every ſide ſo covered her nakedneſs, that no part of her body was
uncivil to ſight: whereby ſhe redeemed the former freedom, and remiſſions of
ſuch heavy Tributes.

At Gofford Gate in Coventry, did hang the ſhield-bone of a Wild-bore, far
big­ger then the greateſt Ox bone: with whoſe ſnout the great pit called
Swans­well was turned up, and was ſlain by the famous Guy.

At Leamington, far from the Sea, a Spring of Salt water boileth up, and
Newenham Regis moſt ſoveraign water againſt the Stone, green Wounds, Ul­cers,
and Impoſtumes, and drank with Salt looſeth, but with Sugar bindeth [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=48) the body, and
turneth Wood into Stone.

#### 1.17.22. Northampton-ſhire.

NOtwithſtanding the ſimple and gentle ſheep, of all Creatures the moſt
harmleſs: are now become ſo Ra­venous, that they begin to devour men, waſte
fields, and depopulate houſes; if not whole Town-ſhips, as one merrily hath
written.

#### 1.17.23. Rutland-ſhire.

NEar the Lord Harringtons houſe Burley, ſtandeth Okham a fair Market-town,
which Lordſhip the ſaid Lord Baron enjoyeth, with a Royalty ſomewhat
extraordinary, which is this: If any Noble by birth come within the precinct
of the ſame Lordſhip, he ſhall forfeit as an homage a ſhooe from the Horſe
whereon he rideth, unleſs he re­deem it at a price with Money. In wit­neſs
[[Page 80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=49) whereof,
there are many Horſe­ſhooes nailed upon the Shire-hall door, ſome of large
ſize and ancient faſhion.

#### 1.17.24. Leiceſter-ſhire.

KIng Richard the third, (vid.) Crouch-back Richard the Uſur­per, who from the
City of Leiceſter ſet forth in one day in great Pomp, and in battel-aray, to
keep the Crown ſure up­on his own helmet in a ſore fought field, yielded both
it and his life, unto the Head and Hands of Henry of Rich­mond his Conquerour,
and the next day was brought back like a Hog, naked and torn, and with
contempt without tears obſcurely buryed in the Gray-Fryers in this City; whoſe
ſuppreſſion hath ſuppreſſed the Plot place of his Grave, and only the Stone-
Cheſt wherein he was laid (a drinking trough now for Horſes in a common Inn)
re­taineth the Memory of that great Mo­narchs Funeral: And ſo did a Stone in
[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=49) the
Church and Chappel of St. Ma­ries, incloſe the Corps of the proud and
pontifical Cardinal Wolſey, who had prepared for himſelf a far more richer
Monument.

Lutterworth: Where the famous John Wickliffe, Englands Morning-Star,
di­ſperſed the clouds of all Papiſtical dark­neſs, by preaching the Goſpel in
that his charge, and ſtile of his Pen; ſo pier­cing in power, that the Man of
ſin ever ſince hath been better known to the world.

#### 1.17.25. Lincoln-ſhire.

THis Country affordeth great Plenty of Fowl and Fiſh, exceed­ing any other in
the Realm, wherein at ſome times and ſeaſon of the year, hath been taken in
Nets. In Auguſt at one draught, above three thouſand Mallards, and other Fowls
of the like kind,

At Harlaxton was plowed up a brazen Veſſel, wherein was incloſed a Golden
[[Page 82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=50) Helmet of
an ancient faſhion, ſet with precious ſtones, which was preſented to Katherine
of Spain, Wife and Dowager to King Henry the eight.

At Bullingbrooke was King John poy­ſoned by Simon a Monk of S [...]nſted
Ab­bey, and of Queen Eleanor, wife to King Edward the firſt, the Mirrour of
Wed­lock, and Love to the Commons, who at Harby near Bullingbrooke, his Birth
place, ended her life.

#### 1.17.26. Nottingham-ſhire.

IN this Town are many ſtrange Vaults hewed out of the Rocks, and thoſe under
the Caſtle of an eſp [...]ci­al note; one for the ſtory of Chriſts paſſion
engraven in the Walls, and cut by the hand of David the ſecond, King of Scots,
whilſt he was therein detained priſoner. Another wherein the Lord Mortimer was
ſurprized in the Non-age of King Edward the third ever ſince bearing the name
of Mortimers Hole; [[Page
83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=50) theſe have their
ſtairs and ſeveral rooms made artificially even out of the Rocks, as alſo in
that Hill are dwelling Houſes with winding ſtairs, windows, chimneys, and room
above room, wrought all out of the ſame Rock.

#### 1.17.27. Darby-ſhire.

THings of ſtrange note are the hot water Springs burſting forth of the ground
at Buxton, where out of the Rock within the compaſs of eight yards, nine
Springs ariſe, eight of them warm, but the ninth very cold. Theſe run from
under a fair ſquare building of free ſtone, and about threeſcore paces off,
receive another hot Spring from a well, near unto which another very cold
Spring bubled up, daily experience ſheweth they are good for the ſtomach and
ſinews, and very pleaſant to bathe the body in. Not far thence is Elden hole,
the Waters that trickle from the top of that Cave (which indeed is very [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=51) ſpacious, but of
a low and narrow en­trance) do congeal into ſtone, and hang as Ickles in the
roof very white, and ſomewhat Chriſtal-like. And ſeven miles thence upon a
Mounted hill, ſtand­eth a Caſtle, under which there is a hole or Cave in the
ground of a marvellous capacity, which is commonly called the Devils Arſe in
the Peak.

Shrop-ſhire hath nothing remarka­ble.

#### 1.17.28. The County Palatine of Chester.

CHeſhire having been made a Prin­cipality by Richard the 2d. and ſtyled
himſelf Prince of Cheſter, King Henry the 3d. gave it to his eldeſt Son Prince
Edward, againſt whom Lewlin Prince of Wales gathered a mighty Band, and with
them did the Country much harm, even unto the Cities gates. With the like Skar
Fiers it had oft times been afrighted, which [[Page
85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=51) they laſtly
defenced with a Wall made of the Welſh mens heads, on the South ſide of Dee in
Hanbridge.

Cheſter in the days of King Edgar, was in moſt flouriſhing Eſtate, wherein he
had the Homage of eight other Kings, who rowed his Barge from St. Johns to his
Pallace, himſelf holding the Helm as their Supreme.

#### 1.17.29. Lancaſhire.

BY the civil Wars of York and Lan­caſter was bred and brought forth that
bloudy diviſion and fatal ſtrife of the Noble Houſes, which for many years
together moleſted the peace and quiet of the Land, and defiled the earth with
bloud: there were thirteen fields fought, and three Kings of England, one
Prince of Wales, twelve Dukes, one Marqueſs, eighteen Earls, one Viſcount, and
three and twenty Barons, beſides Knights and Gentlemen, loſt their lives in
the ſame; yet at laſt, by the happy [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=52) Marriage of
Henry the ſeventh, King of England, next heir to the houſe of Lancaſter, with
Elizabeth Daughter and heir to Edward the fourth of the houſe of York; the
White and red Roſes were conjoyned in the happy uniting of thoſe two divided
Families.

#### 1.17.30. York-ſhire.

HAlifax once called Horton, and touching the alteration of the name, this
pretty ſtory is related of it; namely, that a Clerk (for ſo they call him)
being far in Love with a Maid, and by no means either of long praiſes or large
promiſes, able to gain like affection at her hands: when he ſaw his hopes
fruſtrate, and that he was not like to have his purpoſe of her, turned his
love into rage, and cut of the Maids head, which being afterwards hung upon an
Ewe tree, common people counted it as an hallowed Relique till it was rotten:
And afterward (ſuch was the credulity [[Page
87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=52) of that time) it
maintained the opinion of reverence and Religion ſtill, for the people
reſorted thither on Pilgrimage, and perſwaded themſelves, that the little
veins that ſpread out between the bark and body of the Ewe-tree like fine
threds were the very hairs of the Maids head: Hereupon it was called by this
name Haligfax, or Haly-fax, that is, Ho­ly-hair.

Under Knauſhrouh there is a Well called Dropping-well, in which the Waters
ſpring not out of the veins of the earth, but diſtil and trickle down from the
Rocks that hang over it; it is of that vertue and efficacy, that it turns Wood
into Stone; for what Wood ſo­ever is put into it, will be ſhortly cover­ed
over with a ſtony bark, and be turn­ed into ſtone, as hath been often
obſer­ved.

St. Wilfrids Needle, a place very fa­mous in times paſt for the narrow hole in
the cloſe vaulted room under the ground, by which womens honeſties [[Page
88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=53) were wont to be
tryed; for ſuch as were chaſte paſs through with much facility, but as many as
had plaid falſe, were mi­raculouſly held faſt, and could not creep through.

#### 1.17.31. The Weſt Riding of York-ſhire.

THoſe Mountains near unto Rich­mond, on the top whereof are found certain
ſtones much like unto ſea­winkles, Cockles, and other Sea fiſh, which if they
be not the wonders of Na­ture, we may deem to be the undoubt­ed tokens of the
general deluge, that in Noahs time over-flowed the whole face of the Earth.

Alſo the River Swale, among the En­gliſh was reputed a very Sacred River, and
Celebrated with an univerſal glory; for that (the Engliſh Saxons firſt
em­bracing Chriſtianity) in one day above ten thouſand men, beſides a
Multitude of Women and Children, were there­in baptized unto Chriſt, by the
hands of Paulinus Arch-biſhop of York.

[[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=53)

#### 1.17.32. The North and Eaſt Riding.

PLaces of eminent Note, are Whitby, where are found certain ſtones fa­ſhioned
like Serpents, folded, and wrap­ed round in a Reath, even the very paſ­times
of Nature, who when ſhe is wea­ried (as it were) with ſerious works, ſometimes
forgeth and ſhapeth things by way of ſport and recreation; ſo that by the
credulous they are thought to have been Serpents, which a Coat or cruſt of
ſtones had now covered all o­ver, and by the prayers of St. Hilda turned to
ſtones. And alſo there are certain fields here adjoyning, where Geeſe flying
over fall down ſuddenly to the ground, to the great admiration of all men.

Ounsbery hill; beſides a Spring of Me­dicinable waters for the eyes, is a
Prog­noſtication unto her Neighbours, whoſe head being covered with a cloudy
cap, preſageth ſome tempeſtuous ſtorms or [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=54) ſhowers to
follow. At Huntly Nabe, are ſtones found at the roots of certain Rocks, of
divers bigneſs, ſo artificially ſhaped round by nature in manner of a Globe,
as if they had been made by the Turners hand. In which (if you break them) are
found ſtony Serpents, en­wrapped round like a reath, but moſt of them
headleſs.

#### 1.17.33. The Biſhoprick of Durham.

THings of rare note obſerved in this ſhire, are three pits of a won­derful
depth, commonly called the Hell Kettles, which are adjoyning near unto
Darlington, whoſe waters are ſomewhat warm. Theſe are thought to come of an
Earth-quake, which happened in the year 1179. whereof the Chronicle of
Tinmouth maketh mention, whoſe Re­cord is this, On Chriſtmas-day at Ox­enhall
in the Territory of Darlington, within the Biſhoprick of Durham, the ground
heaved up aloft, like unto a high [[Page
91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=54) Tower, and ſo
continued all that day, as it were unmoveable until the Evening, and then fell
with ſo horrible a noiſe, that it made all the Neighbour dwellers ſore afraid;
and the earth ſwallowed it up, and made in the ſame place a deep pit, which is
there to be ſeen for a teſti­mony unto this day.

Of no leſs admiration are certain ſtones lying within the River Weere, at
Butterbee near Durham, from whoſe ebb and low-water in the Summer, iſſueth a
certain Salt reddiſh water, which with the ſun waxeth white, and growing into
a thick ſubſtance, becometh a neceſſary ſalt to the uſe of the by-dwellers.

Weſtmorland nothing worth noting.

#### 1.17.34. Cumberland.

THe Rivers in this Country feed a kind of Muskle that bringeth forth Pearl,
wherein the mouth of the Irt, as they lye gaping and ſucking in dew, the
Country people gather and [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=55) ſell to the
Lapidaries, to their own lit­tle, and the buyers great gain. But the Mines
Royal of Copper, whereof this Country yieldeth much, is for uſe the Richeſt of
all: at Keſwick and Newland, is the black lead gotten, whoſe plenty maketh it
of no great eſteem, otherwiſe a Commodity that could hardly be miſſed.

At Burgh upon the ſand, was the fa­tal end of our famous Monarch King Edward
the firſt, who there leaving his Wars unfiniſhed againſt Scotland, left his
troubles, and ſoon miſſed life, to his untimely and ſoon lamented death.

And at Salkelds upon the River Eden, a Monument of ſeventy ſtones, each of
them ten foot high above ground, and one of them at the entrance fifteen, as a
Trophy of Victory, was erected. Theſe are by the by-dwellers called Long Megg
and her Daughters.

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=55)

#### 1.17.35. Northumberland.

THe chiefeſt Commodity that en­richeth Country, is that which we call Sea-
Coals, whereof there is ſuch plenty and abundance digged up, as they do not
only return a great gain to the Inhabitants, but procure alſo much plea­ſure
and profit to others. No place of this Province vents forth ſo many of theſe
Sea-Coals into other Regions as New-Caſtle doth.

The Inhabitants of Morpeth ſet their own Town on fire in the year 1215. in the
ſpight they bare to King John, for that he and his Rutars over ran theſe
Countries.

#### 1.17.36. Man Iſland.

THis Commodity makes this Iſland more happy then we are here, for the people
are there free from all neceſſary commencements of Suits, [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=56) from long and
dilatory Pleas, and from frivolous Feeing of Lawyers. No Judge or Clerks of
the Court take there any penny for drawing Inſtruments, or ma­king of
Proceſſes. All Controverſies are there determined by certain Judges, without
writings or other Charges, and them they call Deemſters, and chuſe forth among
themſelves. If any com­plaint be made to the Magiſtrate for wrongs either done
or ſuffered, he pre­ſently taketh up a ſtone, and fixeth his mark upon it, and
ſo delivereth it unto the party Plaintiff, by vertue of which he both calls
his adverſary to appear­ance, and to produce his Witneſſes. If the caſe fall
out to be more litigious, and of greater conſequence than can eaſily be ended,
it is then referred to twelve men, whom they term the Keys of the Iſland. And
this Iſland is ſo well ma­naged for matter of Rule and civil Diſ­cipline, that
every man there poſſeſſeth his own in peace and ſafety. No man lives in dread
or danger of loſing what [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=56) he hath. Men are
not there inclined to robbing, or thieving, or licentious li­ving.

This Iſle prohibits the cuſtomary manner of begging from door to door,
deteſting the diſorders, as well Civil as Eccleſiaſtical of Neighbour-Nations.
That which deſerves to be committed to Memory, is, that the Women of this
Country, whereſoever they go out of their doors, gird themſelves about with
the winding-ſheet that they purpoſe to be buryed in, to ſhew themſelves
mind­ful of their Mortality; and ſuch of them as are at any time condemned to
dye, are ſowed within a ſack, and flung from a Rock into the Sea.

This Iſland is in length 29 Miles, the wideſt part is ſcarce nine Miles, the
whole compaſs about, is fourſcore and two Miles.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=57)

#### 1.17.37. Holy Iſland.

THis Iſland from Eaſt to Weſt is a­bout two thouſand two hundred and fifty
paces, ſo that the circumference cannot be great.

#### 1.17.38. Farn Iſle.

THe bredth of this Iſle is but five Miles, and the length no more; the whole
circumference extends it ſelf no further then to fifteen Miles.

#### 1.17.39. Garnſey.

THis Iſle lyeth in length from Plim­mouth-bay South-weſt, to Lancroſs de
Anckers North-eaſt, thirteen Miles; in bredth from St. Martins point South-
eaſt, to the Howe North-weſt, nine miles; and is in circuit thirty ſix miles.

In this Iſle is neither Toad, Snake, Adder, or any other venemous Crea­ture,
[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=57) whereas
Jerſey hath great plenty, their fields in the Summer time are ſo naturally
garniſhed with Flowers of all ſorts, that a Man (being there) might conceit
himſelf to be in a pleaſant Arti­ficial Garden: Among the Rocks is found a
hard ſtone, which we term Eme­rill. This ſtone is ſerviceable for many
purpoſes, and many Trades, as Glaſiers, &c. but eſpecially for the Gold-ſmiths
and Lapidaries, to cut their precious ſtones.

#### 1.17.40. Jerſey.

THis Iſland is in length ten miles, and in bredth ſix miles, the whole
cir­cuit of the Iſland being thirty eight miles.

Pembroke-ſhire, in this ſhire nothing remarkable.

[[Page 98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=58)

#### 1.17.41. Caermarden-ſhire.

IN the ruins of Carreg-Caſtle, which ſtood mounted on a high hill, under which
many Vaults and ſpacious Caves far into the ground are ſeen, wherein is
thought the people unable to fight, were therein ſecured in time of their
Wars. Where alſo is a Well, that in this place twice in four and twenty hours
ebbing, and twice flowing, reſem­bleth the unſtable Motions of the main Sea.

#### 1.17.42. Glamorgan-ſhire.

THings of ſtrange note, that in a Rock or Cliff upon the Sea-ſide, and Iſland
of Barry, lying near the South-eaſt point of this Country, is heard out of a
little chink, the noiſe as it were of Smiths at their work, one while the
blowing of Bellows to increaſe the heat, then the ſtroaks of the hammer, and
[[Page 99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=58) ſound of
the Anvil; ſometimes the noiſe of the Grind-ſtone in grinding of Iron Tools,
then the hiſſing ſparks of Steel-gads▪ as they fly from their beat­ing, with
the puffing noiſe of flames in a Furnace.

More Weſtward from hence, upon the River Ogmore, and near unto Newton, in a
ſandy plain about an hundred paces from Severn, there ſpringeth a Well, though
not of the cleareſt water, whereat the flowing and fulneſs of the Sea can
hard­ly any water be gotten, but at the ebb and fall of the Tide, it walloweth
up a main.

And upon the ſame ſhore more North and by Weſt, on the top of a hill called
Minyd-Margan, is erected a Monument inſcribed with a ſtrange Character, and as
ſtrange a conceit held thereof by the by-dwellers, whoſe opinions are
poſſeſ­ſed, that if any Man read the ſame, he ſhall ſhortly after dye.

[[Page 100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=59)

#### 1.17.43. Monmouth.

OUr King Henry the V the great Triumpher over France, was born in Monmouth.

#### 1.17.44. Brecknock-ſhire.

THe Welſhmen relate of a Prince na­med Brechavius, the Father of an holy off-
ſpring, whoſe twenty four Daughters were all of them Saints.

From the top of a Hill, in Welſh called Mounch-devuy, or Cadier Arthur; if any
man from the North-eaſt Rock caſt their Cloaks, Hats, and Staves,
notwith­ſtanding will never fall, but with the Air and wind return back, and
blow up; neither will any deſcend from that Cliff being ſo caſt, unleſs it be
ſtone or ſome Metalline ſubſtance, affirming the cauſe to be the Clouds, which
are ſeen to rack much lower than the top of that hill.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=59) As
ſtrange a tale is told of the M [...]y Llynſavathan, two Miles Eaſt from Brec
[...] ­nock, which at the breaking of her fro­zen Ice, maketh a fearful ſound
like un­to Thunder. In which place as is repor­ted, ſometimes ſtood a fair
City, which was ſwallowed up in an Earthquake, and reſigned her Stone-walls
unto this deep and broad water.

#### 1.17.45. Radnor-ſhire.

NEar Knigton a Market Town, is Offaes Ditch which runs along by the Mountain,
which was a bound ſet to ſeparate the Welſh from the Engliſh.

A Law was made, that it ſhould be preſent death for the Welſh to paſs over the
ſame.

#### 1.17.46. Cardigan-ſhire.

IN Tyui, the Beaver hath been found, a Creature living both by land and water,
whoſe ſtones the Phyſici­ans [[Page
102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=60) hold in great
price. His fore-feet are like unto a Dogs, but the hinder whole skinned as is
the Gooſe, like Oars giving him ſwift motion in ſwiming, his tail broad and
Griſtly, he uſeth a ſtern, wherewith on the ſudden he can divert his ſwift
floating courſe.

Mount-Gomery-ſhire, nothing there re­markable.

#### 1.17.47. Merioneth-ſhire.

HIlls there are ſo high, as it is af­firmed by one, that ſhepherds upon their
tops falling at odds in the Morning, and challenging the field for fight,
before they can come together to try out the Quarrel, the day will be ſpent,
and the heat of their fury ſhut up with their ſleep.

#### 1.17.48. Denbigh-ſhire.

THis is worth obſerving, both for Admiration and Antiquity, that in [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=60) the Pariſh of
Llan-ſunan within this County, there is a place compaſs cut out of the main
Rock by mans hand, in the ſide of a ſtony hill, wherein there be four and
twenty ſeats to ſit in, ſome leſs, ſome bigger, where Children and young men
coming to ſeek their Cattel, uſe to ſit, and to have their ſports. And at this
day they commonly call it King Arthurs Round Table.

#### 1.17.49. Flint-ſhire.

THis Country hath many ſhallow Rivers in it, but none of fame and note, but
Dee and Cluyde. How he it there is a Spring not far from Rudland Caſtle, of
great report and antiquity, which is termed Holy-well, and is com­monly called
St. Winefrids Well, of whom antiquity thus reporteth, that Winefrid a
Chriſtian Virgin, very fair and vertu­ous, was doted upon by a young luſtful
Prince or Lord of the Country, who not being able to rule his head-ſtrong
affe­ctions, [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=61) having many
times in vain at­tempted and tryed her chaſtity, both by rich Gifts, and large
Promiſes, could not by any means obtain his deſires, he therefore (in a place
of advantage) ſud­denly ſurprized and raviſhed her weak (yet reſiſting) body.
After the deed done, the cruel Tyrant, to ſtop her crys and acclamations, ſlew
her, and cut off her head, out of which place did ſudden­ly ariſe a Spring
that continueth to this day, carrying from the Fountain ſuch a forcible ſtream
and currant, as the like is not found in Chriſtendom. Over the head of the
Spring there is built a Chappel of Free-ſtone, with Pillars cu­riouſly wrought
and ingraved, in the Chancel whereof, and Glaſs window, the Picture of the
Virgin is drawn, toge­ther with the Memorial of her life and death. To this
Fountain Pilgrims are accuſtomed to repair in their zealous, but blind
devotion, and divers others reſort to Bathe in, holding firmly that the water
is of much vertue.

[[Page 105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=61) There be
many Red ſtones in the bot­tom of this Well, and much green Moſs growing upon
the ſides, the ſuperſtition of the people holding that theſe Red ſpots in the
ſtones were drops of the Ladies bloud, which all the water in the Spring can
never waſh away, and that the Moſs about the Wall was her hair, which though
ſome of it be given to e­very ſtranger that comes, yet it never waſteth. But
howſoever this be carry­ed for truth by the Tradition of time, the Moſs it
ſelf ſmells exceeding ſweet.

#### 1.17.50. Carnaervon-ſhire.

KIng Edward the ſecond was born at Carnaervon, in a Tower of the Caſtle; he
was the firſt Prince of Wales of the Engliſh Line.

There are in this ſhire two Pools call­ed the Mears, the one of which
produ­ceth great ſtore of fiſh, but all having only one eye; and in the other
there is a moveable Iſland, which as ſoon as a [[Page
106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=62) man treadeth
on, it forthwith floateth a great way off, whereby the Welſh are ſaid to have
often eſcaped, and deluded their Enemies aſſailing them.

#### 1.17.51. Angleſea-Iſland.

THe length of this Iſland is twenty miles, in bredth ſeventeen miles, the
whole circumference amounting to­twards ſeventy miles.

### 1.18. Out of Scotlands General Deſcription.

THis Nations Original by ſome hath been derived from Scota, the ſup­poſed
Daughter of the Egyptian King Pharaoh, that nouriſhed Moſes, who having
marryed Gaithelus, the ſon of Ce­crops (the Founder of Athens) who firſt
ſeating in Spain, paſſed thence into Ire­land, and laſtly into Scotland, where
his Wife Scota gave name to the Nation.

[[Page 107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=62) In this
Country is the dark Wood Caledonia, famous for the Wild White Bulls that
therein were bred, whoſe Manes were Lion-like, thick and curled, of nature
fierce and cruel, and ſo hateful to Mankind, that they abhorred whatſo­ever
was by them handled or breathed upon; but becauſe the fleſh was plea­ſant and
dainty to the mouth, the whole race of them is extinguiſhed.

It is Admirable, the report that is gi­ven of this Country, as to the plenty
of Cattel, Fiſh and Fowl there abiding, fiſh ſo plentiful, that men in ſome
places (for delight) on Horſe-back hunt Sal­mons with Spears, and a certain
Fowl, which ſome call Soland-Geeſe, ſpread­ing ſo thick in the Air, that they
even darken the Suns-light; of whoſe fleſh, feathers and Oil, the Inhabitants
in ſome parts make great uſe and gain; yea, and even of fiſhes brought by
them, abundant proviſion for Diet; as alſo of the ſticks (brought to make
their Neſts) plentiful proviſion for fewel.

[[Page 108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=63) With
theſe of Wonders, might be ſpoken of the Natures of thoſe two fa­mous Loughs,
Lomand and Neſsa, the latter whereof never freezeth in Win­ter, though never
ſo extream, and the Waters of the other moſt raging in the faireſt and calmeſt
weather, wherein alſo floteth an Iſland that removeth from place to place, as
the wind forceth her ſpongeous and unfaſtned body. In Buquhan upon the banks
of Ratra is a Well, whoſe trickling drops turn (in Piramidy wiſe) into hard
ſtone, and ano­ther near Edenbrough that floteth with Bitumen. In Dee and
Done, beſides the admired plenty of Salmons, is found a Shell-fiſh, called the
Horſe-Muſcle, where Pearls are engendred moſt preci­ous for Phyſick, and ſome
of them ſo Orient, that they give no place to the choiceſt.

The Weſtern Iſlands lying ſcattered in the Deucalidonia Sea, were anciently
ruled by a King of their own, whoſe maintenance was out of their common [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=63) Coffers, and
the Regal Authority never continued in lineal ſucceſſion; for (to prevent
that) their Kings were not per­mitted to have Wives of their own, but might by
their Laws accompany with other mens, as the like Law was in the other parts
of Scotland, that the Virgi­nity of all new Wives, ſhould be the Land-Lords
prey, till King Malcolme enacted, that half a Mark ſhould be paid for
Redemption.

More North, lie the Iſles of Shet­land, where as Tzetzes fableth, the Souls of
good men are ferryed into thoſe Elizian Fields that ever grow green, but their
fictions intended only that the ver­tuous Souls of the dead paſſed the
ut­termoſt bounds of earthly abode, and attained to an over-pleaſing repoſe,
and ever flouriſhing happineſs; which whe­ther they borrowed from the
Deſcripti­on of Paradiſe, (taken both for a fair Garden, and the Souls happy
reſt) is hard to define.

[[Page 110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=64)

### 1.19. Out of the Deſcription of Ireland.

THe Manners and Cuſtoms of the Wild Iriſh are thus ſet forth by Strabo. The
Inhabitants (ſaith he) of Ireland are more rude then the Britains, they feed
upon the fleſh of men; yea, and think it a point of worth to eat their dead
Parents, wantonly they accompa­ny with Women, making no difference of other
mens wives, their own Siſters, nor of their natural Mothers; but of theſe
things (ſaith he) we have no cer­tain witneſs of ſufficient credit. Pompo­nius
Mela recordeth, that the Iriſh are uncivil, ignorant of Vertues, and void of
Religion. And Solinus affirmeth, that after Victory they drink the bloud of
the ſlain, and beſmear their own Faces therewith, ſo given to War, that the
mother at the birth of a man-child, feed­eth the firſt meat into her Infants
mouth upon the point of her Husbands ſword, [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=64) and with
heatheniſh imprecations, wiſh­eth that it may dye no otherwiſe then in War, or
by ſword.

But from theſe ancient and barbarous manners, we will come to the conditi­ons
of their middle time, whom Giral­dus Cambrenſis deſcribeth as followeth. The
Iriſh (ſaith he) are a ſtrong and bold people, Martial and Prodigal in War;
nimble, ſtout and haughty of heart; care­leſs of life, but greedy of glory;
courte­ous to ſtrangers, conſtant in Love, light of belief, impatient of
injury, given to fleſhly luſts, and in enmity implacable. At the baptizing of
their Infants, their manner was, not to dip their right arms into the water,
that ſo (as they thought) they might give a more deep and un­curable blow,
never calling them by the name of their Parents whileſt they li­ved together,
but at their death took it upon them: Their Women nurſed not their Children
they bare, and they that nurſed others, did affect and love them much more
than their own.

[[Page 112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=65) So much
were they given to Fanta­ſtical conceits, that they held it very o­minous to
give their Neighbours Fire upon May-day, to eat an odd Egg; endangered the
death of their Horſe▪ And before they caſt in their ſeed, they ſent ſalt into
the field; to hang up the ſhells in the roof, was a preſervative of the
Chickens from the Kite; to ſet up green boughs at their doors in the month of
May, increaſed their Kines Milk, and to ſpit upon Cattel, they held it good
againſt Witchery, whereof Ire­land was full.

Superſtitious Idolatry among the Wild Iriſh was common, yielding di­vine
honour unto the Moon after the change, unto whom they both bowed their knees,
and made ſupplications, and with a Loud Voice would thus ſpeak unto that
Planet, We pray thee leave us in as good Eſtate as thou foundſt us. Wolves
they did make as their God-ſis, terming them Chari Chriſt, and ſo thought
themſelves preſerved from their [[Page
113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=65) hurts, the
hoofs of dead Horſes they accounted and held Sacred: About childrens necks
they hung the beginning of St. Johns Goſpel, a crooked nail of an Horſe ſhooe,
or a piece of a wolves-skin, and both the ſucking Child and Nurſe were girt
with Girdles finely plated with Womans hair; ſo far they wandred in­to the
ways of errour, in making theſe arms the ſtrength of their healths.

Their Wives were many, by reaſon of Divorcements, and their Maids marry­ed at
twelve years of Age, whoſe Cu­ſtoms were to ſend to their lovers, brace­lets
plated, and curiouſly wrought of their own hair, ſo far following Venus in the
knots of theſe allurements. The men wore Linnen ſhirts exceedingly large,
ſtained with Saffron, the ſleeves wide, and hanging to their knees, ſtrait and
ſhort Truſſes plated thick in the skirts, their Breeches cloſe to the thighs,
a ſhort skeine hanging point down be­fore, and a Mantle moſt times caſt over
their heads. The women wore their [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=66) hair plated in
curious manner, hanging down their backs and ſhoulders from un­der foulden
wreaths of fine Linnen, roll­ed about their heads, rather loding the wearer
then delighting the beholder; for as the one was moſt ſeemly, ſo the other was
unſightly, their necks was hung with Chains and Carkaneths, their Arms
wreathed with many Bracelets, and over their ſide garments the Shag Rug
Mantles, purfled with a deep fringe of divers colours, both Sexes ac­counting
idleneſs their only liberty, and eaſe their greateſt riches.

In War [...] they were forward, and fought with Battle-axes, whoſe bearers
were called Galloglaſſes, the common ſouldier, but lightly armed, who ſerved
with darts and ſharp skeines, their Trum­pet was a Bag-pipe, and word for
en­counter Pharroh, which at the firſt On­ſet with great acclamation they
uttered, and he that did not, was taken into the Air, and carryed into the
Vale of Kerry, where transformed (as they did believe) [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=66) he remained
until he was hunted with hounds from thence to his home.

For the dying and dead, they hired Women to mourn, who expoſtulated with the
ſick, why he would die▪ and dead, at his Funeral ſuch out-crys were made, ſuch
clapping of hands, ſuch howlings, and geſtures, that one would think their
ſorrows unrecoverable, hold­ing the opinion of Pythagoras for their ſouls
departed.

Their Diet in neceſſity was ſlender, feeding upon Water-creſſes, Roots,
Muſhrooms, Shamroh, Butter temper­ed with Oatmeal, Milk, Whey; yea, and raw
fiſh, the bloud being cruſhed out; their uſe was alſo to let their Kine bloud,
which ſtanding a while, and co­ming to Jelly, with Butter they did eat as a
very good diſh.

[[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=67)

### 1.20. Out of the Deſcription of the Civil Wars fought in England, Wales,
and Ire­land.

FRance felt the heavy hands of Ed­ward and Henry our Engliſh Kings, when the
one of them at Poictiers took Priſoners John King of France, and Philip
Sirnamed the hardy, his ſon; the other (Henry the fifth at Azincourt in a
bloudy battel took and ſlew four thouſand Princes, Nobles, Knights and
Eſquires, even all the flower of France, as their own writers have declared.
And at Paris the Crown of France was ſet up­on Henry the 6th. his Head, homage
done unto him by the French, that Kingdom made ſubject, and their Flower
deluces quartered with our Lions of England.

An enterprize remaining freſh in Me­mory, of Philip date King of Spain,
againſt our Dread Soveraign Queen Elizabeth, [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=67) in the year
1588. attempting by his in­vincible Navy as he thought, and ſo termed, under
the Conduct of the Duke of Medina Celi, which with great Pride and Cruelty was
intended againſt us, arrived on our Coaſts to Englands Invaſion and
Subverſion, had yet never­theleſs, here in the narrow Seas, the one part of
his Fleet diſcomfited, taken, and drowned, and the other part forced to their
great ſhame, in poor Eſtate, to make a fearful and miſerable flight a­bout the
Coaſt of Ireland homeward, ſo that of 158 great ſhips furniſhed for War, came
to their own Coaſt of Spain but few; and thoſe ſo torn and beaten by the
Engliſh Canons, that it was thought they were unſerviceable for ever, and
eleven of their Enſigns or Banners prepared for Triumph and Pride in Conqueſt,
were contrariwiſe to their diſhonour ſhewed at Pauls Croſs, and in other
places of this Realm.

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=68)

### 1.21. Out of the Deſcription of the Turkiſh EMPIRE.

WE will take notice of their Re­ligion, how it is a meer Cou­zenage thruſt
upon the filly people by the impious ſubtilty of one Mahomet, whoſe ſtory is
well worth our know­ledge, and may cauſe us to commiſerate the deſperate
Eſtate of thoſe ignorant, yet perverſe and bloudy Antichriſti­ans.

His place of Birth is queſtioned, whe­ther he were a Cirenick, an Arabian, or
Perſian, it is not yet fully decided; cer­tain enough it is he was of baſe
Parents, his Father (ſome ſay) a Worſhipper of Devils, and his Mother a
faithleſs Jew, betwixt them they ſent into the World a pernicious deceiver
(which none but two ſuch Religions could have made up.) In the year 597. when
he had been for a while thus inſtructed by his [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=68) diſtracted
Parents, poverty and hope to improve his Fortunes, perſwaded him from his
Native ſoil, to live for another while among true profeſſed Chriſtians, where
he received ſo much knowledge of the Word, and light of the Goſpel, as to
pervert it to his deſtruction, and ruine of many Millions of ſouls.

In his firſt adventurous travels a­broad, he fell into the hands of thee­viſh
Saracens, which ſold him to a Jew­iſh Merchant, and he imployed him to drive
his Camels through Egypt, Syria, Paleſtine, and other forrain Countries, where
he ſtill gathered farther inſtru­ctions of that truth which he intended to
abuſe. His wickedneſs firſt brake forth into fraud, open Theft and Ra­pine,
and other ſins of higheſt rank, in which he continued and ſeduced others, till
the death of his Maſter, and after marryed his Aged, but rich Miſtreſs.

He had means now to act his malicious purpoſes, and wealth to countenance his
exceeding Pride, which would not be [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=69) ſatisfied with
a lower Ambition, then to be called a Prophet of God. This he began to
practice, by the Counſel of one Sergius a Monk, who being caſt out for Hereſie
from Conſtantinople, betook himſelf into Arabia, and joyned in with Mahomet to
make up this miſchief per­fect: ſee now their Juggling. There wanted no craft
betwixt them, to make uſe of his worſt actions to gull the ſim­ple. For when
by his debaucht drinking and gluttony, he was fallen into an Epi­lepſie, and
in his fits lay (Bear like) gro­velling and foaming upon the Earth, as one
without ſenſe; he pretended an Exta-like ſwoon, wherein his ſoul was wrapped
from his body, in which he con­verſt with Gabriel an Angel from Hea­ven. To
make this familiarity with God the more to be believed, he had bred up a Dove
to take her meat from his ear, which he moſt blaſphemouſly profeſſed to be the
Holy Ghoſt, who in ſuch times and in that ſhape infuſed the propheſies which
he was to preach. Laſtly, what [[Page
121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=69) they in their
wicked fancies had concei­ved, and meant to propagate, they di­geſted into a
Volume, and called it the Alcoran.

For this too they had a trick, that it might ſeem to have been ſent from
Heaven into the hands of Mahomet; and to this purpoſe he had himſelf fed up a
tame Bull, which by cuſtom became ſo familliar, that no ſooner he heard the
voice of his Maſter, but he would ſtraight run, caſt the head in his lap, and
uſe his wanton dalliance as with a Fel­low. Betwixt the horns of this Bull,
had he faſtned the Alcoran, and conveyed him into a by-place, near where he
had aſſembled the Multitude at a ſet time, to expect a wonderful Miracle from
Heaven that might confirm his Prophe­cy. The Scene thus ordered, on the ſudden
he lift up his voice, and made a loud cry, which no ſooner the beaſt heard,
but he brake his way through the Preſs, over-turned many of the Specta­tors,
which now ſtood at a gaze, and [[Page
122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=70) gently laid his
horns and book in the bo­ſom of this falſe couzener, which he with much
ceremony, and feigned Reverence received, and in their preſence opening the
Volume, began to interpret the chief of their Laws, which for hereafter they
were to obſerve.

Circumciſion he allowed, and with the old Law forbad Swines fleſh, that he
might with more eaſe lead on ſuch as were Jewiſh; he ſuffered him­ſelf to be
baptized by Sergius, that the Chriſtian too might have in ſome mea­ſure his
content: Moſes and our Savi­our he denyed not to be great Pro­phets, but that
neither party might e­mulate the greater obſervance of other, and indeed
eſpecially that his own might ſeem new, and yet take place from both, he
changed the circumſion of the Jews from the eighth day, and multiplyes
baptiſm, which can be con­ferred but once for all, upon the true believer. For
the like reaſon of diffe­rence with other Nations and Sects, he [[Page
123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=70) left both the
Jews Sabbath, and diem Chriſtianorum Dominicum, and com­mands his holy
ceremonies to be cele­brated on the Friday; for ſo it was, whent he Bull
beſtowed on him his Al­caran. Before they enter the Temple, they waſh all the
unclean parts of their bodies, and then to prayer, which muſt be performed
five times in a day with their face toward the South. They have a Months faſt
too once every year, but it is obſerved only for the day, for they may, when
the Sun is down, redeem it with what gluttony they pleaſe; Wine is forbidden,
only for a ſhew that he might not ſeem to have loved that which (he was guilty
to himſelf) had brought him into his Epileptical fits. Briefly, what he knew
would beſt agree with the brutiſh deſires of the people, that he took order
ſhould be confirmed by his Laws, four or five Wives to eve­ry Husband, and as
many Concubines as they could maintain. For their bliſs af­ter life, he
propoſed no inviſible de­lights [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=71) which over
reacht their under­ſtanding, but proportioned to each of their ſenſual
thoughts. And promiſed to thoſe which would keep his Law a Paradiſe of all
kinds of pleaſure, which they themſelves moſt affected, to the covetous
wealth, to the ambitious Ho­nours, to the gluttenous Meats, to the Virgins
rich attire, and embraces of An­gels, the poor ſouls were never ſo fitted; and
when he had thus for a long time diſcourſed over his Alcoran, he took a yoak
from Sergius, and put it upon the Bulls neck; for it was fore-told by an
Inſcription brought by his door, that whoſoever could yoke the Bull, it ſhould
be a ſign to declare the man, as one ſent from God, to govern his peo­ple.

This huddle of Miracles put the Ga­zers beyond all pauſe, ſo that in an
in­ſtant they cryed him up King, and held his companion in Reputation of a
minor Prophet, called themſelves Muſulmanni; true believers, which the Turk
ſtill af­fects, [[Page
125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=71) rather than his
right name of Turk, which imports baniſhment, and unpraids him the diſgrace of
his Original.

And now he hath paſt the difficulty of his attempt, an eaſie matter to draw on
Millions of followers, ſuch as would like that Religion beſt which baulkt not
their pleaſures; yet at laſt he met with an end anſwerable to his beginning,
for he was poyſoned by ſome of his own Fa­mily.

He had long before propheſied, that he ſhould be wonderfully conveyed to
Heaven, and to make good his Fraud, had framed an Iron Cheſt for his
Sepul­chre, which he purpoſed ſhould have been held up by force of a Load-
ſtone placed in the top of the Temple, and by this means have appeared to the
behol­der to hang in the Air without any ſup­port. But this trick (it ſeems)
was pre­vented by death, yet they expected ſtill his aſcent to Heaven, till he
ſtank upon Earth, ſo that at laſt they were forced to convey him into his Iron
Coffin, [[Page 126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=72)
which remains to this day in Mecha a City of Perſia, and is viſited by the
Turks, as the Sepulcher of our Saviour at Jeruſalem by Pilgrim-Chriſtians.

### 1.22. China.

THis Kingdom is in the utmoſt bounds Eastward of the Eaſt India, and therefore
lyes fartheſt remote from Chriſtendom; the Chinoyſe do much exceed us for
ample Cities, and multi­tude of Inhabitants: It is now a vaſt Empire, and
without doubt, as they are infinitely populous, ſo they are propor­tionably
Rich, beyond any other Na­tion of the World. Their principal Commodities are
Silks and Sugars; yet beſides theſe, they ſend forth Wool, Cotton, Olives,
Metals, Rhu­barb, Honey, Purſlain diſhes, Camphire, Ginger, Pepper, &c. Musk,
Salt great ſtore.

The men are in their ſeveral imploy­ments infinitely laborious, and
ingenu­ous: [[Page
127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=72) it is very rare
to ſee any of them in a ſtrange Country, nor will they eaſily admit a ſtranger
far into theirs; they are addicted much to Manual Arts, for they have
excellent practick Wits, and indeed for that go beyond any other Nation: Much
quarrel hath been about the invention of Guns and Printing, which ſeveral
people have been ambi­tious to take to themſelves, as the Maſter-piece of Mans
wit; but with­out doubt they were both uſed here, long before any of Europe
pretended to the knowledge of either. In their wri­tings, they make not their
Lines from the Right hand to the left, as the He­brews, nor from the left to
the right as we do, but from the top to the bottom of the page, and uſe all
one Character through the whole Kingdom. Their ſpecial skill, which we much
admire, but cannot imitate, is in making the Pur­ſlain diſhes white as very
Snow, and tranſparent as Glaſs, formed up only of Cockles found in the Sea-
ſhore, mixt [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=73) with Egg
ſhells, but lye buryed in the Earth many years before they come to perfection,
and are ſeldom took up by the ſame Artificer, which kneads them, but are left
as a portion to ſome of his Poſterity.

When they travel over the Plains, they uſe a kind of Coach, yet not drawn with
Horſes or other Beaſt, but driven with the Wind under-ſail as a Bark on the
Sea, which the people are as perfect to guide which way they pleaſe, as the
Mariner is to direct his courſe unto any Coaſt whither he is bound; as they
ſail upon Land, as if it were Sea; ſo they dwell as frequent upon the Sea, as
if it were Land; for they have an incredible number of ſhips and Boats, which
are in many places ranked like ſtreets upon the Waters, and filled with
Inhabitants, ſuch as are here born, live, traffick, mar­ry, and die. Mr.
Purchas Reports that upon one River from Nanquin to Pa­quin, they are thus
ordered for three hundred leagues. No mar [...]l then, if [[Page
129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=73) their number
exceed any part proportio­nable of the whole Earth, ſince their Land is not
ſufficient, but is forced to borrow room out of the Sea, for their habitation.
Yet are they all governed by one Monarch, whom they call the Lord of the
World, and Son to the Sun. In matters of State they are very Politick, in
Peace wary, and in War Va­liant, crafty and excellent Engineers.

Their Laws are for the moſt part juſt, and ſeverely executed, eſpecially
againſt idle drones which ſet not a hand to ad­vance their State, or maintain
them­ſelves; they will not cheriſh the very blind by Alms, ſince without eyes
a man may be fit for ſome corporal im­ployment; but to the maimed and lame,
they deny not a charitable main­tenance; the Son is bound to exerciſe his
Parents occupation, ſo that no pre­tenſe almoſt is left for Wonderers: and
briefly, as far as humane Laws can pro­vide, all other vain occaſions, for
miſ­expence of time are taken off; for [[Page
130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=74) within the
Cities no ſtews are allow'd, or lewd perſons to withdraw them, Adul­tery is
puniſhed with death, but yet they have liberty to take many Wives, one they
keep at home, the reſt are diſpoſed of abroad, where they beſt pleaſe. Their
Marriages they chiefly ſolemnize at the New Moon, and for the moſt part in
March, which begins their year.

For their Religion, they are Gentiles, but have a confuſed knowledge of God,
Heaven, and the Creation: When they would decipher their great God, they
expreſs him by the firſt Letter in their Alphabet, and in their Devotions;
they worſhip him as their chief (but not on­ly) preſerver, for they have their
pray­ers to the Sun, Moon, Stars, and to the Devil himſelf, that he would not
hurt them. Their Prieſts are diſtinguiſhed into the black and White Friers as
we call them, for they much reſemble Fri­ers in their courſe of life, ſome are
cloath­ed in White, their heads ſhorn, and their Victuals in common; others in
[[Page 131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=74) black,
long hair, and live apart, neither are marryed, but both take their liberty to
live obſcurely, as the debaucheſt ſwaggerers.

The chief of the Cities is Paquin, where the King hath his continual
Reſi­dence, his Pallace here is compaſſed with a Triple wall, carrys the bulk
and face of a fair Town, for indeed his re­tinue are no fewer then might well
peo­ple a large City, among the reſt he hath 16000 Eunuchs daily attending,
ſuch as their own Parents have emaſcul'd in their Infancy, to make them
capable of this Court preferment. The ſeat Imperial was heretofore at Nanquin,
where ſtill remains a Golden teſtimony of her paſt glory. It is a fair City
thirty miles in compaſs, ſeated nine leagues from the Sea upon a fair
Navigable River, where there Rides commonly at leaſt 10000. of the Kings
ſhips, beſides Merchants; it hath three brick walls, the ſtreets are ſix miles
in length, of a proportionable breadth, and trimly paved.

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=75) The
Metropolis is Quinſay or Suntien, the largeſt City in the world; for it
contains 100 miles in compaſs, it is ſeat­ed in a low and Fenny ground, is
ſubject to floods, and hath been forced in very many places, to erect bridges
for free paſſage from one ſtreet to another; there are in all 12000. built of
ſtone, and moſt of them ſo high, that a good ſhip may ſtrike under them with
full ſail, each of them hath its ten for a night guard. The Inhabitants of
this City live luxuriouſly, eſpecially their Women, who are much more comely
then their men; yet all of them almoſt eat both Horſe and Dogs fleſh. Toward
the South part of the City, there is a great lake about 24 miles in circuit,
in the midſt ſtand two Iſlands, whither the chief Nobilty repair and invite
their friends to Solemnize their Marriage, and have in each a ſtately Pallace
erected, furniſhed ſufficiently with all fitting Or­naments for a Wedding
jollity. In ma­ny parts of the City there are publick [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=75) places of
Receipt; for ſuch as ſuſtain any misfortune by fire, there they may lodge
their Goods ſafe upon a ſuddain caſualty, till they can make better
pro­viſion.

In each Province the Cities ſtand ſo thick, and are ſo populous, that they all
ſeem to be as one, one as well for their continued building almoſt as their
fa­ſhion of building; for they all obſerve the ſame form, and diſpoſe their
ſtreets alike, two broad, croſſing each other in the middle in ſo ſtrait a
line, that the eye may reach clean from one end to the other.

The Revenues of the whole Empire and number of Inhabitants, are not eaſily to
be reckoned. Yet this in brief, he hath ſubject under him 70 Crowned Kings,
gathers up yearly 120 Millions of Crowns, ſtirs not into the field without
300000 foot, and 200000 horſe.

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=76)

### 1.23. Out of the Deſcription of the Kingdom of TARTARY.

THeſe Tartaryans, for brutiſh Cu­ſtoms, were grown odious to the more civil
parts of the World, and as (Herod in his fourth Book of Hiſtories delivers)
were wont to ſing their Pa­rents to the Grave, invite their beſt Friends to
Feaſt with their Fathers fleſh, and uſe his Scull, as a cup to drink in at
their laſcivious banquets. Who more the Axiaca, who quenched their thirſt with
the bloud of him, whom they firſt ſlew, as it guſhed warm from his wounds; who
more fooliſh proud than the Agathyrſt, who were uſed to mend their beauty by a
deformed paint­ing, and ugly ſtaining of their bodies with motly colours.

You ſhall have here their Character, which is given by moſt that deſcribe
them, to have ill faſhioned bodies, an­ſwerable [[Page
135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=76) to their rude
minds, fit houſes for ſo unclean gueſts.

Their Stature is different. The moſt part have large ſhoulders, a broad face,
with a crooked noſe, deformed counte­nance, ſwarthy colour, hollow eyes,
hai­ry and untrimmed beard, and head cloſe ſhaved. Their ſpeech is boiſterous,
and clamorous, their noiſe in ſinging, like the yell of Wolves, and endurance
of hun­ger, thirſt, heat, cold and watching e­quals them (in ſtrength of body)
to the moſt able beaſt, for it exceeds the com­mon power of a man. Their luſt
is with­out Law, for they except no kindred, but their own Mothers, Daughters,
and Siſters. No ſpecies, for they mix with beaſts; nor ſex, for they are
unſatiate Sodomites; and yet take liberty for as many Wives which they can
maintain, which (contrary to our civil courſes) they buy of their Parents,
inſtead of recei­ving Dowries. Their meat is the raw fleſh of horſes, without
regard how they were killed, or what diſeaſes they dyed; [[Page
136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=77) ſometimes they
ſuck bloud from the li­ving, to appeaſe their hunger and thirſt, if (in a
journey) they be diſtreſſed for want of food.

Cities they have but few, nor hou­ſes other then moveable Tents made of Beaſts
skins, which they pitch up by great multitudes in the form of a Town, and
thoſe are called hordes: when the Graſs is once eaten bare, and the ground
yields not meat for their Cattel, they trudge with bag and baggage to another
quarter, and ſo in courſe they wander through the vaſt Deſarts unſetled, and
indeed impatient to be ſetled, or rather impriſoned (as they take it) within
any bounded compaſs, having the wide world to roam in: Their chief Arms are
Bow and Arrows, which they uſe moſt on Horſe-back, for their moſt ſpeedy
flight, and have them commonly ſtrong­ly poyſoned, for the more ſure miſchief
to the foe; their ſtratagems are down­right fraud, and breach of truce, for
they keep no faith with an Enemy, regard [[Page
137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=77) not any compact
made upon terms of peace, but follow their own ſenſe, and commit what out-
rages they can with leaſt danger to themſelves.

Their Religion is anſwerable to their vile cuſtoms; Some are Pagans, others
Mahometans, yet will not be called Turks, but Berſemany, and their chief
Prieſt Seyd, whom they reverence more then their Maker, and admit none ſhall
touch his hand but their Kings; and theſe too with an humble geſture, their
Dukes aſpire not above his knee, nor the Nobles higher then his feet, the reſt
are happy if they can but reach at his garment, his Horſe, his any thing; ſo
ſimple are they in their ſuperſtition. And thus have they continued either
Atheiſts or falſe Idolaters, ever ſince the firſt entrance upon this Kingdom
in the year 1187. Before they were not eſteemed a Nation at all, but wild
peo­ple, without Law or reaſon almoſt, who lived in the open fields, and
converſed with no other then their own heards of Cattel.

[[Page 138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=78) They
ceaſe not to commit continual Murthers and Rapines upon the Coun­tries
adjoyning, with an inveterate hate to ſuch as profeſs the Name of Chriſt,
inſomuch, that they have engaged themſelves to pay yearly three hundred
Chriſtians, as tribute to the great Turk, which number they draw out of
Polonia, Ruſsia, Tituania, Walachia, and part of Muſcovia.

[[Page 139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=78)

## 2\. A GENTLEMAN In his Travels TO BOHEMIA,  
Hath theſe Rare Obſervations following.

AFter he had left Hambrough, he was carryed (as he ſaith) day and night in
Waggons to an ancient Town called Heldeſhim, it ſtandeth in Brunſ­wick-Land,
and yet it belongeth to the Biſhop of Collin, where he did obſerve in their
Kirk or Cathedral Church, a [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=79) Crown of Silver
80 foot in compaſs, hanged up in the body of the Church: In the circuit of
which Crown were pla­ced 160 Wax Candles, the which at Fe­ſtival days, or at
the Celebration of ſome high Ceremonies are lighted.

Moreover there he ſaw a Silver Bell in their ſteeple of thirty pound weight,
and the Leads of their ſteeple ſhining and ſparkling with the Sun-beams; they
did affirm to him to be Gold, the truth of which he doubted.

From thence in his Travels, he came to a Town called Halverstadt, which
belongs to a Biſhop ſo ſtyled, who is Duke Chriſtian Brother to the now Duke
of Brunſwick, a long Dutch mile (or almoſt ſix Engliſh) is a ſmall Town called
Groning belonging to the Duke: In which place he obſerved,

Firſt a moſt ſtately Pallace built with a beautiful Chappel, ſo adorned with
the Images and Forms of Angels and Cherubims, with ſuch exquiſiteneſs of Arts
beſt Induſtry of Carving, Graving, [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=79) Guilding,
Painting, Glazing, and Pa­ving, with ſuch ſuper-excellent Work­man-ſhip of
Organs, Pulpit, and Font, that for Curioſity and admirable Rare­neſs, all the
buildings (he ſaith) and Fa­bricks that ever he beheld, muſt give it
preheminence; he confeſſeth that Hen­ry the ſevenths Chappel at Weſtminſter,
Kings Colledge Chappel in Cambridge, and Chriſt-Church in Canterbury, are
be­yond it in height and Workman-ſhip of Stone; for indeed this Chappel is
moſt of Wood, Gippe, and Plaiſter of Paris, but it is ſo guilded, as if it had
been made in the Golden age, when Gold was eſteemed as Droſs, ſo that a man
had need to wear a vaile over his daze­ling eyes, or elſe he can hardly look
up­on it.

In this Church there is no Service: If the painted Pulpit could preach, the
Images might (perhaps) have a Sermon now and then, for ſcarce at any time
there comes any body into the Chap­pel, but a fellow that ſhews the beauty of
it for 2d. or 3d. a piece.

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=80) In the
ſame houſe, in a place or Cel­ler built of purpoſe, is a great Tun, or Veſſel
of Wood, that was ſeven years in making, and was uſed to be filled with
Rheniſh-Wine, it is ſaid to be twice as big as the Veſſel at Heidelberg, and
the hoops of it are twelve inches thick, the ſtaves or boards of it being as
much; they go up to the top of it with a Lad­der of 18 ſteps, he that keeps
it, ſaith it will hold 160 Tunnes.

This is a Tub of Tubs, Tub of Tubs hall;

Who ne're had fellow yet, nor ever ſhall.

From hence paſſing through many Towns, and inacceſſible mountains, he and his
company came to a Wood, which parts Bohemia from Saxony on the Weſt, which
Wood is called by the peo­ple of thoſe parts the Beamer Wolts, or Wolt, and is
in breadth ten Engliſh miles, but in length farther than to be deſcri­bed by
him truly: Thus much is affirm­ed, that it is a natural impregnable Wall
[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=80) to the
Kingdom of Bohemia, which Kingdom is all incompaſt round with Woods and
mountains, ſo that there is no paſſage on that ſide of it for an Ar­my to
enter into it with Munition and Artillery, all the wayes being uneven, and the
mountain tops all Bogs, Moſſes, and Quagmires; beſides, there are num­bers
paſt numbring of Firre-trees, many ſtanding, and ſuch ſtore fallen of
them­ſelves, that any paſſage might eaſily be ſtopped by laying them croſs the
way; a moſt diſmal Wood it is, the trees grow ſo thick, and ſo high, that the
Sun is obſcured, and the day ſeemeth night.

When they had paſt the Hills and Woods, and that they might look down the
Mountains, into the fruitful Land of Bohemia, never did ſight more rejoyce
them, the lower hills being all full of Vineyards, and the Valleys, Corn and
Paſture, not an Engliſh mile diſtance, but a Village every way, and twenty,
thirty, or fourty ricks or ſtacks of Corn (which [[Page
144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=81) their Barns
cannot hold) in the ſpace of every hours journey: In a word, every thing that
belonged to the uſe and Commodity of man was and is there, and all the
delightful objects to ſatisfie every ſenſe is there abundantly, ſo that nature
ſeemed to make that Country her Store-houſe or Granary, for there is nothing
wanting, except mens grati­tude to God for ſuch bleſſings. Then they came to
Prague, which long lookt for City, could not be ſeen until they came within an
hours travel of it; within half a Dutch mile is a fearful place, being
frequented with inhumane and barba­rous murderers, that aſſault travellers,
but if they chance at any time to be apprehended, they are racked and
tortu­red to make them confeſs, and after­wards their Executions are very
terrible: In their journey they ſaw above ſeven­ſcore Gallowſes and wheels,
where thieves were hanged, ſome freſh, and ſome half rotten, and the carkaſſes
of murtherers broken Limb after Limb on the wheels.

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=81) When
they were come to Prague, which was but two days after a moſt fearful
execution of two notorious Of­fenders; the manner how, with their faults, as
it was truly related to them by Engliſh Gentelmen that ſaw it, I ſhall relate
it. The one of them being taken, apprehended and racked, for ripping up a live
Woman with Child, and for taking the Infant out of her bo­dy, did ſow a living
puppy into her bel­ly, all which he confeſſed he did to make properties for
Witchcraft; and be­ing further tortured, he confeſſed when & where he had
committed 35 murthers more. The other in reſpect of him was but a petty
offender, for he in all his life-time had murthered but 14. for the which
execrable facts, their deſer­ved executions were as followeth. Firſt, they
were brought out of the Goal na­ked from the girdle upward, and ſo be­ing
bound faſt on high in a Cart, that the Spectators might ſee them, then the
hangman having a pan of Coals near [[Page
146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=82) him, with red
hot pincers nip'd of the nipple of one breaſt, then he took a knife and gives
him a ſlaſh or cut down the back on one ſide from the ſhoulder to the waſte,
and preſently gave him ſuch another ſlaſh, three inches from the firſt, then
on the top he cut the ſlaſhes into one, and preſently taking pincers, took
hold of the croſs cut, and tore him down like a Girſe below the middle,
letting it hang down behind him like a belt, after which he took his burning
pincers, and pluck'd off the tops of his fingers of one hand; then paſſing to
ano­ther place of the Town, his other nipple was plucked off, the other ſide
of his back ſo cut and mangled, (which they call by the name of rimming) his
other fingers nip'd off; then paſſing further, all his Toes were nip'd off
with the burning pincers, after which he was inforced to come out of the Cart,
and go on foot up a ſteep hill to the Gallows, where he was broken with a
wheel alive, one bone after another, beginning at his leggs, [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=82) and ending with
his neck, and laſt of all quartered and laid on the Wheel, on a high poſt,
till Crows, Ravens, or con­ſuming time conſume him.

This was the manner of both their executions, but I ſpeak of the greateſt
murther particularly, becauſe it is re­ported that all theſe torments never
made him once to change countenance, or to make any ſign or action of grief,
to call to God for mercy, or to intreat the people to pray for him, but as if
he had been a ſenſleſs ſtock or ſtone, he did moſt ſcornfully, and as it were
in diſdain abide it; whilſt the other Villain did cry, rore, and make
lamentation, calling up­on God often. The difference was not much in their
lives, and manner of their deaths, but the odds may be great in their dying.

In the City of Prague is ſaid to be of Churches and Chappels 150. I was there
at four ſeveral ſorts of divine ex­erciſe, viz. at good Sermons with the
Proteſtants, at Maſs with the Papiſts, [[Page
148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=83) at a Lutherans
preaching, and at the Jews Synagogue, three of which I ſaw and heard for
curioſity, and the other for E­dification. The Jews in Prague are in ſuch
great numbers, that they are thought to be of Men, Women, and Children betwixt
50 or 60000. who do all live by Brokage and Uſury upon the Chri­ſtians, and
are very rich in Money and Jewels, ſo that a man may ſee 10 or 12 together of
them, that are accounted worth 20 30 or 40000 l. a piece, and yet the ſlaves
go ſo miſerably attired, that 15 of them are not worth the hang­ing for their
whole ward-ropes.

### 2.1. The City of Hamburgh. The priviledges of their grand hang-man.

YOu muſt underſtand that this fel­low is a Subſidy Hangman, to whom our Tyburn
Tatterdemallion, or our Wapping winde-pipe ſtretcher, is but a Raggamuffin,
not worth the [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=83) hanging. The
priviledges of this Grand haulter-maſter are many, as he hath the emptying of
all the Vaults or draughts in the City, which no doubt he gains ſome favour
by. Beſides all Oxen, Kine, Horſes, Dogs, or any ſuch beaſts, if they dye
themſelves, or if they be not like to live, the hang man muſt knock them on
the head, and have their skins; and whatſoever Inhabitant in his juriſdiction
doth any of theſe things aforeſaid himſelf, is abhorred and accounted as a
Villain without Redemp­tion: So that with hangings, headings, breakings,
pardoning, and killing of Dogs, flaying of Beaſts, emptying of Vaults, and
ſuch privy Commodities, his whole Revenue ſometimes amounts to four or five
hundred pounds a year. And he is held in that regard and eſtima­tion, that any
man will converſe and drink with; nay, ſometimes the Lords of the Town will
feaſt with him, and it is accounted no impeachment to their honours, for he is
held in the rank of a [[Page
150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=84) Gentleman, (or
a rank Gentleman) and he ſcorns to be clad in the caſt weeds of executed
offenders; no, he goes to the Mercers, and hath his Sattin, his Vel­vet, or
what ſtuffe he pleaſes meaſured out by the Yard or the Ell, with his Gold and
Silver Lace, his ſilk Stock­ings, laced ſpangled Garters and Roſes, Hat and
Feather, with four or five brave Villains attending him in Livery Cloaks, who
have ſtipendary means from his ignominious bounty.

### 2.2. Their manner of executing Thieves and Murtherers upon the Wheel▪ I
ſhall name one for a preſident.

A Poor Carpenter dwelling in the Town, who having ſtoln a Gooſe, and plucking
it within his doors, a little Girl (his Daughter-in-law) went out of his
houſe, and left the door open, by which means, the owner of the Gooſe paſſing
by, eſpyed the wretched thief [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=84) very diligently
picking what he before had been ſtealing, to whom the owner ſaid, Neighbour, I
now perceive which way my Geeſe uſe to go, but I will have you in Queſtion for
them, and ſo away he went; the Caitiff being thus reproved, grew deſperate,
and his Child coming into his houſe, ye young whore, quoth he, muſt ye leave
my door open for folks to look in upon me, and with that word he took a
hatchet, and with a curſed ſtroak, he clove the Childs head, for the which
murther he was condem­ned and judged to be broken alive upon the wheel. Upon
the day of Execution, about the hour of 12 at Noon, the peo­ple of the Town in
great multitudes flocked to the place of Execution, which is half a mile
Engliſh without the Gates, the Priſoner came on foot with a Divine with him,
all the way exhorting him to repentance; and becauſe death ſhould not terrifie
him, they had given him many Rowſes, and Carowſes of Wine and Beer; for it is
a cuſtom there to make [[Page
152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=85) ſuch poor
wretches drunk, whereby they be made ſenſleſs, either of Gods mercy, or their
own miſery, but being pray'd for by others, they themſelves may die
re­ſolutely, or (to be feared) deſperate­ly.

But the Priſoner being come to the place of death, he was by the Officers
delivered to the hang-man, who entring his ſtrangling fortification with two
grand hang-men more, and their men, to aſſiſt their Hamburghian brother in
this great and weighty work; the Priſoner mounted on a mount of Earth, built
high on purpoſe that the people about may ſee the execution a quarter of a
mile round about, four of the hang-mens men takes each of them a ſmall halter,
and by the hands and the feet they hold the priſoner extended all abroad lying
on his back, then the Arch-hang-man, or the great Maſter of this mighty
buſineſs, took up a wheel much about the bigneſs of one of the fore, wheels of
a Coach, and firſt having [[Page
153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=85) put off his
Doublet, his Hat, and being in his ſhirt, as if he meant to play at Tennis, he
took the wheel, and ſet it on the edge, and turn'd it with one hand like a Top
or Whirly-gig; then he took it by the Spoaks, and lifting it up, with a mighty
ſtroke, he beat one of the poor wretches legs in pieces (the bones I mean) at
which he rored grievouſly, then after a little pauſe he breaks the o­ther leg
in the ſame manner, and conſe­quently breaks his arms, and then he ſtroke four
or five main blows on his breaſt, and burſt all his bulk and cheſt in ſhivers;
laſtly, he ſmote his neck, and miſſing, burſt his chin and Jaws to mam­mocks,
then he took the broken man­gled Corps, and ſpread it on the wheel, and then
fixed the poſt into the Earth ſome ſix foot deep, being in height a­bove the
ground ſome ten or twelve foot, and there the carkaſs muſt lye till it be
conſumed by all conſuming time, or ravening fowls.

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=86) This was
the terrible manner of the horrid Execution; and at this place are twenty
poſts with thoſe wheels or pie­ces of wheels, with heads of men nailed on the
top of the poſts; with a great ſpike driven through the skull. The ſeveral
kinds of torments which they inflict upon offenders in thoſe parts, puts me to
imagine our Engliſh hanging to be but a flea-biting.

### 2.3. There manner of beheading.

MOreover, if any men in thoſe parts are to be beheaded, the faſhion is, that
the priſoner kneels down, and being blinded with a Napkin, one takes hold of
the hair of the crown of the head, holding the party upright, whilſt the
hangman with a backward blow with a ſword, will take the head from a mans
ſhoulders ſo nim­bly, and with ſuch dexterity, that the owner of the head
ſhall never want the [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=86) miſs of it. And
if it be any mans fortune to be hanged for never ſo ſmall a crime, though he
be mounted whole, yet he ſhall come down in pieces, for he ſhall hang till
every joynt and limb drop one from another.

### 2.4. Strange Torments and varieties of deaths.

THey have ſtrange torments and varieties of deaths, according to the various
nature of the offences that are committed; as for example, he that
counterfeits any Princes Coin, and is proved a Coiner, his judgment is to be
boiled to death in Oil; not thrown into the Veſſel all at once, but with a
pulley or a rope, to be hanged under the Arm-pits, and let down into the Oil
by degrees; firſt the feet, and next the legs, and ſo to boil his fleſh from
the bones alive. For thoſe that ſet houſes on fire wilfully, they are ſmoaked
to death; as firſt there is a pile or poſt fix­ed [[Page
156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=87) in the ground,
and within an Engliſh Ell of it is a piece of Wood nailed croſs, whereupon the
offender is made faſt ſit­ting, then over the top of the poſt is whelmed a
great tub or dry fat, which doth cover or over-whelm the priſoner as low as
the middle. Then underneath the executioner hath wet ſtraw, hay, ſtubble, or
ſuch kind of ſtuffe, which is fired, but by reaſon it is wet and dank, it doth
not burn, but ſmother and ſmoak, which ſmoak aſcends up into the Tub, where
the priſoners head is, and not being able to ſpeak, he will heave up and down
with his belly, and people may perceive him in theſe torments to live three or
four hours.

Adultery there if it be proved, is puniſhed with death, as the loſs of the
parties heads, if they be both marryed, or if not both, yet the marryed party
muſt die for it, and the other muſt en­dure ſome eaſier puniſhment, either by
the purſe or carkaſſe, which in the end proves little better then half a
hang­ing.

[[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=87) One
thing more: In Ham­burgh thoſe that are not hanged for theft, are chained two
or three toge­ther, and they muſt in that ſort ſix or ſeven years draw a dung-
cart, & cleanſe the ſtreets of the Town, and every one of thoſe thieves for as
many years as he is condemned to that ſlavery, ſo many bells he hath hanged at
an Iron above one of his ſhoulders, and every year a bell is taken off, till
all are gone, and then he is a free-man again, ſome of the thieves had ſeven
bells, ſome five, ſome ſix, ſome one, but ſuch a noiſe they make, as if all
the Devils in hell were dancing the Morrice.

### 2.5. A Pretty Story.

THe Hangmans place being void, there were two of the bloud (for it is to be
noted that the ſucceſſion of the office doth lineally deſcend from the Father
to the Son, or to the next [[Page
158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=88) of the bloud)
which were at ſtrife for the poſſeſſion of this high indignity. Now it
happened that two men were to be beheaded at the ſame Town, and at the ſame
time, and (to avoid ſuit in Law for this great Prerogative) it was concluded
by the Arbitrators, that each of theſe new hangmen ſhould exe­cute one of the
priſoners, and he that with greateſt cunning and ſlight could take the head
from the body, ſhould have the place; to this they all agreed, and the
priſoners were brought forth, where one of the executioners did bind a Red
ſilk thred double about his priſo­ners neck, the threds being diſtant one from
another but the breadth of one thred, and he promiſed to cut off the head with
a backward blow with a ſword, between the threds. The other called his
priſoner aſide, and told him that if he would be ruled by him, he ſhould have
his life ſaved, and beſides (quoth he) I ſhall be ſure to have the office. The
priſoner was glad of the [[Page
159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=88) motion, and
ſaid he would do any thing upon theſe conditions, then ſaid the hang-man, when
thou art on thy knees, and haſt ſaid thy prayers, and that I do lift up my Axe
(for I will uſe an Axe) to ſtrike thee, I will cry Hem, at which word do thou
riſe and run away (thou knoweſt none will ſtay thee if thou canſt once eſcape
after thou art de­livered into my cuſtody; it is the faſhion of our Country)
and let me alone to ſhift to anſwer the matter. This being ſaid or whiſpered,
the heads-man with the ſword did cut off the priſoners head juſt between the
threds as he had ſaid, which made all the people wonder at the ſteddineſs of
his hand, and moſt of them judged that he was the man that was and would be
fitteſt to make a mad hang-man of.

But as one tale is good till another be told, and as there be three degrees of
good, better and beſt, ſo this laſt hang-man did much exceed and eclipſe the
others cunning; For his priſoner be­ing [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=89) on his knees,
and he lifting up his Axe to give the fatal blow, Hem (ſaid he according to
promiſe) whereupon the fellow aroſe and ran away, but when he had run ſome
ſeven or eight paces, the hang-man threw the Axe after him, and ſtruck his
head ſmoothly from his ſhoulders: Now for all this, who ſhall have the place
is unknown, for they are yet in Law for it, and I doubt not but before the
matter is ended, that the Lawyers will make them exerciſe their own Trade upon
themſelves to end the controverſie. This tale doth ſavour ſomewhat
Hyperbolical, but I wiſh the Reader to believe to more of the matter than I
ſaw, and there is an end.

### 2.6. Hamburgh a free City.

HAmburgh is a free City, not be­ing ſubject to the Emperour or any other
Prince, but only governed by twenty four Burgo-maſters, whereof [[Page
161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=89) two are the
chief, who are called Lords, and do hold that dignity from their firſt
Election during their lives. The build­ings are all of one uniform faſhion,
very lofty and ſtately, it is wonderful popu­lous, and the water with boats
comes through moſt of the ſtreets of the Town.

Their Churches are moſt gorgeouſly ſet forth, as the moſt of them covered with
Copper, with very lofty ſpires, and within ſides they are adorned with
Crucifixes, Images and Pictures, which they do charily keep for Ornaments. In
St. Jacobs and in St. Katherines Chur­ches there is in one of them a Pulpit of
Alablaſter, and the other a pair of ſuch Organs, which for worth and
Workman­ſhip are unparallel'd in Chriſtendom, as moſt travellers do relate.

[[Page 162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=90)

### 2.7. The Womens Habit.

THe Women there are no faſhion-mongers, but they keep in their degrees one
continual habit, as the richer ſort do wear a Huick, which is a Robe of Cloth
or Stuff plated, and the upper part of it is gathered and ſowed together in
the form of an Engliſh pot­lid, with a taſsle on the top, and ſo put upon the
head, and the garment goes over her tuffe and face if ſhe pleaſe, and ſo down
to the ground, ſo that a man may meet his own Wife, and perhaps not know her
from another Woman.

[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=90)

### 2.8. Men and Women draw Carts, their Office.

THey have no Porters to bear bur­dens, but they have big burly­bon'd Knaves
with their Wives that do daily draw Carts any whither up and down the Town,
with Merchants Goods, or any other imployments.

And it is reported that theſe Cart-drawers are to ſee the Rich men of the Town
provided of Milch Nurſes for their Children, which Nurſes they call by the
Name of Ams; ſo that if they do want a Nurſe at any time, theſe fel­lows are
curſed, becauſe they have not gotten Wenches enough with Child to ſupply their
wants.

[[Page 164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=91)

### 2.9. The Lawyer a bad Trade.

A Lawyer hath but a bad Trade there, for any Cauſe or Con­troverſie is tryed
and determined in three days, Quirks, Quiddits, Demurs, Habeas Corpus's,
Cercioraries, Proceden­does, or any ſuch dilatory tricks are abo­liſhed, and
not worth a button.

[[Page 165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=91)

## 3\. THE Lamentable Deſtruction, OF THE Ancient and Memorable City and
Temple OF JERUSALEM; Being deſtroyed by Veſpaſian, and his Son Titus.

WArs hath brought dreadful Jars and Confuſions, both of hor­rour and terrour
unto Domeſtick, For­reign, Inward and Outward Eſtates: In Jehovahs ire were
ſhafts ſhot at Juda, [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=92) ſo that War,
Fire, Sword, Famine, In­fectious Plagues, Depopulations and Deſolations, was
the final Conqueſt of old Jacobs Land.

Theſe are the Theames of my mournful Muſe, theſe are the grounds of my
Lamentation; Joſephus wrote theſe things in ample manner, which I do here
Epitomize. That worthy Author in a large ſcope relates, and the Books of his
Antiquities do tell his Countries altera­tions, how oftentimes they roſe how
of­ten they fell, how often God favoured them, and how often his frowns was
up­on them, and at laſt in his anger he caſt them head-long down.

The ſeventh Book of Joſephus's wars, declareth plainly how the Romans did by
Conqueſt gain the Kingdom, how death did in ſundry ſhapes tyrannize, both in
Sword, in Fire, in Famine, and in Rapes.

Since Hebers Sons enjoyed the Coun­try, it hath been ſix times waſted and
deſtroyed; ſo that if you account all [[Page
167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=92) the Wars ſince
the Creation that hath chanced, they are nothing to Jeruſalems deſolation: No
ſtory, no Memory de­ſcribes the calamity of old Iſraels Tribes to be
parallel'd: And indeed if each Land in the univerſal did recount the bloudy
broyls to them, it were but a Molehill to a Mountain; all which for ſin, the
Almighty in his anger heaped upon this ſinful Land.

It is now about ſixteen hundred years ſince great Veſpaſian, Romes Imperial
Prince, with his ſtout Valiant Son, brave young Titus, did over-run Judea's
King­dom, and with a Royal Army renown­ed, did beleaguer Jeruſalem with Forces
and ſtratagems, as with Rampiers, En­gines, ſcaling Ladders and Towers, with
all the Art that either might or ſleight could do.

The beſieged amongſt themſelves, in this interim, fell to Sedition, like
Bavines that lyeth near one to another, if one burn, and burning, each one
burneth another; ſo did the Jews each other [[Page
168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=93) madly kill,
inſomuch as their ſtreets were fill'd with their ſlain Corpſes.

Eleazer, Simon and John diſagreeing, rent Jeruſalem in pieces, each contending
who ſhould be the chief; John ſcorned Eleazer, as thinking himſelf moſt
wor­thy to be Superiour, on the other ſide Eleazer thought John to be his
Inferi­our, and Simon ſcorned them both, and each ſcorned another, and would
not by any be ruled or over-born.

The City being thus divided into three Factions, ſad it is to relate how
horrid their bloudy and inhumane acti­ons were, there all impieties were
com­mitted in ſundry ſorts of varieties, all ſacrilegious acts were counted
moſt no­ble and meritorious facts: In evil they ſtrived each other to ſurpaſs,
and labour­ed moſt how to ſerve the Devil. Theſe men had no thoughts of grace
and goodneſs, but daily each againſt the o­ther moſt madly fought, and over-
turn­ed all things by their hurly burly, ſo violent were they one againſt
another, [[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=93)
that they burned each others ſtore­houſes, with their Victuals: And with
hearts more harder than the Adamantine Rocks, they drailed Virgins by the hair
of their heads, as alſo the Aged they ſpared not to drag about the ſtreets,
ſome Infants their brains they daſhed out, and ſome upon the points of Lances,
they bore about the ſtreets: It is not poſſible to write with Pen, the
devilliſh out-rages, and barbarous acts that was committed by them.

The advantage upon this ſeditious and moſt inhumane diſorder that the Romans
took, is moſt incredible; yet credible it may be, becauſe the Jews were
altogether unmindful of their own ſafety, they waſted and ſpoiled one another
without remorſe, inſomuch as their enemies, their cruel foes, relented and
wept in pity of them, whilſt they (relentneſs Villains) void of pity; did
their Mother City conſume and ruinate, the Channels flowed all with gore
bloud, the ſtreets were beſtrowed with [[Page
170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=94) murdered
carkaſſes, the Temple with unhallowed hands defiled; there was no reſpect to
any, to Man, Woman, or Child.

Thus this three headed multitude, or helliſh crew did waſte themſelves, till
indeed they did at length ſubdue themſelves: but you muſt note they were not
altogether neglective, ſome vi­gilancy they had upon their enemy, and whilſt
they were making their ſtrength more ſure within, the Romans with­out with
their dreadful Batteries, made not only the City to tremble, but the Walls to
break, at which the factious wiſely bethought themſelves, and aſſembled
themſelves together with all their powers; and, as a won­derment it was united
together like good friends: And then like ſwoln Ri­vers bounded in with Banks,
they ſally forth and fight their enemies, like as the ambitious torrent breaks
his bounds, and over-runs whole Lordſhips; ſo did theſe Jews out-dare and
challenge any [[Page
171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=94) that would
withſtand the fury of their inſulting pride, whereupon they out of the City
came, and entred the Romans Army like a flood, and in their deſpe­rate
madneſs, all was overwhelmed that durſt withſtand them; the Walls then could
not be aſſaulted, the enemies fearful Engines was then by them ſet on fire,
and bravely fighting they bravely made their enemies to retire!

The Battel done, back go theſe hair­braind men, and divide again, and each
becomes the others foe, and then pell mell they go to it, and begin to
diſor­der, and bring all things to confuſion; with fire their Corn and
Victuals they conſumed, all their proviſion in a mo­ment ſpoiled and waſted,
which if well kept, might have laſted them many years; upon which the Famine,
like a Tyrant, roams and rages, and makes all, both Old and Young, Rich and
Poor to ſtarve and dye with fleſhleſs A­natomies.

[[Page 172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=95) This was
a Plague of Plagues, a Woe of Woes, death on every ſide did in­cloſe them;
this being their condition, they knew not what to do, to ſally forth they
durſt not, for then their lives they were ſure to loſe, to ſtay within for
want of food they ſtarved, out they could not go, for the Gates were ſhut and
ſtrongly warded, their throats were cut if any ſtaid within; ſo that if they
ſtay or go, or go or ſtay, every way De­ſtruction they are ſure to meet with.

But of all torments, hunger is the worſt, for that will burſt through the
ſtony Walls; therefore theſe people having been with War, Woe, and want on
every ſide beſet, do now begin to con­ſult and ſtrive how they might get to
the Romans, for there was their hopes, that in their ſwords they ſhould find
more mercy, then their ſtill dying famiſht ſtate afforded them: And indeed
when man is oppreſt, then is wit moſt ſharpeſt, and then wiſdom amongſt evils,
chuſeth the leaſt.

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=95) Now they
knowing Veſpaſian for a noble Prince, and one that did not glo­ry in their
Woe, they thought it beſt to try his clemency, and not with hun­ger and famine
to die, and therefore de­ſpairing of all hopes, reſolved with Ropes to ſlide
down the Walls, which a number of them did, and fled to Titus, who bemoaned
the ſadneſs of their con­dition, and relieved and took them to his grace and
favour. Thus when all hopes failed, they were by their foes preſerved, to the
number of at leaſt 40000.

The City Souldiers ſearched every houſe where they thought any Victuals were
conveyed, and if they found any, the owners were moſt certainly bea­ten for
concealing it; but if they ſaw a man look plump and fat, his throat they would
ſurely cut, for they thought him too much pampered, and too full fed; they
would therefore ſtrike him dead to ſave meat and drink. The Richeſt and
Nobleſt that was born both [[Page
174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=96) of Men and
Women, gave all they had for one poor ſtrike of Corn, and hid themſelves and
it under the ground in ſome cloſe Vault, and there they would eat it under the
ground unground; if any could get fleſh, they would eat it raw: Thus the
weaker were over-awed, and kept under by the ſtronger.

No reſpect of perſons where hunger came; natural affection was then baniſh­ed;
then the Husband did his own Wife reject, the Wife ſhe ſnatches the meat from
her Husband, all pity from the Mother was exiled, ſhe from the Child tears and
takes the Victuals, the Child plays the thief with the Parents, and ſteals the
food, though with grief the Parents pine away.

There was neither Free-man, nor Bond-man, Fathers nor Mothers, Wives,
Husbands, Maſters, Servants, Brothers, Siſters, be it propinquity or ſtrong
affi­nity, no Law, or reaſon, or rule could bear ſway; and indeed obeyſance
muſt be given where ſtrength commands; the [[Page
175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=96) pining Servant
will not know his Ma­ſter, the Son will not ſhew his duty to his Father, the
Commons regardleſs to the Magiſtrate, each for one, and but for one he cared;
diſordered, like the cart before the horſe, force cauſed all reſpect to yield.

Theſe Miſcreants with vigilancy did watch where a door was locked or latch­ed
that they could ſpy, for there they ſuppoſed the people were at meat, and in
their out-rage the doors they would beat open, where entring if they found
them feeding, they would tear it in haſte out of their throats, half eaten and
half uneaten; theſe wretches would conſtrain the people to caſt it up again,
they hauld them about the houſe by the ears, to force them to bring out their
Victuals, which they ſuppoſed they had; ſome by the Thumbs they hanged up, and
ſome by the Toes, ſome had many blows, others were pricked with Bod­kins,
ſadly were they tormented to re­veal their meat when they had none to [[Page
176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=97) conceal; and in
truth all was fiſh that came into their net, and all was food that could be
got by fraud or force.

Graſs, Hay, Barks, Leaves of trees, Cats and Dogs, Frogs, Worms, Rats, Mice,
Snails, Flies and Maggots, all ſtinking and contagious roots, the cover­ing of
their Coaches, Boots and Shoes, and the dung of Fowls and Beaſts, were Feaſts
for theſe poor miſerable ſtarved wretches; things loathſome to be na­med in
time of plenty, is now dainties among theſe ſtarved diſtreſſed Jews.

This Famine run beyond all natures bounds, (as before I have hinted) and
confounded all Motherly-affection, no compaſſion was there had to bloud or
birth: It forced a woman to kill her on­ly Son, ſhe ript and diſ-joynted him,
and diſ-joynted him limb from limb, ſhe dreſt, ſhe roaſted, ſhe broiled and
boil­ed him, ſhe eat him, ſhe interr'd him in her womb; his life by nature
proceed­ed from her, and ſhe her ſelf moſt unna­turally did feed upon him, he
was her [[Page 177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=97)
fleſh, her bloud, her bones, and there­fore ſhe eating him her ſelf, her ſelf
made food: No woe can equal her mi­ſery, no grief can match her ſad
cala­mities, the Souldiers they ſmelt the meat, upon which they ſtraitly
aſſem­bled, which when they ſaw, they trem­bled, and with ſtaring hairs, and
ghaſt­ly looks were thereat ſo affrighted and amazed, that thereupon they
preſently left the houſe: This horrid action did more with them, then any
force of man could ever do, for this ſad ſight over came them.

Oh then thou that doſt live like a fatted Brawn, and cramſt thy guts as long
as thou canſt; thou that doſt eat and drink away thy time, accounting it no
crime for gluttony to be thy God, thou that muſt have fowl of all ſorts, and
haſt the bowels of the Ocean ſearch­ed to ſatisfie thy appetite, and haſt thy
dainties from all parts and places, near and remote, and all to ſatisfie thy
de­vouring throat, whoſe pamper'd paunch [[Page
178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=98) never leaves to
feed and quaff. Think on Jeruſalem, perhaps it will move thee in the midſt of
thy Diet and rio­tous courſes, to a more temperate and ſober demeanor.

And you brave Dames, adorned with Jems and Jewels, that muſt have Grewels and
Caudles, Conſerves and Marchpanes, & that too in ſundry ſhapes made, as
Caſtles, Towers, Horſes, Apes, and Bears; think on Jeruſalem in the midſt of
all your glory, and then you will be more ſorrowful and leſs dainty; poor
Jeruſalem had once Beauty, Strength, Riches, ſpacious Buildings, Authority and
honour, yet theſe avail­ed them nothing, wrong trode down right, and Juſtice
was quite forgotten, which was their chiefeſt, their greateſt, their only
earthly good.

But now one little piece of bread they reckoned more upon, then ever before
they did of bags of Gold. Scraps, parings, and fragments, &c. which your full
ſed Corps did uſually fling away, [[Page
179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=98) with them had
been a ranſom for a King, the loathſome garbage which our dogs refuſe, had
been amongſt the Jews a diſh of ſtate.

Whilſt within Famine plaid the Ty­rant, the Romans Army ſtrived to win the
Walls, their Pioners, and all their Engines were at work to batter and
aſ­ſault the Wall: Now note, Jeruſalem had three ſtrong ſtone Walls, and long
it was ere the Romans could get one, but the dearth ſo ſpread, and death of
the ſword, as that in the ſtreets the living trod upon the dead, the Carkaſſes
which the Seditious kill'd, fill'd many great houſes, ſo that with the ſtinck
of bodies putrefied there dyed a number number­leſs of people, for burial they
afforded none, but where they fell they let them lye ſtink and rot, yet very
unſenſible were they of the ſad condition of each other, by hundreds and
thouſands: then did the ſouldiers throw their liveleſs Corpſes over the Walls,
upon this and their diſ-uniting, the Romans had high [[Page
180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=99) advantages, and
could with more ſecuri­ty batter and ſcale the Walls.

When the Romans ſaw their diſmal fall from the Walls, they told it to Ti­tus▪
which when he perceived he wept, and lifted up his hands to Heaven and called
on God to witneſs with him this.

Theſe flanghters ſaith he, were no thoughts of mine, neither was it my fault.
Indeed thoſe wretches that e­ſcaped from out of the City, and came amongſt
their foes in my Army, found both relief and pity, if any of thoſe that fled
to my Army had by the Seditious been caught, they had without remorſe ſtrook
them dead.

But another miſery I muſt unfold un­to you, many Jews had ſwallowed ſtore of
Gold, which they ſuppoſed in their need ſhould help them, but from this
treaſure did their bane proceed, the Gold was the cauſe that many of them
periſht, amongſt them all, one unhappy poor creature went privately to do the
needs of Nature, and in his dung he [[Page
181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=99) looked for his
Gold, where being by the ſtraggling ſouldiers took, they ript him up and
ſearched his Maw, to find what Gold or treaſure there remained: In this ſort
was many a Man and Woman ript and ſlain for the gain of Gold that the
ſouldiers gaped for. In ſome they found Gold, in many none, but had they Gold
or not, it was all one with them, they were unbowelled and ſearched moſt
barbarouſly whither they had any or no.

But my ſtory briefly to conclude, Ve­ſpaſians Souldiers had ſubdued the walls,
& his triumphant banner was diſplayed, and that in the midſt of the ſtreets,
at which the Jews were all diſmayed, and upon which they deſperately did
retire to the Temple, which with ungodly hands they ſet on fire; which noble
Ti­tus with great care intreated them they would ſpare: Oh ſave the houſe
(quoth he) and I will ſpare you for the Temple ſake, quench the fire, [[Page
182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=100) put out the
flame! Oh let not after­times report that you have burnt the worlds
unmatchable glory! For your own ſakes, your wives, and your chil­drens, if
from Veſpaſians hands you ex­pect grace, if from Veſpaſians hands you expect
your lives; oh ſave your Temple, Titus doth command you to ſave the Temple.

The Jews heard of the mercy they might have had, but with hearts hard they
refuſed the offer, they refuſed mer­cy, and themſelves regarded not; but in
their madneſs they burned, conſumed and confounded to the ground King Solomons
great Temple, that Temple which did coſt thirty Millions, was in a moment loſt
and conſumed. The bleſt Sanctum Sanctorum, the holieſt place of­ten bleſſed
with Johovahs ſacred grace, where as the Text ſaith, were 22000 Ox­en ſlain,
and 12000 ſheep beſides, dyed at the ſame time for an oblation. That houſe of
God whoſe glorious fame [[Page
183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=100) made all the
World to wonder, was burnt, and ranſackt, and laid level to the ground, which
when it was ſeen by Ve­ſpaſian and young Titus, they cry'd kill, kill thoſe
wretched Jews, ſpare not to kill, uſe ſpeedy and Marſhal Law; the Roman
ſouldiers then fell on and ſpared none, they ſlew while they were weary of
ſlaying, and had no reſpect to Age or Sex, the ſtreets were drowned in bloud,
and ſlaughtered-Carkaſes did ſwim in in bloud, the ableſt men that were ſaved
they carryed away for ſlaves, John, Si­mon, and Eleazer, as they deſerved were
brought to violent ends.

Now from that time that the Romans began their ſiege, until the City was won
by Sedition, by the Sword, Fire, and Famine, were depri­ved of their lives
eleven hundred thouſand, be­ſides one hundred thouſand were taken as beaſts
and ſold for ſlaves, and from the time it was firſt erected, till the Romans
had take [...] it, it ſtood as appears in Hiſtories twenty one hundred ſeventy
and nine years.

[[Page 184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=101) But
before Gods vengeance was ſhowred down upon them, what ſtrange prodigious
Wonders did he ſhew, as warnings how they ſhould avoid their deſtruction, and
cauſe them to repent the wicked evils they had done.

1\. The Firmament ſhewed them a Comet like a fiery Sword.

2\. Divers nights the Temple and the Altar were environed with bright burning
lights.

3\. In the midſt of the Temple though un­a Cow did bear a Lamb.

4\. No Bolts or Bars could reſtrain the Temple-gates, but they would fly open
of themſelves.

5\. In the Air aſſembled Armed men and Chariots, the pondrous Earth quaked,
affright­ed and trembled.

6\. To this ſenſe a voice cryed in the Temple, & the people cry'd oh let us
from hence depart!

Theſe ſupernatural accidents, foretold ſome fearful Judgment was to come, but
toyes they were accounted to the Jews, or ſcar-crow-bug­bears to fright
children with, and not minding them, nor no way by them being affrighted, they
did in Jeruſalem ſecurely revell, they thought theſe ſigns were againſt their
foes, and not them.

[[Page 185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=101) But
when war, when death, when ſpoil, when ruine had ſtorm'd them, appear'd the
place ſo deſolate as none could have known there had been a City.

Thus Juda, and thus Jeruſalem fell, which Chriſt did foretell, and was now
fulfill'd, that all their joys they ſhould be bereft off, and that one ſtone
ſhould not be left to ſtand upon ano­ther.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=102)

## Appendix A THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.

  * SHeweth that in Aſia did God begin his marvellous work of Creation, and there was the first Church Collected; alſo the Saviour of the World born and ſlain: In this Aſia abounds Myrrhe, Frankinſence, Nutmegs, Pepper, &c. and it breeds Ele­phants, and many other Beaſts and Serpents. page 1\. 2, 3, 4.
  * In the City Medina in Arabia, is Maho­met Intombed in an Iron Chest ſupported [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=102) by Art from falling to the ground. 5
  * A brief Deſcription of Africa, in one of which Cities there is 700 Churches, and a Caſtle whoſe Globes are pure Gold, weigh­ing 130000 Barbury Duckets in one Pro­vince; they allow not a man to Marry till he hath killed twelve Chriſtians, where they alſo Circumciſe Male and Female. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
  * A brief deſcription of Europe, wherein is plenty of Corn, Plants, Fruits, Rivers, and Fountains of admirable vertue. 12, 13
  * A brief deſcription of America, in which are that Worſhip Sun, Moon, and Stars, and adore Images made of Cotton-Wool, which by the deluſion of Satan utters an Hideous noiſe, which works on them a great awe. In Peru doth Gold and Silver ſo abound, that it's reported they ordinarily ſhooed their Horſes with Gold an Braſſel men live for the moſt part in the Bodies of trees? In this Re­gion is an herb called Viva, which if toucht will ſhut up, and not open till the party that injured it be out of ſight. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=103) A brief deſcription of Greece, wherein was firſt ſetled the Chriſtian Religion by Ti­mothy. 20, 21
  * A brief deſcription of Germany and Bo­hemia. In Cullen is received a Tradition a­mongſt the Inhabitants, that the bodies of the Wiſe-men which came from the Eaſt to Wor­ſhip Chriſt are Interr'd in Acon, they Worſhip a Clout, which they take to be our Saviours Mantle, in which he was wrapped. 24, 25
  * A brief deſcription of France, in one of which Provinces called Aquitania, was fought the great Battel betwixt our Black Prince, and John of France, where with 8000 he conquered 40000 took the King and his ſon Philip priſoners 70 Earls, 50 Barrons, and 12000 Gentlemen. 29, 30
  * In the Dukedom Lutxenburge, Quick is this Memorable ſtory, that at one time their ſtudyed 9 Kings Sons, 24. Dukes Sons, 29 Earls Sons. 31
  * A large deſcription of a Tortoys, from p. 47\. to p. 51
  * A diſcription of Great Brittain in very Remarkable ſtories from p. 51\. to p. 106
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=103) Amongſt which is a notable ſtory in Eſſex 1581\. of an Army of Mice, that ſo over­run the Marſhes near unto South Minſter, that they ſhore the Graſs to the very roots, and in Suffolk was taken a fiſh in all parts like a man, and kept in Orford Caſtle for ſix months after eſcaped, and went to Sea again. 68, 69
  * In the year 1571. Maſley-hill in the Eaſt of Hereford-ſhire removed, travel­ling for three days together, began upon the 7th of February at ſix of the clock at night, and before 7 next morning had gone forty pa­ces, carrying with it ſheep in the coots, hedge rows and trees mounting to an hill of twelve fathoms high, and there reſted after three days travel. 75, 76
  * Under Knaves-brough in York-ſhire, there is a Well called Dropping-Well of that vertue and efficacy, that it turns Wood into Stones. 87
  * A deſcription of Scotland and Ireland. 107 to 116
  * A deſcription of the Spaniſh Invaſion in Eighty eight. 116, 117
  * [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=104) A deſcription of the Turkiſh Empire, their Religion, and Manners, with the riſe of Mahomet from 118 to 126
  * A deſcription of China and Tartary, from 126 to 138
  * Rare Obſervations of a Gentleman in his travels to Bohemia. 139 to 148
  * The priviledges of the Grand-hangman of Hamburgh, with the manner of executing Thieves and Murderers; the habit of their Women, and how their men draw Carts and Carriages. 148 to 165
  * The Lamentable Deſtruction of the An­cient and Memorable City of Jeruſalem, with the ſore and terrible Famine, while Graſs, Hay, Barks, Leaves of Trees, Cats and Dogs, &c. with the dung of Fowls and Beaſts, was dainties to the diſtreſſed Jews. 165
  * To the end.

FINIS.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=55817&page=104)

[Home](/)

G. H.. Date: 1670  

