---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# A Letter writ to Sir John Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, By Edward
Bagshvve [sic], close-prisoner there.

## Table of contents

  * 1\. A Letter writ to Sir John Robinſon Lieutenant of the Tovver,
  * 2\. POST-SCRIPT.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=151527&page=1)

## 1\. A Letter writ to Sir John Robinſon Lieutenant of the Tovver,

By EDWARD BAGSHVVE, Cloſe-Priſoner there.

SIR,

THough I believe you have no Remorſe, yet I ſuppoſe you cannot but be
conſcious, how unworthily you have uſed me; and be­cauſe, whenever you do any
thing which is injuri­ous & oppreſſive, you are apt to excuſe your ſelf by
your Orders, in the obſervance of which, eſpecially when they are harſh and
ſevere, you pretend to a great deal of care and ſtrictneſs; I deſire therefore
to know what Warrant you had to commit me un­to the Dungeon, and to detain me
there four dayes, under ſuch Rigorous and Unchriſtian Circumſtan­ces, that
none could have been guilty of doing, but one, who, together with his
Religion, had put off all ſence of common Humanity. You have told me indeed,
and it is a Poſition, not only falſe and damnable in Divinity, but utterly
deſtructive of our Engliſh Liberty, that The King hath a Prerogative above the
Law, by which he may puniſh Whom and How he pleaſeth: But were I willing ſo
far to unman my ſelf, and to deny both my Religion and Reaſon, as to admit of
that, yet I am ſure, His Jaylor hath no Prerogative, but ſtands[?] upon the
[...] Level with the reſt of his Brethren: And therefore it is my purpoſe to
call you to an Account for that barbarous, and, in a Chriſtian State, never
ſufficiently to be abhorred Action, unleſs you have the King's, or his
Secretaries Hand to authoririze you for the doing of it.

But, Sir, that ſaying, how unjuſtifiable ſoever, is but part of your Crime,
for when I adviſed You not to do any thing but what you could juſtifie by Law:
You replied, that You had nothing to do either with the Law or Parliaments;
and You do daily ma­nifeſt by your Lawleſs carriage, both to my ſelf and the
reſt of the Priſoners here, that you ſpake as you thought. But, Sir, ſuch an
Aſſertion, in perſons who are entruſted with the Lives of others, is ſo Black
and Horrid; and the condition of thoſe who are under your Power, is by it,
made ſo Unſafe, that I dare no longer conceal my knowledge, but intend forth
with to ſignify unto ſome Members of the Houſe of Commons, what a Monſtrous
and Unnatural kind of Offender you are; of which I thought fit to give you
this private Notice, that you might not be ſur­prized, but prepare your ſelf,
either to defend, or, which I rather wiſh, to expiate your Fault by
Re­pentance.

Sir, It is poſſible you may think, that a juſt and due ſenſe of my own
Unmerited and Illegal Suffer­ings, hath excited me to ſeek for Juſtice upon
[...] Inflicter of them; but I can aſſure you, that, in t [...] Action, I am
as free from Malice, as You, in yo [...] late one, was from Piety and Honour:
It is a ſe [...] ­vice which I owe, firſt to God, and next to my O [...]
­preſſed Country-men, who are in Bondage unde [...] You, to diſcover unto the
Parliament, what a wret­ched and unworthy Task-maſter is ſet over them, who,
though he is crept in to be one of their Num­ber, by whom Laws are made, and
Grievances ſhould be redreſſed, yet is not afraid to profeſs, that he hath
nothing to do either with the Law or Them.

Sir, As a Friend, and one that is ready to forgive you all my Perſonal
Injuries, let me entreat you to bethink your ſelf in time, and by a ſolemn
Retract­ing of what you then ſaid, prevent your being brought upon the Stage:
Or if, in confidence of your preſent Power, you reſolve to perſiſt in the
owning of ſuch Tyrannical Principles, and in Pra­ctices correſpondent to them,
hereafter, you can ac­cuſe none but your ſelf, if your ſins  [...]ut and hunt
you unto puniſh [...] [...]

Sir[?],

Ready to ſerve you in all Chriſtian Offices, EDW. BAGSHAVVE.

March 16\. 1663/4.

## 2\. POST-SCRIPT.

SIR,

THe fore-going Letter had been delivered into your own hand, in the ſame
private and concealed manner which there is mentioned: But your Uncivil, as
well as Il­legal, denying me the Uſe of my Pen and Ink, hath forced me to ſend
it you from the Preſſe, ſo that now it is no longer in my power to keep your
Counſel: But hereafter, if this occaſions your being queſtioned for ſo
Inſolent an Expreſ­ſion, I hope you will be ſatisfied that Guilt is a very Ill
Coun­ſellor, ſince the very means you deſigned unduly to ſilence my Complaint,
hath made me find out another, which you will be leſs able to reſiſt the
effects of. And now, Sir, that the World will take notice of your Abſurd and
Ungodly De­meanour, never imagine that any thing but speedy Repen­tance can
ſecure you: And becauſe I fear, that you have ſinned even in your own
thoughts, ſo much unto Death, that you despair of any Recovery, I leave you to
the Anguiſh of your Conſcience, till the Hand of Juſtice brings your Fears
upon You.

FINIS.

[Home](/)

Bagshaw, Edward, 1629-1671.. Date: 1664  

