---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Poor Robin's prophecy being a true astronomical prediction on the beginning,
continuance, and catastrophe of the ensuing year 1679, and what will be the
principal actions therein.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52895&page=1)
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52895&page=1) Poor Robin's
PROPHECY.

BEING A true Aſtronomical Predicti­on of the Beginning, Conti­nuance, and
Cataſtrophe of the enſuing Year 1679. And what will be the Principal Actions
therein.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for W. A. 1679.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52895&page=2)

## Table of contents

  * 1\. Poor Robin's Propheſie.
    * 1.1. Winter.
    * 1.2. Of the Spring.
    * 1.3. Of the Summer Quarter.
    * 1.4. Autumn.
    * 1.5. Now for ſome General Predictions on the whole Year.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52895&page=2)

## 1\. Poor Robin's Propheſie.

IT is not long ſince we had publiſh­ed a certain Pamphlet, intituled the
Engliſh Oracle, ſomething claiming affinity with this: The Title of which was
not confirmed by the Purport. For inſtead thereof we had a long
Circumlocution, condemning the Noble Science of Aſtronomy, and all it's
Speculations; although I eſteem him no competent Judge of any matter whereof
he hath not ſome knowledge; and conſequently a too bold ſentencer of it. That
there may be Predictions learnt from that Siderial School is undeniable; being
conſonant to the judgment of all Antiquity. The reading of Jeru­ſalem's Ruin
among the Stars, preceded the ac­compliſhment many years. Nay Poſtel, a
Chri­ſtian Writer, doth take God and Chriſt to witneſs, That in the Hebrew
Characters among the Stars (Vidit omnia quae in Rerum naturae conſtituta
ſunt,) He ſaw all things that were conſtituted by Nature. [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52895&page=3) Nor was Poſtell
Lunatick when he broke forth into that Proteſtation. But I ſtay no longer on
this Cir­cumſtance, leſt I ſhould ſeem guilty of that which I condemn.

If we may credit Albumazar and Ptolemy about the motions of Celeſtial Bodies,
whoſe influence doth excitate and procure continual change in this lower
Region, we ſhall find this Year, That the Moon's Eclipſe will be the cauſe of
many mutati­ons: Her Eclipſe I find by my skill will be in one of the Twelve
Months of the Year.

### 1.1. Winter.

But let us take the beginning and end of the Year in their due courſe; And
firſt of all for Win­ter, according to my account is the firſt Aſtrono­mical
Quarter of the Year; and ſhall have a ſooner beginning and longer duration
with poor Men than with Rich. This ſeaſon ſhall be ſubject to ſo great Froſts,
that unleſs lookt to, Charity will not only catch cold, but be congeal'd to a
ſtone; and ſo in­ſtead of its deſigned kindneſs, prove the contrary by
Oppreſſion. Alſo I portend that Rich Uſurers Purſes this Quarter will be ſo
frozen up, that no­thing will be found efficacious enough to thaw them but the
warm breath of Uſury, or ſome hopeful Mortgage.

### 1.2. Of the Spring.

I predict concerning that ſeaſon, by the ſuperiour Planets, that there will be
ſuch a Spring-tide of Uſu­rers, [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52895&page=3) Brokers,
Projectors, Trencher-Flies, caſt up this ſeaſon, when all things are Creſcent,
that though they nip not (like Pharaoh's Frogs) every flower of the Field, yet
will they hurt the moſt part of all the wholeſom Herbs they come to, unleſs
ſome ſtrong Eaſterly Wind drive them up the Hill, to that leaveleſs Tree that
bears no fruit of it ſelf, but rids Vermine from others.

### 1.3. Of the Summer Quarter.

Summer, according to the Computation of A­ſtronomy, takes its beginning the
twelfth of June. In this Quarter Beggars ſcorn Barns, and lie in Ditches. And
there ſhall be ſuch a fervent fiery heat abounding, that many unprotected
ſhall not dare to go over the Threſhold of the Door, leſt ſome Bayliff (a more
hurtful and dangerous object than a Hare) chance to croſs their way with ill
luck a quarter of a Year after. I portend likewiſe, That through the extremity
of the ſeaſon, the fat Conſciences of divers Men will be melted away into
nothing.

### 1.4. Autumn.

This laſt Quarter of the Year beginneth by my Account when Ceres joyfully
expects a fruitful Harveſt; after long wiſhings and longer Toyl­ings. About
the latter end of this Quarter, the Chimny-Corner is frequented, yea and many
will be ſo inflam'd with ſitting in the Alehouſe, that [[Page
4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52895&page=4) their Mamſy-Noſes
will be able to light a Candle, and ſerve in the Night inſtead of a Lanthorn.

### 1.5. Now for ſome General Predictions on the whole Year.

This Year 1679. The Golden Number ſhall have no place in poor Men's Purſes.
And this Year many ſhall go ſober into Taverns, where, by a certain
Me­tamorphoſis, they come out Mad. This Year ſhall be dub'd many Ale-quaffers
into fellowſhip with that ancient and much deſir'd Order of Red-Roſes.
Likewiſe, This Year ſhall be born many ſtrange Children, that when they come
to Age, will be ſo ignorant that they ſhall not know their own Fa­thers. And
whereas the Eclipſe of the Moon this Year is ſhort; it ſignifies to us that
Womens love ſhall be very ſhort and Momentary; inſomuch that hereupon divers
great ſtorms ſhall happen, and many loud Winds, together alſo with incredible
Hail­ſtones, (no leſſer than Joint-ſtools) ſhall fall upon Mens heads.

I portend alſo, that ſundry other Occurrences ſhall happen; Many ſtrange and
woful Diſeaſes ſhall Raign: as hollowneſs of the Heart, infirmities of the
Tongue; ſo that, that Member ſhall play the Harlot, and lie with all Men.

Moreover alſo, I foretel to thoſe Patient Things, whoſe Wives are as light as
their Weights, that they ſhall be troubled with great ſwellings in the Brows,
and unleſs that Diſtemper be met and prevented, it will certainly break out
into that pain­ful Diſeaſe of the Horn-Cholick. Likewiſe by rea­ſon [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=52895&page=4) of the abounding
of Cherries, Plums, and other ſtony-fruit this Year; by eating thereof many
Men ſhall be troubled with a Diſtemper of ſuch a Nature as none can cure but
Cunning Women.

I Predict further; many Citizens, Sailors, Ad­vocators and others, ſhall have
great luck in Hunt­ing: for though the Game be too quick of foot which they
follow, yet going homewards, they ſhall have the fortune to meet with ſome
deſireable Purchaſe.

Likewiſe, This Year I infallibly Prognoſticate that Silver ſhall be dearer
than Tin, and Gold more precious than Lead; and, as it is thought by ſome, ſo
much ſcarcity of either, that a whole Teem of Knights of the Poſt ſhall not be
able to draw 100l. through Cheapſide, without the help of a ſubſtantial Fore-
horſe.

And laſtly, I Prognoſticate, That Hens, Capons, Geeſe, and ſuch Dainties,
ſhall little haunt poor Mens Tables this Year; but fly quite away to fat
Churls Houſes. And for thoſe Miſers, although few things concern them in this
Propheſie, yet let me give them this Caveat, That having Clothes enough, they
keep themſelves warm; and having Coals enough, they provide good Fires; and
having a liberal Purſe, they go to Bed always with a Cup of Malaga; and having
a good Wife, they make much of her: and then for ought I can perceive by my
skill, they are like to live as long as they can, though not ſo long as they
would; and not die one hour before their time.

THE END.

[Home](/)

Poor Robin.. Date: 1679  

