---
layout: default
---
## (unknown project)

# Familiar letters: vol. I. Written by the Right Honourable, John, late Earl
of Rochester, to the honourable Henry Savile, esq; and other letters by
persons of honour and quality. With letters written by the most ingenious Mr.
Tho. Otway, and Mrs. K. Philips. Publish'd from their original copies. With
modern letters by Tho. Cheek, Esq; Mr. Dennis, and Mr. Brown.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=1)

## ADVERTISEMENT.

There is lately publish'd in Latin, Evangelium M [...]dici, se [...] M [...]
­dic [...]n [...] Mystica de Suspensis Naturae Legibus, siv [...] de
Miraculis. By Dr. Connor, of the Colledge of Physicians, and Fellow o [...]
the Royal Society. In Octavo. T [...]e chief Heads of the Matters that he
treats of are as follows:

  * I. Of the Nature of a Body, particularly an Organical one, where the Structure and Natural State of the H [...]man Body is explain'd.
  * II. How many Ways the Natural State of the Human Body, is said to have been Supernaturally alter'd.
  * III. Of the Laws of Motion, and of the three different Suspen­sions of the same, in order to explain all Miracles.
  * IV. How it can be conceived, that Water can be changed into Wine.
  * V. How it can be conceiv'd, that a Human Body can be Invul­nerable, Immortal, and can live for ever without Meat, as after the Resurrection.
  * VI. How a Human Body can be conceived to be in a Fire with­out Burning.
  * VII. How we can conceive that an Army can pass through the Sea without Drowning, or walk upon the Water without Sinking.
  * VIII. How it can be conceived that a Man can have a Bloody Sweat.
  * IX. Of the different Ways a Human Body can come into the World; where is given an Account of its G [...]n [...]ration by Concourse of Man Woman.
  * X. How we can conceive a Human Body can be  [...]orm'd of a Woman without a Man, as Christ's.
  * XI. How to conceive a Human Body to be made without Man or Woman, as Adam's.
  * XII. How to conceive a Human Body Dead, some Ages since, to be brought to Life again, as in the R [...]surrection.
  * XIII. How many Ways it cannot be conceiv'd that a Human Body can be Intire and Alive in two Places at the same time.
  * XIV. Of the Natural State of the Soul, and its Influence upon the Body.
  * XV. Of the Supernatural, or Miraculous State of the Soul uni­ted to the Body.

There is in the Press, and will be publish'd next Trinity-Term, A Third Volume
of Familiar Letters, written by the late Lord Rochester, the Duke of
Buckingham, and Sir George Etherege, which will be intirely theirs. If any
Gentlemen are willing to oblige the Publick with any Letters of those
Ho­nourable Persons own writing, they are desired to send them to Sam.
Briscoe, in Cov [...]nt-gard [...]n, who will print them in the next Volume.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=1)

Familiar Letters: VOL. I.

Written by the Right Honourable, Iohn, late Earl of Rochester, TO THE
Honourable Henry Savile, Esq And other LETTERS by Persons of Honour and
Quality.

WITH LETTERS Written by the most Ingenious Mr. THO. OTWAY, AND Mrs. K.
PHILIPS.

Publish'd from their Original Copies.

With Modern LETTERS by THO. CHEEK, Esq Mr. DENNIS, and Mr. BROWN.

The Second Edition with Additions.

London: Printed by W. Onley, for S. Briscoe, at the Corner of Charles-street,
in Russel-street, Covent-garden, 1697.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=2)

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=2)

## TO Dr. RADCLIFF.

I Have presumed, tho' I knew at the same time how hainously I trespass'd
against you in doing so, to Inscribe your Name to the following Colle­ction of
Letters. As you were no Stranger to that Excellent Person, whose Pieces
Composes, by far, the most valuable part of it, so I was satisfied that every
thing, from so celebrated a Hand, wou'd be acceptable and welcome to you; and
in that Confi­dence, made bold to give you the Trouble of  [...]his Address.
My Lord Rochester has left  [...]o established a Reputation behind him, that
he needs no officious Pen to set out his Worth, especially to you, who were
acquainted so per­  [...]ectly well with all his Eminent Qualities,  [...]hat
made him the Delight and Envy of both Sexes, and the Ornament of our Island.
In every thing of his Lordship's writing,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=3) there's
something so happily express'd, the Graces are so numerous, yet so unaffected,
that I don't wonder why all the Original Touches of so incomparable a Master,
have been enquired after, with so Publick and General a Concern. Most of his
other Com­positions, especially those in Verse, have long ago bless'd the
Publick, and were received with Vniversal Delight and Admiration, which gives
me Encouragement to believe, that his Letters will find the like Reception.
Tho' most of them were written upon pri­vate Occasions, to an Honourable
Person who was happy in his Lordship's Acquain­tance, with no intention to be
ever made publick; yet that constant good Sence, which is all along visible in
them, the Iustice of the Observations, and the peculiar Beauties of the Style,
are Reasons sufficient, why they should no longer be conceal'd in private
Hands. And indeed, at this time, when the private Plate of the Nation comes
a­broad to relieve the present Exigences, it seems but just, that since the
Dearth of Wit [...] is as great as that of Money, such a Trea­sure of good
Sence and Language shou'd no longer be buried in Oblivion. With thi [...]
difference, however, That whereas our Plate before it can circulate in our
Markets, mus [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=3) receive the
Royal Stamp, must be melted down, and take another Form, these Vnva­luable
Remains want no Alterations to re­commend them; they need only be taken from
the Rich Mines where they grew; for their own Intrinsick Value secures them,
and his Lordship's Name is sufficient to make them Current.

As for the Letters by other Hands, that make up this Volume, some of them were
written by Gentlemen, that are wholly Stran­gers to me, and others belong to
those that are so much better known in the World than myself, that I can say
nothing upon this Oc­casion, but what falls vastly short of their Merit. But I
cannot forbear to say some­thing of Mr. Otway's: They have that In­imitable
Tenderness in them, that I dare op­pose them to any thing of Antiquity; I am
sure few of the present Age can pretend to come up to them. The Passions, in
the rai­sing of which, he had a Felicity peculiar to himself, are represented
in such lively Co­lours, that they cannot fail of affecting the most
insensible Hearts, with pleasing Agi­tations. I cou'd wish we had more Pieces
of [...] the same Hand, for I profess an intire Veneration to his Memory, and
always look­ed upon him as the only Person, almost, that
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=4) knew the
secret Springs and Sources of Na­ture, and made a true use of them. Love, as
it is generally managed by other Hands, is either raving and enthusiastical,
or else dull and languishing: In him alone 'tis true Na­ture, and at the same
time inspires us with Compassion and Delight. After this, I will not venture
to say any thing of my own Trifles that bring up the Rear. Some of 'em were
written long ago, and now huddled in haste; the rest had a little more Care
and Labour bestow'd upon them. If they contri­bute in the least to your
Entertainment, which was my only Design in publishing them, I have attain'd my
Ends: I have some others by me, which I may, perhaps, publish hereafter, if
these meet with any to­lerable Success.

I need not, and I am sure I cannot make you a better Panegyrick than to
acquaint the World, that you were happy in my Lord Rochester's Friendship,
that he took plea­sure in your Conversation, of which even his Enemies must
allow him to have been the best Iudge, and that in the Politest Reign we can
boast of in England. The Appro­bation of so impartial a Iudge, who was, in his
Time, a Scourge to all Blockheads, by what Names or Titles soever dignisied,
or [[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=4)
distinguish'd, is above all the Incense that a much better Hand than mine can
presume to offer: Shou'd I put out all the Dedica­tion Sails, as 'tis the way
of most Authors, I cou'd soon erect you into a great Hero, and Deliverer; and
tell how often you have triumph'd over inveterate Distempers, and restor'd the
Sick to that only Blessing, that makes Life supportable. I cou'd tell how, by
your single Merit, you have ba [...]led a Faction form'd against you with
equal Ma­lice and Ignorance; I cou'd tell what Marks of Munisicence you have
left behind you, in the Place that was honour'd with your Edu­cation, and how
generously ready you are to serve your Friends upon all Occasions. But after
all, the highest thing I will pretend to say of you her is, That you were
esteem'd, and valu'd, and lov'd by my Lord Rochester. 'Tis true, as there
never was any Conspicuous Merit in the World, that had not, like Her­cules,
Monsters to encounter, so you have had your share of them; but, Heaven be
prais'd, your Enemies, with all their vain Endea­vours, have only served to
six your Interest, and advance your Reputation: Tho' I know you hear of
nothing with more Vneasiness, than of the Favours you do; yet I cannot omit to
tell, and indeed I am vain upon it,
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=5) that you have
condescended so low, as to di­vert those Hours you cou'd steal from the
Publick, with some of my Trifles, that you have been pleased to think
favourably of them, and rewarded them. For all which Obligations, I had no
other way of expressing my Gratitude but this; which, I am afraid will but
inflame the Reckoning, instead of paying any part of the Debt: But this has
been the constant Vsage in all Ages of Par­nassus, and, like Senators that
take Bribes, we have Antiquity and Vniversality to plead in our Excuse. But I
forget that you are all this while in pain, till the Dedication re­leases you:
Therefore I have nothing but my Wishes to add, That you, who have been so
happy a Restorer of Health to others, may ever enjoy it yourself, that your
Days may be always pleasant, and your Nights easie, and that you'll be pleas'd
to forgive this Presumption in

Your most humble and most obliged Servant, T. BROWN.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=5)

## THE Bookseller's Preface.

HAving, by the Assistance of a Wor­thy Friend, procured the follow­ing Letters
that were written by the late Incomparable Earl of Rochester (the Ori­ginals
of all which I preserve by me, to satisfie those Gentlemen, who may have the
Curiosity to see them under his Lord­ship's hand) I was encouraged to trouble
others of my Friends, that had any Let­ters in their Custody, to make this
Col­lection, which I now publish.

Indeed the Letters that were written by the abovemention'd Honourable Per­son,
have something so happy in the Manner and Stile, that I need not lose my Time
to convince the World they are genuine. I may say the same of Mr. Ot­way's
Letters, that they are full of Life and
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=6) Passion, and
sufficiently discover their Author. And that this Collection might be
compleat, I got some that were writ­ten by the Fam'd Orinda, Mrs. Katherine
Phillips, to be added to the rest; together with others by some Gentlemen now
li­ving, that the Reader might have a Va­riety of Entertainment.

Our Neighbouring Nations, whom I don't believe we come short of in any
re­spect, have printed several Volumes of Letters, which meet with publick
Ap­probation; I am satisfied, that if the Gen­tlemen of England wou'd be as
free, and Communicative to part with theirs, we might show as great a Number,
and as good a Choice as they have done. It has been used as an Objection
against pub­lishing things of this Nature, That, if they are written as they
ought to be, they shou'd never be made publick. But I hope this Collection
will disarm that Ob­jection; for tho' the Reader may not un­derstand every
particular Passage, yet there are other things in them that will make him
sufficient Amends.

I have only a word more to add: Up­on the Noise of this Collection, several
Gentlemen have been so kind, as to send
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=6) me in
Materials to compose a Second, which is now printed; and, on the Print­ing the
Second, I have procured as many of the Lord Rochester's the Duke of
Buck­ingham, and Sir George Etheridge, which will almost make a third Vol.
which if I can compleat, it shall be publish'd next Trinity-Term; and
therefore those Gen­tlemen that have any Curious Letters by them, written by
those Honourable Per­sons, and are willing to oblige the Pub­lick, by letting
them come abroad, are desired to send them to me, who will take care to have
them faithfully Tran­scrib'd for the Press, and Printed in the third Vol.
which will be intirely theirs, and no modern one mixt with them.

SAM. BRISCOE.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=7)

## A TABLE Of all the Letters in this Volume.

SEveral Letters by the late Earl of Roche­ster, to the Honourable Henry Savil,
Esq from

    p. 1. to p. 50.
The Earl of L—'s Letter to the Honourable Algernoon Sidney,

    p. 51.
Algernoon Sidney's Letter against Arbitrary Government,

    p. 60.
Two Letters by another Hand, to Madam— from

    p. 67. to p. 72.
Love-Letters by Mr. Otway, from

    p. 73. to 87.
A Letter from — to Mr. G—

    p. 88.
A Letter to the Duke of Vivone, by the Fam'd Monsieur Boiliau. Translated by
Thomas Cheek, Esq

    p. 91.
A Letter by Mr. Dennis, sent with Monsieur Boi­leau's Speech to the Academy of
Paris, upon his Admission,

    p. 102.
Monsieur Boileau's Speech to the Academy. Tran­slated
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=7) by Mr.
Dennis,

    p. 106.
Letters of Courtship to a Woman of Quality, from

    p. 118. to 133.
A Letter of Reproach to a Woman of Quality,

    p. 134.
A Letter of Business to a Merchant's Wife in the City,

    p. 136.
Letters by the late celebrated Mrs. Katherine Phillips, from

    p. 137. to 152.
A Letter to Mr. Herbert,

    p. 153.
A Letter to C.G. Esq in Covent-garden,

    p. 156.
To the Perjur'd Mrs. —

    p. 163.
To the Honourable — in the Pall-mall,

    p. 168.
A Letter to my Lady —

    p. 173.
A Consolatory Letter to an Essex-Divine, upon the Death of his Wife,

    p. 179.
A Letter to the fair Lucinda at Epsom,

    p. 183.
To the same at London,

    p. 185.
To W. Knight, Esq at Ruscomb, in Berkshire,

    p. 189.
To a Gentleman that fell desperately in Love, and set up for a Beau in the
45th Year of his Age,

    p. 197.
The Answer,

    p. 200.
A Letter to his honoured Friend, Dr. Baynard, at the Bath,

    p. 202.
A Letter to Mr. Raphson, Fellow of the Royal Society, upon occasion of Dr.
Conner's Book, entituled, Physica Arcana, seu Tractatus de Mystico corporum
Statu; to be Printed by Mr. Briscoe,

    p. 213.
A Letter to the Lord North and Grey,

    p. 218.
To a Friend in the Country,

    p. 221.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=8)

## BOOKS newly Printed for R. We [...]lington, at the Lute in St. Paul Church-
yard.

  * A Discourse of the Nature and Faculti [...] of Man, in several Essays; with Refl [...]ctions upon the Occurrences of Human Li [...] By Tim. Nourse, Gent.
  * The Lord Rochester's Letters, Vol. I.
  * The Works of that excellent Practical Ph [...]sician, Dr. Tho. Syden [...]am; wherein not on the History of Acute Diseases are treated  [...] after a new Method, but also the shortest  [...] safest way of curing most Chronical Diseas [...]
  * Ovid Travestie: Or a Burlesque on Ovi [...] Epistles. By Capt. Alexander Rad [...]liff, Grays-inn.
  * The Family-Physician: Being a cho [...] Collection of approved and experienced R [...]medies to cure all Diseases incident to H [...]man Bodies; useful in Families, and servi [...] able to Country-people. By George Ha [...]ti [...] Se [...]vant to Sir Ken [...]hn Digby, till he died.

### PLAYS.

Anatomist, or Sham-doctor. Plain-deal Orphan. Oedipus. Rover. Spanish Wiv
[...] Unnatural Brother. Younger Brother, Amorous Jilt.

Where you may be furnished with most Plays.

## Table of contents

  * ADVERTISEMENT.
  * TO Dr. RADCLIFF.
  * THE Bookseller's Preface.
  * A TABLE Of all the Letters in this Volume.
  * BOOKS newly Printed for R. We•lington, at the Lute in St. Paul Church-yard.
    * PLAYS.
  * 1\. Familiar Letters, By the Right Honourable, JOHN, LATE Earl of ROCHESTER. VOL. I.
    * 1.1. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.2. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.3. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.4. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.5. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.6. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.7. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE, Embassador in FRANCE. Begun, White-hall, May 30th, 79.
    * 1.8. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.9. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.10. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.11. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.12. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.13. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.14. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE •
    * 1.15. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.16. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.17. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.18. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
    * 1.19. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.
  * 2\. THE E. of L—'s LETTER To the Honourable Algernoon Sidney.
  * 3\. The Honourable Algernoon Sidney's LETTER, AGAINST BRIBERY, AND Arbitrary Government. Written to his Friends, in Answer to Theirs, perswading his Return to England.
  * 4\. A Letter by another Hand.
  * 5\. LOVE-LETTERS,
    * 5.1. Mr.— to Mr. G—
  * 6\. Mons. BOILEAV's LETTERS,
    * 6.1. To the Duke de Vivone, upon his Entrance into the Haven of Messina.
    * 6.2. From the Elysian Fields, June the 22d.
    * 6.3. From the Elysian Fields, June the 22d.
  * 7\. A LETTER Writ by Mr. DENNIS, Sent with the following SPEECH.
  * 8\. THE SPEECH OF Monsieur BOILEAV, Upon his Admission into the French Academy.
  * 9\. Letters of Courtship TO A Woman of Quality.
  * 10\. A Letter of Reproach to a Woman of Quality.
  * 11\. A Letter of Business to a Merchant's Wife in the City.
  * 12\. LETTERS, By the late Celebrated Mrs. Katherine Phillips.
    * 12.1. The Fam'd Orinda, to the Honourable Berenice.
    * 12.2. To the Honourable Berenice.
    * 12.3. To the Honourable Berenice.
    * 12.4. To the Honourable Berenice.
    * 12.5. To Mr. Herbert.
  * 13\. LETTERS
    * 13.1. To C. G. Esq in Covent-Garden.
    * 13.2. To the Perju•'d Mrs. —
    * 13.3. To the Honourable— in the Pallmall.
    * 13.4. To My Lady—
    * 13.5. A Consolatory Letter to an Essex-Divine upon the Death of his Wife.
    * 13.6. To the fair Lucinda, at Epsom.
    * 13.7. To the same at London.
    * 13.8. To W. Knight, Esq at Ruscomb in Berkshire.
      * 13.8.1. POSTSCRIPT.
    * 13.9. To a Gentleman that fell desperately in Love, and set up for a Beau, in the 45th Year of his Age.
      * 13.9.1. The Answer.
    * 13.10. To his Honoured Friend, Dr. Baynard, at the Bath.
    * 13.11. To Mr. Raphson, Fellow of the Royal Society.
  * 14\. TWO LETTERS BY Capt. AYLOFFE.
    * 14.1. To the Lord North and Grey.
    * 14.2. To a Friend in the Country.
  * Appendix A BOOKS newly Printed for and Sold by Samuel Briscoe, in Russel-street, the Corner of Charles-street, Covent-garden, 1697.

[[Page 1]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=8)

## 1\. Familiar Letters, By the Right Honourable, JOHN, LATE Earl of
ROCHESTER. VOL. I.

### 1.1. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

Dear SAVILE,

DO a Charity becoming one of your pious Principles, in preserving your humble
Servant Rochester, from the imminent Peril of Sobriety; which, for want of
good Wine, more [[Page
2]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=9) than Company, (for
I can drink like a Hermit betwixt God and my own Con­science) is very like to
befal me: Re­member what Pains I have formerly ta­ken to wean you from your
pernicious Reso­lutions of Discretion and Wisdom! And, if you have a grateful
Heart, (which is a Miracle amongst you Statesmen) shew it, by directing the
Bearer to the best Wine in Town; and pray let not this highest Point of Sacred
Friendship be per­form'd slightly, but go about it with all due deliberation
and care, as holy Priests to Sacrifice, or as discreet Thieves to the wary
performance of Burglary and Shop-lifting. Let your well-discerning Pallat (the
best Judge about you) travel from Cellar to Cellar, and then from Piece to
Piece, till it has lighted on Wine sit for its noble Choice and my
Approbation. To engage you the more in this matter, know, I have laid a Plot
may very probably betray you to the Drinking of it. My Lord — will inform you
at large.

Dear Savile! as ever thou dost hope to out-do MACHIAVEL, or equal ME, send
some good Wine! So may thy wearied [[Page
3]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=9) Soul at last find
Rest, no longer hov'ring 'twixt th' unequal Choice of Politicks and Lewdness!
Maist thou be admir'd and lov'd for thy domestick Wit; belov'd and cherish'd
for thy foreign Interest and In­telligence.

ROCHESTER.

[[Page 4]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=10)

### 1.2. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

HARRY,

YOU cannot shake off the States­man intirely; for, I perceive, you have no
Opinion of a Letter, that is not almost a Gazette: Now, to me, who think the
World as giddy as my self, I care not which way it turns, and am fond of no
News, but the Pro­sperity of my Friends, and the Con­tinuance of their
Kindness to me, which is the only Error I wish to continue in 'em: For my own
part, I am not at all stung with my Lord M—'s mean Ambition, but I aspire to
my Lord L—'s generous Philosophy: They who would be great in our little
Government, seem as ridiculous to me as School-boys, who, with much
en­deavour, and some danger, climb a Crab-tree, venturing their Necks for
Fruit, which solid Pigs would disdain, if they [[Page
5]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=10) were not
starving. These Reflections, how idle soever they seem to the Bu­sie, if taken
into consideration, would save you many a weary Step in the Day, and help G—y
to many an Hours sleep, which he wants in the Night: But G—y would be rich;
and, by my troth, there is some sence in that: Pray remember me to him, and
tell him, I wish him many Mil­lions, that his Soul may find rest. You write me
word, That I'm out of fa­vour with a certain Poet, whom I have ever admir'd,
for the disproportion of him and his Attributes: He is a Rari [...]y which I
cannot but be fond of, as one would be of a Hog that could fiddle, or a
singing Owl. If he falls upon me at the Blunt, which is his very good Wea­pon
in Wit, I will forgive him, if you please, and leave the Repartee to Black
Will, with a Cudgel. And now, Dear Harry, if it may agree with your Affairs,
to shew yourself in the Country this Summer, contrive such a Crew toge­ther,
as may not be asham'd of passing by Woodstock; and, if you can debauch
Alderman G—y, we will make a shift to delight his Gravity. I am sorry for
[[Page 6]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=11) the
declining D—ss, and would have you generous to her at this time; for that is
true Pride, and I delight in it.

ROCHESTER.

[[Page 7]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=11)

### 1.3. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

Dear SAVILE,

THIS Day I receiv'd the unhappy News of my own Death and Bu­rial. But, hearing
what Heirs and Successors were decreed me in my Place, and chiefly in my
Lodgings, it was no small Joy to me, that those Tydings prove untrue; my
Passion for Living, is so encreas'd, that I omit no Care of myself; which,
before, I never thought Life worth the trouble of taking. The King, who knows
me to be a very ill-natur'd Man, will not think it an  [...]asie matter for me
to die, now I live chie­fly out of spight. Dear Mr. Savile, af­ford me some
News from your Land of the Living; and though I have little Curiosity to hear
who's well, yet I would be glad my few Friends are so, of whom you are no more
the least than the lean­est. I have better Compliments for you, [[Page
8]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=12) but that may not
look so sincere as I would have you believe I am, when I profess myself,

Your faithful, affectionate, humble Servant, ROCHESTER.

Adderbury, near Banbury, Feb.ult

My Service to my Lord Middlesex.

[[Page 9]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=12)

### 1.4. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

HARRY,

I Am in a great straight what to write to you; the stile of Business I am not
vers'd in, and you may have forgot, the familiar one we us'd hereto­fore. What
Alterations Ministry makes in Men, is not to be imagined; though I can trust
with confidence all those You are liable to, so well I know you, and so
perfectly I love you. We are in such a setled Happiness, and such merry
Secu­rity in this place, that, if it were not for Sickness, I could pass my
time very well, between my own Ill-nature, which inclines me very little to
pity the Mis­fortunes of malicious mistaken Fools, and the Policies of the
Times, which expose new Rarities of that kind every day. The News I have to
send, and the sort alone which could be so to you, are things Gyaris & carcere
digna; which I [[Page
10]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=13) dare not trust
to this pretty Fool, the Bea­rer, whom I heartily recommend to your Favour and
Protection, and whose Qua­lities will recommend him more; and truly, if it
might suit with your Chara­cter, at your times of leisure, to Mr. Bap­tists's
Acquaintance, the happy Conse­quence would be Singing, and in which your
Excellence might have a share not unworthy the greatest Embassadors, nor to be
despis'd even by a Cardinal-Legate; the greatest and gravest of this Court of
both Sexes have ta [...]ted his Beauties; and, I'll assure you, Rome gains
upon us here, in this Point mainly; and there is no part of the Plot carried
with so much Secresie and Vi­gour as this. Proselytes, of consequence, are
daily made, and my Lord S—'s Im­prisonment is no check to any. An account of
Mr. George Porter's Retirement, upon News that Mr. Grimes, with one Gentle­man
more, had invaded England, Mr. S—'s Apology, for making Songs on the Duke of
M. with his Oration-Consolatory on my Lady D—'s Death, and a Politick
Dis­sertation between my Lady P—s and Capt. Dangerfield, with many other
wor­thy Treatises of the like nature, are things worthy your perusal; but I
durst not [[Page 11]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=13)
send 'em to you without leave, not know­ing what Consequence it might draw
up­on your Circumstances and Character; but if they will admit a
Correspondence of that kind, in which alone I dare presume to think myself
capable, I shall be very in­dustrious in that way, or any other, to keep you
from forgetting,

Your most affectionate, obliged, humble Servant, ROCHESTER.

White-hall, Nov. 1. 79.

[[Page 12]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=14)

### 1.5. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

Dear SAVILE,

WEre I as Idle as ever, which I shou'd not fail of being, if Health
per­mitted; I wou'd write a small Romance, and make the Sun with his
dishrievel'd Rays guild the Tops of the Palaces in Lea­ther-lane: Then shou'd
those vile En­chanters Barten aud Ginman, lead forth their Illustrious
Captives in Chains of Quicksilver, and confining 'em by Charms to the
loathsome Banks of a dead Lake of Diet-drink; you, as my Friend, shou'd break
the horrid Silence, and speak the most passionate fine things that ever
He­roick Lover utter'd; which being softly and sweetly reply'd to by Mrs.
Roberts, shou'd rudely be interrupted by the envi­ous F—. Thus wou'd I lead
the mournful Tale along, till the gentle Rea­der bath'd with the Tribute of
his Eyes, the Names of such unfortunate Lovers— [[Page
13]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=14) And this (I take
it) wou'd be a most excellent way of celebrating the Memo­ries of my most
Pockey Friends, Compa­nions and Mistresses. But it is a miracu­lous thing (as
the Wise have it) when a Man, half in the Grave, cannot leave off playing the
Fool, and the Buffoon; but so it falls out to my Comfort: For at this Moment I
am in a damn'd Relapse, brought by a Feaver, the Stone, and some ten Diseases
more, which have depriv'd me of the Power of crawling, which I happi­ly
enjoy'd some Days ago; and now I fear, I must fall, that it may be fulfilled
which was long since written for Instru­ction in a good old Ballad,

But he who lives not Wise and Sober,

Falls with the Leaf still in October.

About which time, in all probability, there may be a period added to the
ridiculous being of

Your humble Servant, ROCHESTER.

[[Page 14]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=15)

### 1.6. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

Dear SAVILE,

IN my return from New-market, I met your Packet, and truly was not more
surprized at the Indirectness of Mr. P.'s Proceeding, than overjoy'd at the
Kindness and Care of yours. Mi­sery makes all Men less or more dishonest; and
I am not astonish'd to see Villany industrious for Bread; especially, living
in a place where it is often so de gayete de Coeur. I believe, the Fellow
thought of this Device to get some Money, or else he is put upon it by Some-
body, who has given it him already; but I give him leave to prove what he can
a­gainst me: However, I will search into the Matter, and give you a fur­ther
account within a Post or two. In the mean time you have made my Heart glad in
giving me such a Proof of your Friendship; and I am now [[Page
15]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=15) sensible, that
it is natural for you to be kind to me, and can never more de­spair of it.

I am your faithful, oblig'd, humble Servant, ROCHESTER.

Bishop-Stafford, Apr. 5. 80.

[[Page 16]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=16)

### 1.7. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE, Embassador in FRANCE. Begun, White-
hall, May 30th, 79.

Dear SAVILE,

'TIS neither Pride or Neglect (for I am not of the new Council, and I love you
sincerely) but Idleness on one side, and not knowing what to say on the other,
has hindred me from Writing to you, af­ter so kind a Letter, and the Present
you sent me, for which I return you at last my humble Thanks. Changes in this
place are so frequent, that F— himself can now no longer give an account, why
this was done to Day, or what will ensue to Morrow; and Accidents are so
extrava­gant, that my Lord W— intending to Lie, has, with a Prophetick Spirit,
once told truth. Every Man in this Court thinks he stands fair for Minister;
some give it [[Page
17]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=16) to Shaftsbury,
others to Hallifax; but Mr. Waller says S— does all; I am sure my Lord A— does
little, which your Excellence will easily believe. And now the War in Scotland
takes up all the Discourse of Politick Persons. His Grace of Lauderdale values
himself upon the Rebellion, and tells the King, It is very auspicious and
advantageous to the drift of the present Councils: The rest of the Scots, and
especially D. H— are very in­quisitive after News from Scotland, and really
make a handsome Figure in this Conjuncture at London. What the D. of Monmouth
will effect, is now the general expectation, who took Post unexpectedly, left
all that had offer'd their Service in this Expedition, in the lurch; and,
being attended only by Sir Thomas Armstrong, and Mr. C— will, without
question, have the full Glory as well of the Pruden­tial as the Military Part
of this Action entire to himself. The most profound Politicians have weighty
Brows, and care­ful Aspects at present, upon a Report crept abroad, That Mr.
Langhorn, to save his Life, offers a Discovery of Priests and Iesuits Lands,
to the value of Four­score and ten thousand Pounds a Year; [[Page
18]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=17) which being
accepted, it is fear'd, Par­tisans and Vndertakers will be found out to
advance a considerable Sum of Mony upon this Fund, to the utter Interruption
of Parliaments, and the Destruction of ma­ny hopeful Designs. This, I must
call God to witness, was never hinted to me in the least by Mr. P— to whom I
beg you will give me your hearty Recommenda­tions. Thus much to afford you a
taste of my serious Abilities, and to let you know I have a great Goggle-eye
to Business: And now I cannot deny you a share in the high satisfaction I have
receiv'd at the account which flourishes here of your high Prote­stancy at
Paris: Charenton was never so Honour'd, as since your Residence and Mi­nistry
in France, to that degree, that it is not doubted if the Parliament be sitting
at your return, or otherwise the Mayor and Common-Council, will Petition the
King you may be dignified with the Title of that place, by way of Earldom or
Duke­d [...]m, as his Majesty shall think mo [...]t proper to give, or you
accept.

Mr. S— is a Man of that tenderness of Heart, and approv'd Humanity, that he
will doubtless be highly afflicted when he [[Page
19]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=17) hears of the
unfortunate Pilgrims, tho' he appears very obdurate [...]o the Complaints of
his own best Concubine, and your fair Kins­woman M— who now starves. The
Packet inclos'd in your last, I read with all the sence of Compassion it
merits, and if I can prove so unexpectedly happy to succeed in my Endeavou
[...]s for that Fair Unfortunate, she shall have a speedy ac­count. I thank
God, there is yet a Harry Savile in E [...]gland, with whom I drank your
Health last Week at Sir William Co­ventry's; and who, in Features, Proportion
and Pledging, gives me so lively an Idea of yourself, that I am resolv'd to
retire into Oxfordshire, and enjoy him till Shiloe come, or you from France.

ROCHESTER.

Ended the 2 [...] th of June, 1679.

[[Page 20]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=18)

### 1.8. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

HARRY,

ANY kind of Correspondence with such a Friend as you, is very agree­able; and
therefore you will easily be­lieve, I am very ill when I lose the oppor­tunity
of Writing to you: But Mr. Povy comes into my Mind, and hinders far­ther
Compliment: In a plainer way I must tell you, I pray for your hapyy
Resto­ration; but was not at all sorry for your glorious Disgrace, which is an
Honour, considering the Cause. I wou'd say some­thing to the serious part (as
you were pleas'd to call it) of your former Letter; but it will disgrace my
Politicks to differ from yours, who have wrought now sometime under the best
and keenest Statesmen our Cabinet boasts of: But, to confess the Truth, my
Advice to the La­dy you wot of, has ever been this, Take your Measures just
contrary to your Rivals, [[Page
21]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=18) live in Peace
with all the World, and easily with the King: Never be so Ill-natur'd to stir
up his Anger against others, but let him forget the use of a Passion, which is
never to do you good: Cherish his Love where-ever it inclines, and be assur'd
you can't commit greater Folly than pretending to be Iealous; but, on the
contrary, with Hand, Body, Head, Heart and all the Faculties you have,
contribute to his Pleasure all you can, and comply with his Desires
throughout: And, for new Intrigues, so you be at one end, 'tis no matter
which: Make Sport when you can, at other times help it.— Thus, I have giv'n
you an account how unfit I am to give the Advice you propos'd: Besides this,
you may judge, whether I was a good Pimp, or no. But some thought otherwise;
and so truly I have renounc'd Business; let abler Men try it. More a great
deal I would say, but upon this Subject; and, for this time, I beg, this may
suffice, from

Your humble and most affectionate faithful Servant, ROCHESTER.

[[Page 22]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=19)

### 1.9. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

Dear SAVILE,

'TIs not that I am the idlest Creature living, and only chuse to imploy my
Thoughts rather upon my Friends, than to languish all the Day in the
tedi­ousness of doing nothing, that I write to you; but owning, that (tho' you
excel most Men in Friendship and good Na­ture) you are not quite exempt from
all Human Frailty, I send this to hinder you from forgetting a Man who loves
you very heartily. The World, ever since I can remember, has been still so
insuppor­tably the same, that 'twere vain to hope there were any alterations;
and ther [...]fore I can have no curiosity for News; only I wou'd be glad to
know if the Parliament be like to sit any time; for the Peers of England being
grown of late Years very considerable in the Government, I wou'd make one at
the Session. Livy and Sick­ness [[Page
23]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=19) has a little
inclin'd me to Policy; when I come to Town I make no questi­on but to change
that Folly for some less; whether Wine or Women I know not; according as my
Constitution serves me: Till when (Dear Harry) Farewel! When you Dine at my
Lord Lisle's let me be re­membred.

Kings and Princes are only as Incom­prehensible as what they pret [...]nd to
repre­sent; but apparently as Frail as Those they Govern.— This is a Season of
Tri­bulation; and I piously beg of Almighty God, that the strict Severity
shewn to one scandalous Sin amongst us, may Expiate for all grievous
Calamities.— So help them God, whom it concerns!

[[Page 24]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=20)

### 1.10. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

HARRY,

IF Sack and Sugar be a Sin, God help the Wicked; was the Saying of a merry fat
Gentleman, who liv'd in Days of Yore, lov'd a Glass of Wine, wou'd be merry
with a Friend, and sometimes had an unlucky Fancy for a Wench. Now (dear Mr.
Savile) forgive me, if I confess, that, upon several occasions, you have put
me in mind of this fat Person, and now more particularly, for thinking upon
your present Circumstan­ces, I cannot but say with myself, If loving a pretty
Woman, and hating Lautherdale, bring Banishments and Pox, the Lord have mercy
upon poor Thieves and S—s! But, by this time, all your Inconveniences (for, to
a Man of your very good Sence, no outward Acci­dents are more) draw very near
their end; For my own part, I'm taking [[Page
25]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=20) pains not to
die, without knowing how to live on, when I have brought it a­bout: But most
Human Affairs are carri­ed on at the same nonsensical rate, which makes me,
(who am now grown Su­perstitious) think it a Fault to laugh at the Monky we
have here, when I com­pare his Condition with Mankind. You will be very good-
natur'd if you keep your Word, and write to me some­times: And so good Night,
dear Mr. Sa­vile.

ROCHESTER.

[[Page 26]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=21)

### 1.11. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

HARRY,

WHether Love, Wine, or Wisdom, (which rule you by turns) have the present
Ascendant, I cannot pretend to determine at this distance; but Good-nature,
which waits about you with more diligence than Godfrey himself, is my
Se­curity, that you are unmindful of your ab­sent Friends: To be from you, and
for­gotten by you at once, is a Misfortune I never was criminal enough to
merit, since to the Black and Fair Countess, I villa­nously betray'd the daily
Addresses of your divided Heart: You forgave that upon the first Bottle, and
upon the second, on my Conscience, wou'd have re­nounc'd them and the whole
Sex; Oh! That second Bottle (Harry!) is the Sin­  [...]rest, Wisest, and most
Impartial Down­right Friend we have; tells us truth of o [...]rselves, and
forces us to speak Truths [[Page
27]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=21) of others;
banishes Flattery from our Tongues, and distru [...]t from our Hearts, sets us
above the mean Policy of Court-Prudence; which makes us lie to one ano­ther
all Day, for fear of being betray'd by each other at Night. And (before God) I
believe, the errantest Villain breathing, is honest as long as that Bottle
lives, and few of that Tribe dare venture upon him, at least, among the
Courtiers and Statesmen. I have seriously consi­der'd one thing, That the
three Businesses of this Age, Women, Politicks, and Drink­ing, the la [...]t
is the only Exercise at which you and I have not prov'd ourselves er­rant
Fumblers: If you have the Vanity to think otherwise; when we meet, let us
appeal to Friends of both Sexes, and as they shall determine, live and die
their Drunkards, or entire Lovers. For, as we mince the Matter, it is hard to
say which is the most tiresom Creature, loving Drunkard, or the drunken Lov
[...]r.

If you ventur'd your fat Buttock a Gal­lop to Portsmouth, I doubt not but
thro' extream Galling, you now lie Bed-rid of the Piles, or Fistula in Ano,
and have the lei­sure to write to your Country-Acquain­tance, [[Page
28]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=22) which if you
omit I shall take the Liberty to conclude you very Proud. Such a Letter shou'd
be directed to me at Ad­derbury, near Banbury, where I intend to be within
these three Days.

From your obedient humble Servant, ROCHESTER.

Bath, the 22d of June.

[[Page 29]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=22)

### 1.12. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

Dear SAVILE,

WHether Love or the Politicks have the greater Interest in your Jour­ny to
France, because it is argu'd among wiser Men, I will not conclude upon; but
hoping so much from your Friend­ship, that, without reserve, you will trust me
with the time of your stay in Paris, I have writ this to assure you, if it can
continue a Month, I will not fail to wait on you there. My Resolutions are to
improve this Winter for the Improve­ment of my Parts in Foreign Countries, and
if the Temptation of seeing you, be added to the Desires I have already, the
Sin is so sweet, that I am resolv'd to em­brace it, and leave out of my
Prayers, Libra nos a Malo— For thine is, &c.

ROCHESTER.

Oxford, Sep­temb. 5.

[[Page 30]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=23)

### 1.13. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

HARRY,

'TIS not the least of my Hap­piness, that I think you love me; but the first
of all my Pretensions is to make it appear, that I faithful­ly endeavour to
deserve it. If there be a real good upon Earth, 'tis in the Name of FRIEND,
without which all others are meer fantastical. How few of us are fit stuff to
make that thing, we have daily the melancholly experience.

However, dear Harry! Let us not give out, nor despair of bringing that about,
which, as it is the most difficult, and rare Accident of Life, is also the
best; nay, (perhaps) the only good one. This Thought has so entirely possess'd
me since I came into the Country, [[Page
31]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=23) (where, only,
one can think; for, you at Court think not at all; or, at least, as if you
were shut up in a Drum; as you think of nothing, but the Noise that is made
about you) that I have made many Serious Reflecti­ons upon it, and, amongst
others, ga­ther'd one Maxime, which I desire, shou'd be communicated to our
Friend Mr. G—; That, we are bound in Mo­rality and common Honesty, to
endea­vour after Competent Riches; since it is certain, that few Men, if any,
uneasie in their Fortunes, have prov'd firm and clear in their Friendships. A
ve­ry poor Fellow, is a very poor Friend; and not one of a thousand can be
good natur'd to another, who is not pleas'd within himself. But while I grow
in­to Proverbs, I forget that you may impute my Philosophy to the Dog-days,
and living alone. To prevent the In­conveniences of Solitude, and many
o­thers, I intend to go to the Bath on Sunday next, in Visitation to my Lord
Treasurer: Be so Politick, or be so Kind, (or a little of both, which is
better) as to step down thither, if [[Page
32]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=24) famous Affairs
at Windsor, do not de [...]tain you. Dear Harry! I am

Your Hearty, Faithful, Affectionate, Humble Servant, ROCHESTER.

If you see the Dutchess of P— ve­ry often, take some opportunity to talk to
her about what I spoke to you at London.

[[Page 33]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=24)

### 1.14. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE [...]

Dear SAVILE,

IF it were the Sign of an honest Man, to be happy in his Friends, sure I were
mark'd out for the worst of Men; since no one e'er lost so many as I have
done, or knew to make so few. The Severity you say the Dutchess of P— shews to
me, is a proof, that 'tis not in my power to deserve well of Any-body; since
(I call Truth to Witness) I have never been guilty of an Errour, that I know,
to her: And this may be a Warn­ing to you, that remain in the Mistake of being
kind to me, never to expect a grateful Return; since I am so utterly ignorant
how to make it: To value you in my Thoughts, to prefer you in my Wishes, to
serve you in my Words; to observe, study, and obey you in all my Actions, is
too little; since I have per­formed all this to her, without so much [[Page
34]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=25) as an offensive
Accident. And yet she thinks it just, to use me ill. If I were not malicious
enough to hope she were in the wrong; I must have a very melan­cholly Opinion
of myself. I wish your Interest might prevail with her, as a Friend of her's,
not mine, to tell how I have deserv'd it of her, since she has ne'r accus'd me
of any Crime, but of being Cunning; and I told her, Some­body had been
Cunninger than I, to per­swade her so. I can as well support the Hatred of the
whole World, as Any­body, not being generally fond of it. Those whom I have
oblig'd, may use me with Ingratitude, and not afflict me much: But to be
injur'd by those who have oblig'd me, and to whose Service I am ever bound; is
such a Curse, as I can only wish on them who wrong me to the Dutchess.

I hope you have not forgot what G—y and you have promis'd me; but within some
time you will come and fetch me to London: I shall scarce think of coming,
till you call me, as not ha­ving many prevalent Motives to draw me to the
Court, if it be so that my Ma­ster [[Page
35]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=25) has no need of
my Service, nor my Friends of my Company.

Mr. Shepheard is a Man of a fluent Stile and coherent Thought; if, as I
suspect, he writ your Postscript.

I wish my Lord Hallifax Joy of every Thing, and of his Daughter to boot.

ROCHESTER.

[[Page 36]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=26)

### 1.15. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

HARRY,

YOu, who have known me these ten Years the Grievance of all prudent Persons,
the By-word of Statesmen, the Scorn of ugly Ladies, which are very near All,
and the irreconcilable Aversion of fine Gentlemen, who are the Ornamen­tal
Part o [...] a Nation, and yet found me seldom sad, even under these weighty
Oppressions; can you think that the lo­ving of lean Arms, small Legs, red Eyes
and Nose, (if you will consider that Trifle too) can have the Power to depress
the natural Alacrity of my careless Soul; especially upon receiving a fine
Letter from Mr. Savile, which never wants Wit and Good-nature, two Qualities
able to transport my Heart with Joy, tho it were breaking? I wonder at M—'s
flaunt­ing it in Court with such fine Clothes; sure he is an alter'd Person
since I saw [[Page
37]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=26) him; for, since
I can remember, nei­ther his ownself, nor any belonging to him, were ever out
of Rags: His Page alone was well cloath'd of all his Fami­ly, and that but in
appearance; for, of late he has made no more of w [...]aring Second-hand C—ts,
than Second-hand Shooes; tho' I must confess, to his Ho­nour, he chang'd 'em
oftener. I wish the King were soberly advis'd about a main Advantage in this
Marriage, which may possibly be omitted; I mean, the ridding his Kingdom of
some old Beau­ties and young Deformities, who swam, and are a Grievance to his
Liege People. A Foreign Prince ought to behave him­self like a Kite, who is
allow'd to take one Royal Chick for his Reward; but then 'tis expected, before
he leaves the Country, his Flock shall clear the whole Parish of all the
Garbage and Carrion many Miles about. The King had ne­ver such an opportunity;
for the Dutch are very  [...]oul Feeders, and what they leave he must never
hope to be rid of, unless he set up an Intrigue with the Tartars or Cossacks.
For the Libel you speak of, upon that most unwitty Gene­ration, the present
Poets, I rejoyce in it [[Page
38]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=27) with all my
Heart, and shall take it for a Favour, if you will send me a Copy. He cannot
want Wit utterly, that has a Spleen to those Rogues, tho' never so dully
express'd. And now, dear Mr. Sa­vile, forgive me, if I do not wind up my self
with an handsom Period.

ROCHESTER.

[[Page 39]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=27)

### 1.16. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

Dear SAVILE,

THO' I am almost Blind, utterly Lame, and scarce within the rea­sonable hopes
of ever seeing London a­gain, I am not yet so wholly mortified and dead to the
taste of all Happiness, not to be extreamly reviv'd at the receipt of a kind
Letter from an old Friend, who in all probability might have laid me aside in
his Thoughts, if not quite forgot me by this time. I ever thought you an
extraordinary Man, and must now think you such a Friend, who, be­ing a
Courtier, as you are, can love a Man whom it is the great Mode to hate. Catch
Sir G. H. or Sir Carr, at such an ill-bred Proceeding, and I am mistaken: For
the hideous Deportment, which you have heard of, concerning running naked, so
much is true, that [[Page
40]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=28) we went into the
River somewhat late in the Year, and had a Frisk for forty Yards in the
Meadow, to dry our­selves. I will appeal to the King and the Duke, If they had
not done as much; nay, may Lord-Chancellor and the Arch­bishops both, when
they were School-boys? And, at these Years, I have heard the one Declaim'd
like Cicero, the others Preach'd like St. Austin: Prudenter Per­sons, I
conclude, they were, ev'n in Hanging-sleeves, than any of the flashy Fry, (of
which I must own myself the most unsolid) can hope to appear, ev'n in their
ripest Manhood.

And now, (Mr. Savile) since you are pleas'd to quote yourself for a grave Man
of the Number of the Scanda­liz'd, be pleas'd to call to mind the Year 1676,
when two large fat Nudi­ties led the Coranto round Rosamond's fair Fountain,
while the poor violated Nymph wept to behold the strange De­cay of Manly
Parts, since the Days of her dear Harry the Second: P— ('tis confess'd) you
shew'd but little of; but for A— and B—, (a fil­thier [[Page
41]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=28) Ostentation! God
wot) you ex­pos'd more of that Nastiness in your two Folio Volumes, than we
altogether in our six Quarto's. Pluck therefore the Beam out of thine own Eye,
&c. And now 'tis time to thank you for your kind inviting me to London, to
make Dutch-m [...]n merry; a thing I would a­void, like killing Punaises, the
filthy Savour of Dutch-mirth being more ter­rible. If GOD, in Mercy, has made
'em hush and melancholly, do not you rouze their sleeping Mirth, to make the
Town mourn; the Prince of O­range is exalted above 'em, and I cou'd wish my
self in Town to serve him in some refin'd Pleasures; which, I fear, you are
too much a Dutch-man to think of.

The best Present I can make at this time is the Bearer, whom I beg you to take
care of, that the King may hear his Tunes, when he is easie and pri­vate,
because I am sure they will di­vert him extreamly: And may he ever have
Harmony in his Mind, as this Fel­low will pour it into his Ears: May [[Page
42]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=29) he dream
pleasantly, wake joyfully, love safely and tenderly, live long and happily;
ever prays (Dear Savile) un Bougre lasse qui era toute sa foutue reste de Vie,

Vostre fidelle, amy & tres humble Serviteur, ROCHESTER.

[[Page 43]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=29)

### 1.17. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

HARRY,

THAT Night I receiv'd by Yours the surprizing Account of my Lady Dutchess's
more than ordinary In­dignation against me, I was newly brought in dead of a
Fall from my Horse, of which I still remain Bruis'd and Bedrid, and can now
scarce think it a Happiness that I sav'd my Neck. What ill Star reigns over
me, that I'm still mark'd out for Ingratitude, and on­ly us'd barbarously to
those I am oblig'd to! Had I been troublesom to her in pinning the Dependance
of my Fortune upon her Solicitations to the King, or her Unmerited
Recommendations of me to some Great Man; it would not have mov'd my Wonder
much, if she had sought any Occasion to be rid of a use­less Trouble: But, a
Creature, who had already receiv'd of her all the Obligations [[Page
44]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=30) he ever could
pretend to, except the con­tinuance of her good Opinion, for the which he
resolv'd, and did direct every step of his Life in Duty and Service to her,
and all who were concern'd in her; why should she take the Advantage of a
false idle Story, to hate such a Man; as if it were an Inconvenience to her to
be harmless, or a Pain to continue just? By that God that made me, I have no
more offended her in Thought, Word, or Deed, no more imagin'd or utter'd the
least Thought to her Contempt or Prejudice, than I have plotted Treason,
conceal'd Arms, Train'd Regiments for a Rebel­lion. If there be upon Earth a
Man of Common Honesty, who will justifie a Tittle of her Accusation, I am
contented never to s [...] her. After this, she need not forbid me to come to
her, I have little Pride or Pleasure in shewing myself where I am accus'd of a
M [...]anness I were not capable of, even for her Ser­vice, which would prove
a shrewder Tryal of my Honesty than any Ambi­tion I ever had to make my Court
to. I thought the Dutchess of P— more an Angel than I find her a Woman; and as
this is the first, it shall be the most mali­cious [[Page
45]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=30) thing I will
ever say of her. For her generous Resolution of not hurting me to the King, I
thank her; but she must think a Man much oblig'd, after the calling of him
Knave, to say she will do him no farther Prejudice. For the Countess of P—,
whatever she has heard me say, or any body else, of her, I'll stand the Test
of any impartial Judge, 'twas neither injurious nor un­mannerly; and how
severe soever she pleases to be, I have always been her humble Servant, and
will continue so. I do not know how to assure myself the D. will spare me to
the King, who would not to you; I'm sure she can't say I ever injur'd you to
her; nor am I at all afraid she can hurt me with you; I dare swear you don't
think I have dealt so indis­creetly in my Service to her, as to doubt me in
the Friendship I profess to you. And, to shew you I rely upon yours, let me
beg of you to talk once more with her, and desire her to give me the fair
hearing she wou'd afford any Footman of hers, who had been complain'd of to
her by a less-worthy Creature, (for such a one, I assure myself, my Accuser
is) unless it be for her Service, to wrong the most [[Page
46]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=31) faithful of her
Servants; and then I shall be proud of mine. I would not be run down by a
Company of Rogues, and this looks like an Endeavour towards it: Therefore
(dear Harry) send me word, how I am with other Folks; if you visit my Lord
Treasurer, name the Calamity of this Matter to him, and tell me sin­cerely how
he takes it: And, if you hear the King mention me, do the Office of a Friend,
to

Your humble Servant, ROCHESTER.

[[Page 47]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=31)

### 1.18. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

Dear SAVILE,

THE Lowsiness of Affairs in this Place, is such (forgive the un­mannerly
Phrase! Expressions must de­scend to the Nature of Things express'd) 'tis not
fit to entertain a private Gentle­man, much less one of a publick Chara­cter,
with the Retail of them, the general Heads, under which this whole Island may
be consider'd, are Spies, Beggars and Rebels, the Transpositions and Mixtures
of these, make an agreeable Variety; Bu­sie Fools and Cautious Knaves are bred
out of 'em, and set off wonderfully; tho' of this latter sort, we have fewer
now than ever, Hypocrisie being the only Vice in decay amongst us, few Men
here dis­semble their being Rascals; and no Wo­man disowns being a Whore. Mr.
O— was try'd two Days ago for Buggery, and clear'd: The next Day he brought
[[Page 48]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=32) his
Action to the Kings-Bench, against his Accuser, being attended by the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and other Peers, to the number of Seven, for the Honour of the
Prote­stant Cause. I have sent you herewith a Libel, in which my own share is
not the least; the King having perus'd it, is no ways dissatisfied with his:
The Au­thor is apparent Mr. —, his Patron my L— having a Panegerick in the
midst; upon which happen'd a hand­som Quarrel between his L—, and Mrs. B— at
the Dutchess of P—; she call'd him, The Heroe of the Libel, and complimented
him upon having made more Cuckolds, than any Man a­live; to which he answer'd,
She very well knew one he never made, nor never car'd to be imploy'd in
making. — Rogue and Bitch ensued, till the King, taking his Grand-father's
Character upon him, became the Peace-maker. I will not trouble you any longer,
but beg you still to Love

Your faithful, humble Servant, ROCHESTER.

[[Page 49]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=32)

### 1.19. TO THE Honourable HENRY SAVILE.

HARRY,

YOU are the only Man of England, that keep Wit with your Wisdom; and I am
happy in a Friend that excels in both, were your Good Nature the least of your
Good Qualities, I durst not presume upon it, as I have done; but I know you
are so sincerely con­cern'd in serving your Friends truly, that I need not
make an Apology for the Trouble I have given you in this Affair.

I daily expect more considerable Ef­fects of your Friendship, and have the
Vanity to think, I shall be the better for your growing poorer.

In the mean time, when you please to distinguish from Prosers and Wind­ham,
and comply with Rosers and Bull, [[Page
50]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=33) not forgetting
Iohn Stevens, you shall find me

Your most Ready and most Obedient Servant, ROCHESTER.

The End of the late Earl of Rochester's Letters.

[[Page 51]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=33)

## 2\. THE E. of L—'s LETTER To the Honourable Algernoon Sidney.

DIsuse of Writing hath made it un­easie to me, Age makes it hard, and the
Weakness of Sight and Hand, makes it almost impossible. This may excuse me to
Every-body, and particularly to you, who have not invited me much unto it, but
rather have given me cause to think, that you were willing to save me the
labour of Writing, and yourself the trouble of Reading my Letters: For, after
you had left me sick, solitary and sad, at Penshurst, and that you had
re­solved to undertake the Employment wherein you have lately been, you
nei­ther came to give me a Farewel, nor [[Page
52]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=34) did so much as
send one to me, but only writ a wrangling Letter or two concern­ing Mony, and
Hoskins, and Sir Robert Honywood's Horse; and though both be­fore and after
your going out of Eng­land, you writ to divers other Persons, the first Letter
that I received from you, was dated, as I remember, the 13th of September; the
second in November, wherein you take notice of your Mo­ther's Death; and if
there were one more, that was all, until Mr. Sterry came, who made such haste
from Penshurst, that coming very late at Night, he would not stay to Dine the
next Day, nor to give me time to Write. It is true, that since the Change of
Affairs here, and of your Condition there, your Let­ters have been more
frequent; and if I had not thought my Silence better both  [...]or you and
myself, I would have writ­ten more than once or twice unto you; but though,
for some Reasons, I did for­b [...]ar, I failed not to desire others to write
unto you, and with their own, to convey the best Advice that my little
In­telligence and weak Judgment cou'd af­  [...]ord; particularly not to
expect new Au­thorities nor Orders from hence, not to stay [[Page
53]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=34) in any of the
Places of your Negotiation, not to come into England, much less to ex­pect a
Ship to be sent for you; or to think, that an Account was, or wou'd be
expected of you here, unless it were of Matters ve­ry different from your
Transactions there; that it wou'd be best for you presently to di­vest
yourself of the Character of a Publick Minister, to dismiss all your Train,
and to retire into some safe place, not very near nor very far from England,
that you might hear from your Friends some­times. And for this I advis'd
Hamburgh, where I hear you are, by your Man Powel, or by them that have
received Letters from you, with Presents of Wine and Fish, which I do not
reproach nor envy.

Your last Letter to me had no Date of Time or Place; but, by another at the
same time to Sir Iohn Temple, of the 28th of Iuly, as I remember, sent by Mr.
Mis­sonden, I guess that mine was of the same Date: By those that I have had,
I per­ceive that you have been misadvertiz'd; for though I meet with no
Effects nor Marks of Displeasure, yet I find no such Tokens or Fruits of
Favour, as may give [[Page
54]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=35) me either Power
or Credit for those Un­der [...]akings and good Offices, which, per­haps, you
expect of me.

And now I am again upon the Point of retiring to my poor Habitation, ha­ving
for myself no other Design, than to pass the small remainder of my Days
in­nocently and quietly; and, if it please God, to be gathered in Peace to my
Fa­thers. And concerning you, what to resolve in myself, or what to advise
you, truly I know not: For, you must give me leav [...] to remember of how
little Weig [...] [...] [...]pinions and Counsels have bee [...] [...]ith you,
and how unkindly and unfriendly you have rejected those Ex­hortations and
Admonitions, which in much Affection and Kindness I have gi­ven you upon many
Occasions, and in almost every thing, from the highest to the lowest, that
hath concerned you; and this you may think sufficient to dis­courage me from
putting my Advices in­to the like Danger: Yet, somewhat I will say: And,
First, I think it unfit, and (perhaps) as yet, unsafe for you to come into
England; for, I believe, Powel hath told you, that he heard, when he [[Page
55]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=35) was here, That
you were likely to be ex­cepted out of the General Act of Pardon and Oblivion:
And though I know not what you have done or said here or there, yet I have
several ways heard, That there is as ill an Opinion of you, as of any, even of
those that condemned the late King: And when I thought there was no other
Exception to you, than your being of the other Party, I spoke to the General
in your behalf, who told me, That very ill Offices had been done you, but he
would assist you as much as just­ly he could; and I intended then also to
speak to Some-body else, you may guess whom I mean: But, since that, I have
heard such things of you, that in the doubtfulness only of their being true,
no Man will open his Mouth for you. I will tell you some Passages, and you
shall do well to clear yourself of them. It is said, That the University of
Copenhagen brought their Album unto you, desiring you to write something
therein, and that you did scribere in Albo these words,

Manus haec inimica Tyrannis,

Ense petit placida cum Libertate quie­tem:

[[Page 56]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=36) And put
your Name to it. This can­not chuse but be publickly known, if it be true. It
is said also, That a Minister, who hath married a Lady Laurence here of
Chelsey, but now dwelling at Copen­hagen, being there in Company with you,
said, I think you were none of the late King's Judges, nor guilty of his
Death, meaning our King. Guilty! said you; Do you call that Guilt? Why, 'twas
the justest and bravest Action that ever was done in England, or any where
else; with other words to the same effect. It is said also, That you having
heard of a Design to seize upon you, or to cause you to be taken Prisoner, you
took notice of it to the King of Denmark himself, and said, I hear there is a
Design to seize upon me: But who is it that hath that Design? Est [...]e
nostre Bandit. By which you are un­derstood to mean the King.

Besides this, it is reported, That you have been heard to say many scornful
and contemptuous things of the King's Person and Family; which, unless you can
justifie yourself, will hardly be for­given or  [...]orgotten: For, such
Personal Offences make deeper Impressions than [[Page
57]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=36) Publick Actions
either of War or Trea­ty. Here is a Resident, as he calls him­self, of the
King of Denmark, whose Name (as I hear) is Pedcombe; he hath visited me, and
offered his readiness to give you any Assistance in his Power or Credit with
the Embassadour, Mr. Al­field, who was then expected, and is now arrived here,
and hath had his first Audience. I have not seen Mr. Pedcombe since; but,
within a few Days I will put him in mind of his Pro­fession of Friendship to
you, and try what he can or will do. Sir Robert Ho­nywood is also come hither;
and, as I hear, the King is graciously pleased to admit him to his Presence,
which will be somewhat the better for you, because then the Exceptions against
your Em­ployment and Negotiation, wherein you were Colleague, will be removed,
and you will have no more to answer for, than your own particular Behaviour. I
believe Sir Robert Honywood will be in­dustrious enough to procure
Satisfaction to the Merchants in the Business of Mo­ny, wherein he will have
the Assistance of Sir Iohn Temple; to whom I refer you for that and some other
things.

[[Page 58]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=37)I have
little to say to your Complaints of your Sister Strayford's unequal Re­turns
to your Affection and Kindness, but that I am sorry for it, and that you are
well enough serv'd for bestowing so much of your Care where it was not due,
and neglecting them to whom it was due, and I hope you will be wiser
here­after. She and her Husband have not yet paid the Thousand Pounds,
where­of you are to have your part, by my Gift; for so, I think, you are to
under­stand it, tho' your Mother desired it; and if for the Payment thereof
your be­ing in England, or in some Place not far off, be necessary, as some
pretend, for the Sealing of some Writings, I think that, and other Reasons,
sufficient to perswade you to stay a while where you are, that you may hear
frequently from your Friends, and they from you. I am wholly against your
going into Italy as yet, till more may be known of your Condition, which, for
the present, is hard; and, I confess, that I do not yet see any more than
this, that either you must live in Exile, or very privately here; and
(perhaps) not safely; for [[Page
59]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=37) though the Bill
of Indemnity be lately passed, yet if there be any particular and great
Displeasure against you, as I fear there is, you may feel the Effects there­of
from the Higher Powers, and receive Affronts from the Inferiour: Therefore you
were best to stay at Hamburgh, which, for a Northern Situation, is a good
place, and healthful. I will help you as much as I can in discovering and
informing you of what concerns you; though, as I began, so I must end, with
telling you, That Writing is now grown troublesome to

Your Affectionate Le—

London, Aug. 30. 1660.

[[Page 60]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=38)

## 3\. The Honourable Algernoon Sidney's LETTER, AGAINST BRIBERY, AND
Arbitrary Government. Written to his Friends, in Answer to Theirs, perswading
his Return to England.

SIR,

I Am sorry I cannot in all things con­form myself to the Advices of my
Friends; if theirs had any joint concern­ment with mine, I would willingly
sub­mit [[Page 61]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=38)
my Interest to theirs; but when I a­lone am interested, and they only advise
me to come over as soon as the Act of Indemnity is pass'd, because they think
it is best for me, I cannot wholly lay aside my own Judgment and Choice. I
confess, we are naturally inclin'd to de­light in our own Country, and I have
a particular Love to mine; I hope I have given some Testimony of it; I think
that being exil'd from it is a great Evil, and would redeem myself from it
with the loss of a great deal of my Blood: But when that Country of mine,
which us'd to be esteem'd a Paradise, is now like to be made a Stage of
Injury, the Liberty which we hoped to establish oppress'd, all man­ner of
Prophaneness, Loosness, Luxury and Lewdness set up in its heighth; in­stead of
the Piety, Virtue, Sobriety, and Modesty, which we hoped God, by our Hands,
would have introduc'd; the Best of our Nation made a Prey to the Worst; the
Parliament, Court and Army corrup­ted, the People enslav'd, all things
ven­dible, and no Man safe, but by such evil and infamous Means as Flattery
and Bri­bery; what Joy can I have in my own Country in this Condition? Is it a
Plea­sure [[Page 62]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=39)
to see all that I love in the World sold and destroy'd? Shall I renounce all
my old Principles, learn the vile Court­arts, and make my Peace by bribing
some of them? Shall their Corruption and Vice be my Safety? Ah! no; better is
a Life among Strangers, than in my own Country upon such Conditions. Whil'st I
live, I will endeavour to preserve my Liberty; or, at least, not consent to
the destroying of it. I hope I shall die in the same Principle in which I have
lived, and will live no longer than they can preserve me. I have in my Life
been guilty of many Follies, but, as I think of no meanness, I will not blot
and defile that which is past, by endeavouring to provide for the future. I
have ever had in my Mind, that when God should cast me into such a Condition,
as that I can­not save my Life, but by doing an inde­cent thing, He shews me
the time is come wherein I should resign it. And when I cannot live in my own
Country, but by such means as are worse than dy­ing in it, I think He shews
me, I ought to keep myself out of it. Let them please themselves with making
the King glorious, who think a Whole People may justly be [[Page
63]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=39) sacrific'd for
the Interest and Pleasure of One Man, and a few of his Followers: Let them
rejoice in their Subtilty, who, by be­traying the former, Powers, have gain'd
the Favour of this, not only preserv'd, but advanc'd themselves in these
dangerous Changes. Nevertheless (perhaps) they may find the King's Glory is
their Shame, his Plenty the Peoples Misery; and that the gaining of an Office,
or a little Mony, is a poor Reward for destroying a Na­tion! (which, if it
were preserved in Li­berty and Vertue, would truly be the most glorious in the
World) and that o­thers may find they have, with much Pains, purchas'd their
own Shame and Misery, a dear Price paid for that which is not worth keeping,
nor the Life that is accompanied with it; the Honour of English Parliaments
have ever been in making the Nation glorious and happy, not in selling and
destroying the Interest of it, to satisfie, the Lusts of one Man. Miserable
Nation! that, from so great a heighth of Glory, is fallen into the most
despicable Condition in the World, of having all its Good depending upon the
Breath and Will of the vilest Persons in it! cheated and sold by them they
trust­ed! [[Page 64]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=40)
Infamous Traffick, equal almo [...]t in Guilt to that of Iudas! In all
preceeding Ages, Parliaments have been the Pillars of our Liberty, the sure
Defenders of the Oppressed: They, who formerly could bridle Kings, and keep
the Ballance e­qual between them and the People, are now become the
Instruments of all our Oppressions, and a Sword in his Hand to destroy us:
They themselves, led by a few interested Persons, who are willing to buy
Offices for themselves by the Mise­ry of the whole Nation, and the Blood of
the most worthy and eminent Persons in it. Detestable Bribes, worse than the
Oaths now in fashion in this Mercenary Court! I mean, to owe neither my Life
nor Liberty to any such Means; when the Innocence of my Actions will not
pro­tect me, I will stay away till the Storm be overpass'd. In short, where
Vane, Lambert and Haslerigg cannot live in Safe­ty, I cannot live at all. If I
had been in England, I should have expected a Lodg­ing with them; or, tho'
they may be the first, as being more eminent than I, I must expect to follow
their Example, in Suffering, as I have been their Companion in Acting. I am
most in Amaze at the [[Page
65]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=40) mistaken
Informations that were sent to me by my Friends, full of Expectations, of
Favours, and Employments. Who can think, that they, who imprison them, would
employ me, or suffer me to live, when they are put to death? If I might live,
and be employ'd, can it be expected that I should serve a Government that
seeks such detestable Ways of establish­ing itself? Ah! no; I have not learnt
to make my own Peace, by persecuting and betraying my Brethren, more inno­cent
and worthy than myself: I must live by just Means, and serve to just Ends, or
not at all, after such a Manifestation of the Ways by which it is intended the
King shall govern. I should have re­nounced any Place of Favour into which the
Kindness and Industry of my Friends might have advanc'd me, when I found those
that were better than I, were only fit to be destroy'd. I had formerly some
Jealousies, the fraudulent Proclamation for Indemnity, encreas'd the
imprison­ing of those three Men; and turning out of all the Officers of the
Army, contrary to Promise, confirm'd me in my Reso­lutions, not to return.

[[Page 66]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=41)To
conclude, The Tide is not to be diverted, nor the Oppress'd deliver'd; but
God, in his time, will have Mercy on his People; he will save and defend them,
and avenge the Blood of those who shall now perish, upon the Heads of those,
who, in their Pride, think nothing is able to oppose them. Happy are those
whom God shall make Instruments of his Ju­stice in so blessed a Work. If I can
live to see that Day, I shall be ripe for the Grave, and able to say with Joy,
Lord! now lettest thou thy Servant depart in Peace, &c. [So Sir Arthur
Haslerigg on Oliver's Death.] Farewel; my Thoughts, as to King and State,
depending upon their Actions. No Man shall be a more faithful Servant to him
than I, if he make the Good and Prosperity of his People his Glory; none more
his Ene­my, if he doth the contrary. To my particular Friends I shall be
constant in all Occasions, and to you

A most affectionate Servant, A. SIDNEY.

[[Page 67]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=41)

## 4\. A Letter by another Hand.

# To Madam —

I Have News to tell you: You got a new Subject yesterday; tho', after all,
(perhaps) it is no more News to you, than it would be to the Grand Seignior,
or the French King: For you (Madam) either find or make Subjects where-ever
you go. It is impossible to see you, without surrendring one's Heart to you;
and he that hears you talk, and can still preserve his Liberty, may (for ought
I know) revive the Miracle of the three Children in Daniel, and call for a
Chamlet Cloak to keep him warm in the midst of a Fiery Furnace. But re­ally
(Madam) I am none of those Mi­racle-mongers; I am true Flesh and Blood, like
the rest of my Sex; and, as I make no Scruple to own my Passion to you, so you
(Madam) without incur­ring the Danger of being question'd by the Parliament,
may pretend to all the Rights and Priviledges of a Conqueror. My Comfort is,
that all Mankind, soon­er [[Page
68]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=42) or later, must
wear your Chainr; for you have Beauty enough to engage the nicest Heart,
though you had no Wit to set it off: And you have so plentiful a share of the
last, that were you wholly destitute of the former, as I have already found to
my Cost, you have but too much, you could not fail of harming the most
Insensible. For my own part, I confess myself an Admirer, or, if you please,
an Adorer of your Beauty: But I am a Slave, a meer downright effectual Slave
to your Wit. Your very Conver­sation is infinitely more delicious than the
Fruition of any other Woman.

Thus, my Charming Sovereign, I here profess myself your devoted Vassal and
Subject. I promise you eternal Du­ty and Allegiance: It is neither in my Power
nor Will to depose you; and I am sure it is not in your Nature to affect
Ar­bitrary Sway. Tho' if you do, (Madam) God knows, I am a true Church of Eng
­land-man; I shall never rebel against you in Act or Thought, but only have
recourse to Prayers and Tears, and still stick to my Passive Obedience.
Per­haps, Madam, you'll tell me, I have [[Page
69]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=42) talked more than
comes to my share; but, being incognito, I assume the Li­berty of a
Masquerader, and, under that Protection, think myself safe. But, alas, did you
know how I languish for you, I dare swear (my charming Sylvia!) you would
bestow some Pity upon

AMYNTAS.

[[Page 70]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=43)

# To Madam —

I Have never had the Happiness of your Conversation but once, and then I found
you so very charming, that I have wore your lovely Idea ever since in my Mind.
But it is not without the least Astonishment, that I receiv'd the News of what
befel you t'other Day; it still makes me tremble, and leaves a dis­mal
Impression behind it, not easie to be imagin'd. For Heaven's sake, Madam, what
could urge you to so cruel a Reso­lution, that might have prov'd irrepa­rably
fatal to yourself, and matter of per­petual Affliction to your Friends? What
Harm have I, and a Thousand more of your Adorers done you, that you should so
terribly revenge the supposed Infide­lity of another upon them? Or, Why should
you, whom Beauty and Wit have put in a Capacity to subdue our whole Sex, lay
to Heart the Unkindness of one Lover, who may proceed to a new Ele­ction when
you please? If I had Vanity [[Page
71]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=43) enough to aspire
to be your Privy-Coun­sellour, I wou'd e'en advise you to bury the remembrance
of what is past, and either to punish all Mankind, as you ea­sily may, though
I need not instruct you how; or else to chuse some happy Fa­vourite out of the
Throng of your Ser­vants, and showre your Favours upon him. If Sincerity and
Truth may bid for the Purchase of your Heart, I can help you to one that
thoroughly under­stands your Worth, and accordingly va­lues it; that would be
damn'd before he would abandon you for the greatest Princess in the Universe;
that would chearfully die for your sake, and yet only lives out of Hopes, that
he may one day merit your Esteem by his Services. I fancy, Madam, you now
demand of me, where this strange Monster of Fidelity is to be found? Know
then, that he lives within less than a Hun­dred Miles of Red-Lyon-Square; and
that his Name is, (Oh! pardon the In­solence of this Discovery) his Name is

AMYNTAS,

[[Page 72]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=44)There is
another Letter that accom­panies this, and was written a Week ago; which I had
not Courage enough to lay at your Feet till now.

[[Page 73]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=44)

## 5\. LOVE-LETTERS,

BY Mr. Thomas Otway.

# To Madam —

My TYRANT!

I Endure too much Torment to be si­lent, and have endur'd it too long not to
make the severest Complaint. I love you, I dote on you; Desire makes me mad,
when I am near you; and Despair, when I am from you. Sure, of all Miseries,
Love is to me the most intolerable; it haunts me in my Sleep, perplexes me
when waking; every me­lancholly Thought makes my Fears more powerful; and
every delightful one makes my Wishes more unruly. In all other Uneasie Chances
of a Man's Life, [[Page
74]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=45) there is an
immediate Recourse to some kind of Succour or another: in Wants, we apply
ourselves to our Friends; in Sickness, to Physicians: but Love, the Sum, the
Total of all Misfortunes, must be endur'd with Silence, no Friend so dear to
trust with such a Secret, nor Remedy in Art so powerful, to remove its
Anguish. Since the first Day I saw you, I have hardly enjoy'd one Hour of
per­fect Quiet: I lov'd you early; and no sooner had I beheld that soft
bewitching Face of yours, but I felt in my Heart the very Foundation of all my
Peace give way: But when you became ano­thers, I must confess, that I did then
rebel, had foolish Pride enough to pro­mise myself, I would in time recover my
Liberty: In spight of my enslav'd Nature, I swore against myself, I would not
love you: I affected a Resentment, stifled my Spirit, and would not let it
bend, so much as once to upbraid you, each Day it was my chance to see or to
be near you: With stubborn Sufferance I resolv'd to bear and brave your Power;
nay, did it often too, successfully, Ge­nerally with Wine or Conversation I
di­verted or appeas'd the Daemon that pos­sess'd [[Page
75]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=45) me; but when at
Night, return­ing to my unhappy self, to give my Heart an account why I had
done it so unna­tural a Violence, it was then I always paid a treble Interest
for the short Mo­ments of Ease which I had borrow'd; then every treacherous
Thought rose up, and took your part, nor left me till they had thrown me on my
Bed, and open'd those Sluces of Tears that were to run till Morning. This has
been for some Years my best Condition: Nay, Time itself, that decays all
things else, has but encreas'd and added to my Longings. I tell it you, and
charge you to believe it as you are generous, (which sure you must be, for
every thing except your Neglect of me, perswades me that you are so) even at
this time, tho' other Arms have held you, and so long trespass'd on those dear
Joys that only were my Due; I love you with that tenderness of Spi­rit, that
purity of Truth, and that since­rity of Heart, that I could sacrifice the
nearest Friends or Interests I have on Earth, barely but to please you: If I
had all the World, it should be yours; for with it I could be but miserable,
if you were not mine. I appeal to yourself for [[Page
76]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=46) Justice, if
through the whole Actions of my Life I have done any one thing that might not
let you see how absolute your Authority was over me. Your Com­mands have been
always sacred to me; your Smiles have always transported me, and your Frowns
aw'd me. In short, you will quickly become to me the greatest Blessing, or the
greatest Curse, that ever Man was doom'd to. I cannot so much as look on you
without Confusion; Wishes and Fears rise up in War within me, and work a
curs'd Distraction through my Soul, that must, I am sure, in time have
wretched Consequences: You only can, with that healing Cordial, Love, asswage
and calm my Torments; pity the Man then that would be proud to die for you,
and cannot live without you, and allow him thus far to boast too, that (take
out Fortune from the Ballance) you never were belov'd or courted by a Creature
that had a nobler or juster Pretence to your Heart, than the Unfortunate and
(even at this time) Weeping

OTWAY.

[[Page 77]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=46)

# To Madam —

IN value of your Quiet, tho' it would be the utter ruine of my own, I have
endeavoured this Day to perswade myself never more to trouble you with a
Passion that has tormented me sufficiently alrea­dy, and is so much the more a
Torment to me, in that I perceive it is become one to you, who are much dearer
to me than my self. I have laid all the Reasons my di­stracted Condition would
let me have re­course to, before me: I have consulted my Pride, whether a
[...]ter a Rival's Posses­sion I ought to ruine all my Peace for a Woman that
another has been more blest in, tho' no Man ever loved as I did: But Love,
victorious Love, o'erthrows all that, and tells me, it is his Nature never to
re­member; he still looks forward from the present Hour [...] expecting still
new Dawns, new rising Happiness, never looks back, never regards what is past,
and left behind him, but buries and forgets it quite in the hot fierce pursuit
of Joy before him: I [[Page
78]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=47) have consulted
too my very self, and find how careless Nature was in framing me; seasoned me
hastily with all the most vio­lent Inclinations and Desires, but omitted the
Ornaments that should make those Qualities become me: I have consulted too my
Lot of Fortune, and find how foolishly I wish possession of what is so
precious, all the World's too cheap for it; yet still I Love, still I dote on,
and cheat myself, very content because the Folly pleases me. It is Pleasure to
think how Fair you are, tho' at the same time worse than Damnation, to think
how Cruel: Why should you tell me you have shut your Heart up for ever? It is
an Argu­ment unworthy of yourself, sounds like Reserve, and not so much
Sincerity, as sure I may claim even from a little of your Friendship. Can your
Age, your Face, your Eyes, and your Spirit bid de­fiance to that sweet Power?
No, you know better to what end Heaven made you, know better how to manage
Youth and Pleasure, then to let them die and pall upon your Hands. 'Tis me,
'tis only me you have barr'd your Heart a­gainst. My Sufferings, my Diligence,
my Sighs, Complaints, and Tears are of no [[Page
79]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=47) power with your
haughty Nature; yet sure you might at least vouchsafe to pity them, not shift
me off with gross, thick, home-spun Friendship, the common Coin that passes
betwixt Worldly Interests: must that be my Lot! Take it Ill-natur'd, take it;
give it to him who would waste his Fortune for you; give it the Man would fill
your Lap with Gold; court you with Offers of vast rich Possessions; give it
the Fool that has nothing but his Mony to plead for him; Love will have a much
nearer Relation, or none. I ask for glorious Happiness; you bid me Welcome to
your Friendship, it is like seating me at your Side-table, when I have the
best Pretence to your Right-hand at the Feast. I Love, I Doat, I am Mad, and
know no measure; no­thing but Extreams can give me ease; the kindest Love, or
most provoking Scorn: Yet even your Scorn would not perform the Cure, it might
indeed take off the edge of Hope, but damn'd Despair will gnaw my Heart for
ever. If then I am not odious to your Eyes, if you have Charity enough to
value the Well-being of a Man that holds you dearer than you can the Child
your Bowels are most fond [[Page
80]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=48) of, by that
sweet  [...]ledge of your first softest Love, I charm and here conjure you to
pity the distracting Pangs of mine; pity my unquiet Days and restless Nights;
pity the Frenzy that has half possest my Brain already, and makes me write to
you thus ravingly: The Wretch in Bedlam is more at Peace than I am! And, if I
must never possess the Heaven I wish for, my next Desire is, (and the sooner
the better) a clean-swept Cell, a merciful Keeper, and your Compassion when
you find me there.

Think and be Generous.

[[Page 81]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=48)

# To Madam —

SInce you are going to quit the World, I think myself obliged, as a Member of
that World, to use the best of my En­deavours to divert you from so ill-
natur'd an Inclination; therefore, by reason your Visits will take up so much
of this Day, I have debarr'd myself the opportunity of waiting on you this
Afternoon, that I may take a time you are more Mistress of, and when you shall
have more leisure to hear, if it be possible for any Argu­ments of mine to
take place in a Heart, I am afraid too much harden'd against me: I must
confess it may look a little extraordinary for one under my Circum­stances to
endeavour the confirming your good Opinion of the World, when it had been much
better for me, one of us had never seen it: For Nature disposed me from my
Creation to Love, and my ill Fortune has condemn'd me to Doat on one, who
certainly could never have been deaf so long to so faithfull a Passion, [[Page
82]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=49) had Nature
disposed her from her Crea­tion to hate any thing but me. I beg you to forgive
this Trifling, for I have so many Thoughts of this nature, that 'tis
impossible for me to take Pen and Ink in my Hand, and keep 'em quiet,
e­specially when I have the least pretence to let you know you are the cause
of the severest Disquiets that ever touch'd the Heart of

OTWAY.

[[Page 83]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=49)

# To Madam —

COuld I see you without Passion, or be absent from you without Pain, I need
not beg your Pardon for this re­newing my Vows, that I love you more than
Health, or any Happiness here or hereafter. Every thing you do is a new Charm
to me; and though I have lan­guish'd for seven long tedious Years of Desire,
jealously and despairing; yet, e­very Minute I see you, I still discover
something new and more bewitching. Consider how I love you; what would not
renounce, or enterprize for you? I must have you mine, or I am miserable; and
nothing but knowing which shall be the happy Hour, can make the rest of my
Life that are to come tolerable. Give me a word or two of comfort, or resolve
never to look with common goodness on me more, for I cannot bear a kind Look,
and after it a cruel Denial. This Minute my Heart akes for you; and, [[Page
84]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=50) if I cannot have
a Right in yours, I wish it would ake till I could complain to you no longer.

Remember poor

OTWAY.

[[Page 85]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=50)

# To Madam —

YOU cannot but be sensible, that I am blind, or you would not so openly
discover what a ridiculous Tool you make of me. I should be glad to discover
whose satisfaction I was sacri­fic'd to this Morning; for I am sure your own
ill Nature could not be guilty of inventing such an Injury to me, meer­ly to
try how much I could bear, were it not for the sake of some Ass, that has the
Fortune to please you: In short, I have made it the Bus'ness of my Life to do
you Service, and please you, if pos­sible, by any way to convince you of the
unhappy Love I have for seven Years toil'd under; and your whole Bus'ness is
to pick ill-natur'd Conjectures out of my harmless freedom of Conversation, to
Vex and Gall me with, as often as you are pleased to Divert yourself at the
Expence of my Quiet. Oh, thou Tormenter! Could I think it were Jea­lousie, how
should I humble myself to [[Page
86]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=51) be justify'd;
but I cannot bear the thought of being made a Property ei­ther of another
Man's good Fortune, or the Vanity of a Woman that designs no­thing but to
plague me.

There may be Means found some­time or other, to let you know your mistaking.

[[Page 87]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=51)

# To Madam —

YOU were pleased to send me word you would meet me in the Mall this Evening,
and give me further satis­faction in the Matter you were so unkind to charge
me with; I was there, but found you not, and therefore beg of you, as you ever
would wish yourself to be eased of the highest Torment it were possible for
your Nature to be sensible of, to let me see you sometime to Morrow, and send
me word, by this Bearer, where, and at what Hour, you will be so just, as
either to acquit or condemn me; that I may, hereafter, for your sake, either
bless all your bewitching Sex; or, as of­ten as I henceforth think of you,
curse Woman-kind for ever.

[[Page 88]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=52)

### 5.1. Mr.— to Mr. G—

Dear G—,

AS I hope to be sav'd, and that's a bold word in a Morning, when our
Consciences, like Children, are al­ways most uneasie; when the Light of Nature
flashes upon us with the Light of the Day, and makes way for the calm re­turn
of Thought, that Eternal Foe to Quiet; but, I thank my Stars, I have shook
that Snake out of my Bosom, and made Peace with that Domestick Enemy
Conscience, and so much the more dan­gerous by being so—

—But, as I was going to say, your Letter has put new Life into me, and
re­viv'd me from the Damp, that Solitude and bad Company has flung me into;
'tis as hard to find a Man of Sense here, as a handsom Woman: A Company of
Country 'Squires round a Table, is like a Company of Waiters round a dead
Corps, [[Page 89]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=52)
they are always ridiculously Sober and Grave, or, which is worse,
impertinently Loud: Wine, that makes the gay Man of the Town brisk and
sprightly, only serves to pluck off their Vail of Bashful­ness, a Mask that
Fools ought always to wear; and which, once off, makes 'em as nauseous, as a
bare-fac'd Lady of the Pit; they are as particular in their Stories, as a
Lawyer in his Evidence, and husband their Tales, as well as they do their
Moneys: In short, as Madam Oli­via says, They are my Aversion of all
Aversions.

You may easily imagine, I have too much of the Men, but on my word, I have too
little of the Women: Full of Youth, Vigour and Health I lye fallow, and, like
the Vestal Virgins, am damn'd to Cold­ness and Chastity in the midst of
Flames. God knows what hard shifts I use, my Right-hand often does, what (like
Acts of Charity) I'm asham'd my Left-hand shou'd know. As much as I despise
the Conversation of these Fops, I court it out of an apprehension of being
alone, not daring to trust myself to so dangerous a Companion as myself. 'Tis
in these cool [[Page
90]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=53) Intervals of
Solitude, that we conspire Cuckoldom against our Friend, Treason against the
State, &c. for the Devil of Lust and Ambition, like other Evil Spi­rits, only
appears to us when we are alone.

The Talking of the Devil, puts me in mind of the Parsons: I had the Benefit of
the Clergy this Week; I mean the Company of two honest unbigotted Par­sons; I
drank a Bowl to the Manes of our immortal Friend, one that was as witty as
Necessity, and discover'd more Truths, than ever Time did: One that was born
to Unchain the World, that struggl'd with Mysteries as Hercules did with
Monsters, and, like him, too fell by a Distaff.

After so mournful a Subject, I'gad I'll make you Laugh— The Duce take me, if I
did not, last Week, assist at the Cere­mony of making a Christian; nay, more
Sir, I was, Honos sit Auribus, a Godfa­ther, who am

your Affectionate Friend, and Servant, &c.

[[Page 91]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=53)

## 6\. Mons. BOILEAV's LETTERS,

TRANSLATED By THO. CHEEK, Esq

### 6.1. To the Duke de Vivone, upon his Entrance into the Haven of Mes­sina.

My LORD,

KNow you not, that one of the su­rest ways, to hinder a Man from being
pleasant, is, to bid him be so: Since you fo [...]bad me being serious, I
ne­ver found myself so grave, and I speak nothing now but Sentences. And,
be­sides, your last Action has something in it so great, that truly it would
go against [[Page
92]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=54) my Conscience to
write to you of it o­therwise, than in the Heroick Style: However, I cannot
resolve, not to obey you, in all, that you command me; so that in the Humour
that I find myself, I am equally afraid to tire you with a se­rious Tri
[...]le, or to trouble you with an ill Piece of Wit.

In fine, my Apollo has assisted me this Morning, and in the time that I
thought the least of it, made me find upon my Pillow, two Letters, which, for
want of mine, may perhaps give you an agree­able amusement: They are dated
from the Elysian Fields; the one is from Bal­zac, and the other from Voiture,
who being both charm'd with the Relation of your last Fight, write to you from
the other World, to congratulate you. This is that from Balzac; you will
easily know it to be his by his Style, which cannot express things simply, nor
de­s [...]end from its heighth.

[[Page 93]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=54)

### 6.2. From the Elysian Fields, June the 22d.

My LORD,

THe Report of your Actions, re­vives the Dead; it wakens those, who have slept
these thirty Years, and were condemn'd to an eternal Sleep; it makes Silence
itself speak: The Brave! The Splendid! The Glorious Conquest that you have
made over the Enemies of France! You have restored Bread to a City, which has
been accu­stom'd to furnish it to all others: You have nourish'd the nursing
Mother of Italy; the Thunder of that Fleet, which shut you up the Avenues of
its Port, has done no more than barely saluted your Entrance; its Resistance
has detained you no longer, than an over civil Recep­tion: So far from
hindring the Rapidi­ty of your Course, it has not interrupted the Order of
your March; you have constrain'd, in their Sight, the South, and North Winds
to obey you, without cha­stizing [[Page
94]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=55) the Sea, as
Zerxes did; you have taught it Discipline; you have done yet more, you have
made the Spaniard humble. After that, what may not one say of you? No, Nature,
I say, Nature, when she was young, and in the time that she produc'd
Alexanders and Cae­sars, has produc'd nothing so great, as un­der the Reign of
Louis XIV, she has gi­ven to the French, in her declension, that which Rome
could not obtain from her in her greatest Maturity. She has made appear to the
World, in your Age, both in Body and Soul, that perfect Valour which we have
scarce seen the Idea of in Romances and Heroick Poems. Beg­ging the Pardon of
one of your Poets— he had no reason to say, That beyond Cocitus Merit, is no
more known: Yours, my LORD, is extoll'd here, by the common Voice, on both
sides of Styx. It makes a continual remembrance of you, even in the Abodes of
Forgetfulness: It finds zealous Partizans in the Country of Indifference. It
puts Acheron into the Interests of the Seine. Nay more, There is no shade
amongst us, so prepossest with the Principles of the Porticus, so hardned in
the School of Zeno, so fortified [[Page
95]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=55) against Joy and
Grief, that does not hear your Praises with pleasure, that does not clap his
Hands, and cry, A Miracle! at the Moment you are named, and is not ready to
say with your Malherb,

A la fin, c'est trop de silence,

En si beau suject, de parler.

As for me, my LORD, who know you a great deal better, I do nothing but
meditate on you in my Repose; I fill my Thoughts intirely with your Idea, in
the long Hours of our leisure; I cry continually, How great a Man is this! And
if I wish to live again, 'tis not so much, to return to the Light, as to enjoy
the Sovereign Felicity of your Conver­sation, and to tell you Face to Face,
with how much respect, I am from the whole extent of my Soul,

My LORD,

Your Lordship's most humble, and most obedient Servant, BALZAC.

[[Page 96]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=56)I Know
not, my LORD, whither these violent Exaggerations will please you; and whither
you will not find, that the Style of Balzac is a little corrupted in the other
World; however it be, (in my Opinion) he never la­vish'd his Hyperboles more
to the pur­pose; 'tis for you to judge of it: But first read, (if you please)
the Letter from Voiture.

[[Page 97]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=56)

### 6.3. From the Elysian Fields, June the 22d.

My LORD,

‘THo' we poor Devils, who are dead, do not concern ourselves much in the
Affairs of the Living, and are not exceedingly inclin'd to Mirth: Yet I cannot
forbear rejoycing at the Great Things you do over our Heads. Seriously, your
last Fight makes the De­vil and all of a Noise here below; it has made itself
heard in a place, where the very Thunder of Heav'n is not heard; and has made
your Glory known in a Country where even the Sun is not known. There are a
great many Spa­niards come hither, who were in the Action, and have inform'd
us of the Par­ticulars. I see no reason why the People of that Nation shou'd
pass for Bullies; for I can assure you they are very civil Persons, and the
King sent 'em hither t'other Day very mild and quiet. To tell you the truth,
my LORD, you have ma­nag'd [[Page
98]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=57) your Affairs
very well of late. To see with what speed you fly o're the Mediterranean-Sea,
wou'd make one think you absolutely Master of it: There is not at present, in
all its extent, one single Privateer in safety, and, if you go on at this
rate, I can't see how you'd have Tunis and Algiers subsist. We have here the
Caesars, the Pompeys, and the A­lexanders; they all agree, That you ex­actly
follow their Conduct in your way of fighting: But Caesar believes you to be
superlatively Caesar. There are none here, ev'n to the Alaricks, the
Gense­ricks, the Theodoricks, and all the other Conquerors in icks, who don't
speak ve­ry well of this Action; and in Hell it self (I know not whether you
are ac­quainted with that Place) there is no Devil, my LORD, who does not
con­fess ingenuously, That at the Head of an Army you are a greater Devil,
than himself: This is a Truth that your ve­ry Enemies agree in. But to see the
good that you have done at Messina, for my part, I believe you are more like
an An­gel, than a Devil, only Angels have a more  [...]airy shape, and do not
carry their Arms in a Scarf. Railery apart, [[Page
99]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=57) Hell is
extreamly byass'd in your Fa­vour. There is but one thing to be ob­jected to
your Conduct, and that is the little care, that you sometimes take of your
Life. You are so well belov'd in this Country, that they don't desire your
Company. Believe me, my LORD, I have already said it in the other World, a
Demi-God, is but a very little thing, when he is dead; he's nothing like what
he was, when he was alive. And as for me, who know already, by expe­rience
what it is to be no more, I set the best Face on the Matter I can; but to hide
nothing from you, I die with Im­patience to return to the World; were it only
to have the Pleasure to see you there; in pursuance of this intended Voyage, I
have already sent several times to find out the scatter'd Parts of my Body to
set 'em together, but I cou'd never recover my Heart, which I left at parting
with those seven Mistresses, that I serv'd, as you know so faithfully, the
whole seven at once. As for my Wit, unless you have it, I'm told, 'tis not to
be found in the World. To tell you the truth, I shrewdly suspect, that you
have at least the Ga [...]ety of it: For I have [[Page
100]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=58) been told here
four or five Sayings of your Turn of Expression, which I wish, with all my
Heart, I had said, and for which I would willingly give the Pane­gyrick of
Pliny, and two of my best Letters. Supposing then, that you have it, I beg you
to send it me back as soon as possibly you can; for indeed you can't imagine
how inconvenient it is [...] not to have all one's Wit about one, especially
when one Writes to such a Man as you are; this is the Cause that my Style, at
present, is so alter'd: Were it not for that, you shou'd see me mer­ry again,
as formerly, with my Com­rade le Broch [...]t. And I should not be reduc'd to
the necessity of ending my Letter trivally, as I do in telling you, that I
am,’

My LORD,

Your Lordship's most Humble and Obedient Servant, VOITURE.

### 6.4.

[[Page 101]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=58)

THese are the two Letters, just as I receiv'd 'em: I send 'em you writ in my
own Hand, because you wou'd have had too much trouble to read the Characters
of the other World, if I had sent 'em you in the Original. Do not fancy, my
LORD, that this is only a trial of Wit, and an imitation of the Style of these
two Writers. You know very well, that Balzac and Voiture are inimitable.
However, were it true, that I had recourse to this Invention to divert you,
shou'd I be so much in the wrong of it, or rather ought I not to be esteem'd,
for having found out this way to make you read the Praises, which you wou'd
never have suffer'd otherways? In a word, cou'd I better make appear with what
Sincerity, and with what Respect I am,

My LORD,

Yours, &c.

[[Page 102]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=59)

## 7\. A LETTER Writ by Mr. DENNIS, Sent with the following SPEECH.

SIR,

I Have here sent you inclos'd, what I promis'd you by the last Post, and I
think myself oblig'd to give you some account of it. In the late Appendix to
the new Observator, I find the Author reasonably complaining of the
corrup­tion of History by the French, and gi­ving [[Page
103]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=59) a reasonable
guess, how false the History of this Age (as far as it is writ by them) is
like to come out in the next. And particularly what Monsieur Pelisson's
History of the present King of France is like to be, which is now wri­ting by
that King's own order. Mon­sieur Boileau, who writ the enclos'd, has at least
as great a share in that History as Monsieur Pelisson: And therefore you have
in the enclos'd, in the which he has very artfully inserted a Panegyrick of
his Prince, a Pattern of what his part of the History will be. For having
flatter'd his Master in this small Panegy­rick, we have all the reason in the
World to believe, That he will flatter him too in his History. And that he has
flatter'd him here, you will plainly find; not only by Exaggerations, which
are in some measure to be allow'd to an Ora­tor; but in affirming things which
are directly contrary to the truth. Such are those two remarkable Passages of
the French King's offering Peace to the late Confederacy, for the general good
of Christendom, (which not so much as a Frenchman, who has common Sense,
be­lieves) and of his Bombarding Genoa, [[Page
104]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=60) only to be
reveng'd of its Insolency and of its Perfidiousness, which every Man, who has
heard the Story of Mr. Valdryon, must laugh at. Now since it is to be
presum'd, that Monsieur Boileau will flat­ter him in his History, because it
is plain that he has  [...]latter'd him in his Panegy­rick; What are we to
expect from Mon­sieur Pelisson, whose sincerity is by no means so much talk'd
of as the other's? I thought to have concluded here: But it comes into my mind
to make two Refle­ctions upon the Panegyrical part of the enclos'd. The first
is this, That since Monsieur Boileau, who is, in the main, a Man of Sincerity,
and a lover of Truth, could not but flatter Lewis the Fourteenth when he
commended him; we may conclude, that it is impossible to give him a general
commendation with­out flattery. For, where a Satyrick Poet paints, what other
Man must not daub? The second Reflection is this, That since this Panegyrick
is scarce to be supported, notwithstanding the most admirable ge­nius of the
Author, which shines through­out it; and an Art to which nothing can be added,
(remember that I speak of the Original) and beyond which nothing can [[Page
105]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=60) be desir'd; you
may easily conclude how extreamly fulsom the rest of the Panegy­ricks upon
Lewis the Fourteenth must needs be, whose Authors fall infinitely short of
Boileau's, either Genius, or Art, or Vertue.

[[Page 106]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=61)

## 8\. THE SPEECH OF Monsieur BOILEAV, Upon his Admission into the French
Academy.

Translated by Mr. DENNIS.

GENTLEMEN,

THe Honour this Day confer'd upon me, is something so great, so
ex­traordinary, so little expected; and so many several sorts of reasons ought
to have for ever excluded me from it, that at this very Moment, in which I
return my [[Page
107]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=61)
Acknowledgments, I am doubtful if I ought to believe it. Is it then possible,
can it be true, Gentlemen, that you have in effect judg'd me worthy to be
admitted into this illustrious Society, whose famous Establishment does no
less honour to the memory of Cardinal Richlieu, than all the rest of the
numerous Wonders of his matchless Ministry? And what must be the thoughts of
that great Man? What must be the thoughts of that wise Chan­sellour, who after
him enjoy'd the Digni­ty of your Protectorship; and after whom it was your
Opinion, that none but your King had right to be your Protector? What must be
their thoughts, Gentlemen, if they should behold me this day, becom­ing a Part
of this Glorious Body, the Ob­ject of their eternal care and esteem; and into
which by the Laws which they have establish'd, by the Maxims which they have
maintain'd, no one ought to be receiv'd, who is not of a spotless Merit, an
extraordinary Wit, and comparable even to you? But farther, whom do I succeed
in the Place which you are pleas'd to afford me here? Monsieur de Besons. Is
it not a Man who is equally renown'd for his great Employments, [[Page
108]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=62) and his
profound Capacity? Is it not a Magistrate who fill'd one of the formost Seats
in the Council; and who, in so many important Occasions, has been Honoured by
his Prince, with his strictest Confi­dence: A Magistrate, no less wise than
Experienc'd, watchful, laborious; with whom the more I compare myself, the
less Proportion I find.

I know very well, Gentlemen, (and who can be ignorant of it,) that in the
choice which you make of Men who are proper to supply the Vacancies of your
learned Assembly, you have no regard either to Place or to Dignity: That
Po­liteness, Learning, and an Acquaintance with all the more gentle Arts, have
al­ways usher'd in naked Merit to you, and that you do not believe it to be
unbecom­ing of you, to substitute in the room of the highest Magistrate, of
the most exal­  [...]ed Minister, some famous Poet, or some Writer, whom his
Works have rendred Illustrious, and who has very o [...]ten no other Dignity,
than that which his Desert has given him upon Parnassus. But if you barely
consider me as a Man of Learning, what can I offer you that may [[Page
109]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=62) be worthy of
the favour, with which you have been pleas'd to honour me? Is it a wretched
Collection of Poetry, success­ful rather by a happy temerity and a dex­terous
imitation of the Ancients, than by the beauty of its thoughts, or the
rich­ness of its expressions? Is it a Translation that falls so far short of
the great Master-pieces with which you every day supply us; and in the which
you so gloriously revive Thucydides, Xenophon, Tacitus, and all the rest of
the renown'd Heroes of the most learn'd Antiquity? No, Gentlemen, you are too
well acquainted with the just value of things, to recompence at a rate so
high, such low Productions as mine, and offer me voluntarily upon so slight a
foundation, an Honour which the know­ledge of my want of Merit, has
discou­rag'd me still from demanding.

What can be the reason then, which in my behalf has so happily influenc'd you
upon this occasion? I begin to make some discovery of it, and I dare engage
that I shall not make you blush in exposing it. The goodness which the
greatest Prince in the World has shewn in employing me, together with one of
the first of your [[Page
110]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=63) illustrious
Writers, to make one Colle­ction of the infinite number of his Im­mortal
Actions; the Permission which he has given me to do this, has supply'd all my
Defects with you.

Yes, Gentlemen, whatever just Reasons ought to have excluded me ever from your
Academy, you believed that you could not with Justice suffer that a Man who is
destin'd to speak of such Mighty Things, should be depriv'd of the Utility of
your Lessons, or instructed in any other School than in yours. And, by this,
you have clearly shewn, that when it is to s [...]rve your August Protector,
whatever Consideration might otherwise restrain you, your Zeal will not suffer
you to cast your eyes upon an [...] thing but the Interest of your Master's
Glory.

Yet suffer me, Gentlemen, to undeceive you, if you believe that that great
Prince, at the time when he granted that favour to me, believ'd that he should
meet within me a Writer, who was able to sustain in the least, by the Beauty
of Style, or by the magnificent Pomp of Expression, the Grandeur of his
Exploits. No, Gentlemen, [[Page
111]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=63) it belongs to
you, and to Pens like yours, to shew the World such Master-pieces; and he
never conceiv'd so advantageous a thought of me. But as every thing that he
has done in his Reign is Wonderful, is Prodigious, he did not think it would
be amiss, that in the midst of so many re­nown'd Writers, who with emulation
de­scribe his Actions in all their Splendour, and with all the Ornaments of
the subli­mest Eloquence, a Man without Artifice, and accus'd rather of too
much Sincerity than of Flattery, should contribute by his Labour and by his
Advice, to set to shew in a proper light, and in all the simplicity of the
most natural Style, the Truth of those Actions, which being of themselves so
little probable, have rather need to be faithfully related, than to be
strongly exaggerated.

And indeed, Gentlemen, when Poets and Orators, and Historians, who are
sometimes as daring as Poets or Orators, shall come to display upon so happy a
Subject, all the bold strokes of their Art, all their force of Expression;
when they shall say of Lewis the Great, more justly than was said of a famous
Captain of old, [[Page
112]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=64) that he alone
has atchiev'd more Exploits than other Princes have read; that he alone has
taken more Towns, than other Monarchs have wish'd to take: When they shall
assure us, that there is no Poten­tate upon the face of the Earth, no not the
most Ambitious, who in the secret Prayers that he puts up to Heaven, dares
presume to Petition for so much Glory, for so much Prosperity as Heaven has
freely granted this Prince: When they shall write, that his Condust is
Mistress of Events; that Fortune dares not contradict his Designs: When they
shall paint him at the Head of his Armies, marching with Gigantick Strides,
over great Rivers and the highest Mountains; thundring down Ramparts, rending
hard Rocks, and tearing into ten thousand pieces every thing that resists his
impetuous Shock: These Expressions will doubtless appear great, rich, noble,
adapted to the lofty Subject; but at the same time that the World shall wonder
at them, it will not think itself oblig'd to believe them, and the T [...]uth
may be ea­sily disown'd or mistaken, under the dis­guise of its pompous
Ornaments.

[[Page 113]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=64)But, when
Writers without artifice, and who are contented faithfully to relate things,
and with all the simplicity of Witnesses who depose, rather than of
Hi­storians, who make a Narration, shall rightly set forth, all that has
pass'd in France, ever since the famous Peace of the Pyrenees; all that the
King has done in his Dominions, to re-establish Order, Discipline, Law: when
they shall reckon up all the Provinces which he has added to his Kingdoms in
succeeding Wars, all the Advantages, all the Victories which he has gain'd of
his Enemies; Holland, Germany, Spain, all Europe too feeble a­gainst him
alone, a War that has been always fruitful in prosperity, and a more glorious
Peace: When Pens that are sin­cere, I say, and a great deal more careful to
write the Truth, than to make others admire them, shall rightly articulate all
these Actions, disposed in their order of time, and attended with their real
circum­stances; who is it that can then dissent from them, I do not say of our
Neigh­bours, I do not say of Allies; I say of our mortal Enemies? And tho'
they shou'd be unwilling to acknowledge the [[Page
114]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=65) truth of them,
will not their diminish'd Forces, their States confin'd within stricter
Bounds, their Complaints, their Jealousies, their Furies, their very
Inve­ctives, in spight of themselves, convince them? Can they deny that in
that very Year, of which I am speaking, this Prince being resolv'd to
constrain them all to accept of a Peace which he had offer'd them for the good
of Christendom, did all at once, and that at a time, when they had publish'd,
that he was intirely exhausted of Men and Money: that he did then, I say, all
at once, in the Low-Countries, cause to start up as 'twere out of the ground
two mighty Armies, each of them consisting of Forty Thousand Men; and that he
provided for them abundant Subsistance there, notwith­standing the scarcity of
Forrage, and the excessive drought of the Season? Can they deny, that whil'st
with one of these Armies, he caus'd his Lieutenants to besiege Luxemburgh,
himself with the other, keeping as it were block'd all the Towns of Brabant
and Hainault: That he did, by this most admirable Conduct, or, rather [...] by
a kind of Enchantment, like that o [...] the Head so renown'd in the [[Page
115]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=65) ancient Fables,
whose Aspect trans­form'd the Beholders to Stones, render the Spaniards
unmov'd Spectators of the taking of that important Place, in the which they
had repos'd their utmost Re­fuge? That by a no less admirable effect of the
same prodigious Enchantment, that obstinate Enemy to his Glory, that
industrious Contriver of Wars and Con­federacies, who had labour'd so long to
stir up all Europe against him, found him­self, if I may use the Expression,
disabled and impotent, tyed up on every side, and reduc'd to the wretched
Vengeance of dispersing Libels; of sending forth Cries and Reproaches: Our
very Enemies, give me leave to repeat it, can they they de­ny all this? Must
not they confess, That at the time when these Wonders were executing in the
Low-Countries, our Fleet upon the Mediterranean, after having forc'd Algiers
to be a Suppliant for Peace, caus'd Genoa to feel, by an Example that will be
eternally dreadful, the Just Cha­stisement of its Insolence and of its
Per­fidiousness; burying under the Ruines of Palaces and stately Houses that
proud City, more easie to be destroy'd than be humbled? No, without doubt, our
Ene­mies [[Page 116]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=66)
dare not give the Lie to such known Truths, especially when they shall see
them writ with that simple and natural Air, and with that Character of
Sincerity and Probability, with which, whate'er my Defects are, I do not
abso­ly despair to be able at least in part to to supply the History.

But since this very Simplicity, all Ene­my, as it is to Ostentation and
Pageantry, has yet its Art, its Method, its Beauties; from whence can I better
derive that Art, and those Beauties, than from the source of all Delicacies,
this  [...]am'd Academy, which has kept possession, for so many Years, of all
the Treasures, of all the Riches, of our Tongue? These, Gentle­men, are the
things which I am in hopes to find among you; this is what I come to study
with you; this is what I come to learn of you. Happy, if by my assi­duity in f
[...]equenting you, by my address in bringing you to speak of these Mat­ters,
I can engage you to conceal nothing of all your most secret Skill from me:
Your Skill to render Nature decent and chaste at the very time when she is
most alluring; and to make the Colours and [[Page
117]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=66) Paint of Art,
appear to be the genuine Beauties of Nature. Thrice happy! if by my Respects
and by my sincere Sub­missions, I can perfectly convince you of the extream
Acknowledgment, which I shall make all my Life-time for the un­expected Honour
you have done me.

[[Page 118]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=67)

## 9\. Letters of Courtship TO A Woman of Quality.

IF it be a Crime in me, Madam, to love, 'tis your fair Self that's the
oc­casion of it; and if it be a Crime in me to tell you I do, 'tis myself only
that's faulty. I confess, 'twas in my Power to have forborn writing, but I am
satis­fy'd I cou'd never have seen you, but the Language of my Looks wou'd
have dis­closed the secret; and to what purpose is it to pretend to conceal a
Flame that will discover itself by its own Light? In my mind there's more
Confession in disorder­ed Actions, frequent Sighs, or a com­plaining
Countenance, than in all the artful Expressions the Tongue can utter; I have
been strugling with myself this three Months to discover a thing which [[Page
119]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=67) I now must do
in three words, and that is, that I adore you; and I am sure if you'll be just
to yourself, you cannot be so un­just to me, as to question the reality of
this Discovery, for 'tis impossible for you to be ignorant of the Charms you
possess, no body can be rich, and yet unacquainted with their Stores. And
therefore, since 'tis certain, you have every thing wonder­fully engaging, you
must not take it ill that my Taste is as curious as another's, I shou'd do an
injury to my own Judg­ment if it were not; I am not, Madam, so vain as to
believe, that any thing I can act or utter shou'd ever perswade you to retain
the least kind regard, in recompence of the pain I suffer; I only beg leave
and liberty to complain: They that are hurt in Service, are permitted to show
their Wounds; and the more gallant the Con­querour, the more generous is his
Compassi­on. I ventur'd last Night to faulter out my Misfortune, 'twas almost
dark, and I at­tempted it with greater boldness, nay, you yourself (cruel and
charming as you are) must needs take notice of my disor­der; your Sentences
were short and re­proving; your Answers cold; and your Manner (contrary to
your usual and pe­culiar [[Page
120]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=68) sweetness) was
severe and for­bidding, yet in spight of all the Awe and chill Aspect you put
on, you must always appear most adorable to,

MADAM,

Your most lost and unfortunate humble Servant

.

[[Page 121]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=68)

# By the same Hand.

YOu need not have laid an Obligation on me of writing, who am so incli­nable
of my own accord, to tire yo [...] with Let [...]ers; 'tis the most ag
[...]eable thing I can do, and cou'd wish you thought it so too; but when I
reflect upon the  [...]a [...]sh­ness of my Expressions, I must needs
conclude, I have a greater regard to my own satisfaction in writing, than to
your patience in reading; the only way I know to make me write better, wou'd
be to receive more frequent Letters from you, which would instruct me to do
it; and I shou'd think it the greatest perfecti­on of my Pen to imitate even
the faults of yours (if there were any.) I have the sa­tisfaction left me,
that I am writing to one, that, though her Judgment be nice and discerning,
her Interpretation is easie and candid; ONE that has not only the brightness
of Heaven to make me adore her, but also the goodness of it to forgive my
offences; else I shou'd despair of Par­don for this too long Letter.

[[Page 122]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=69)I
confess, if I were to make a recital of your Divine Qualities, an Age would be
too small a time to be employed in the Work: I shou'd indeavour to paint your
gay airy Temper, and yet shadow it with all the Modesty and cautious
Reserv'd­ness; you have an Humour so very taking, that, as it fires the
serious, and dull, so it checks, and restrains the too forward; and as your
Charms give encouragement, so your wakeful Conduct creates despair. If the
Paper and your Patience wou'd not fail me, I cou'd live upon this Subject; but
whilst I do Justice to your Vertues, I of­fend your Modesty; and every Offence
a­gainst you, Madam, must be avoided as much as possible by him, all whose
Hap­piness depends on pleasing you, as does that of,

MADAM,

Your humble Servant.

[[Page 123]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=69)

# By the same Hand.

AS I cannot reflect upon the melan­choly Appearance of things on Sun­day and
Munday last, without an Afflicti­on inexpressible, so I cannot think on the
happy Change without the most grate­ful Pleasure. Heavens! how my Heart sunk,
when I found the tenderest part of my Soul seiz'd with an Indisposition, her
Colour faded, the usual Gaiety of her Temper eclipsed, her Tongue faultering,
her Ayr languishing, and the charming Lustre of her Eyes setting and decay'd!
Instead of kind Expressions full of Love and Endearments, I could hear nothing
but Complaints, and the melancholy Ef­fects of a growing Illness. 'Tis true,
(my dearest Life) tho' you are as beautiful as Light, tho' sweet and tender as
a Flower in Spring, tho' gay and cheerful as dawn­ing Youth, yet all these
Perfections, that captivate others, cannot secure you against the Tyranny of
Distempers; Sickness has no regard to your Innocence, but the same [[Page
124]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=70) ruffling
Tempest that tears up the common Weeds, blasts also the fragrant blushing
Rose: But now, to the Eternal Peace of my satisfied Mind,  [...]he Feaverish
Heat is extinguish'd, and your Charms recover their usual heavenly Brightness;
I am the Vnhappy Wretch that feels their force, and consumes of a Feaver never
to be ex­tinguish'd, but with the Life of,

MADAM,

Yours, &c.

[[Page 125]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=70)

# By the same Hand.

THIS Morning I discover'd the happy Signal at your Window, which was as
welcome to me as a Cordial to fainting Spirits: Heavens grant the Design be
real, Love is ne­ver free from Fears; and my presa­ging Mind bids me not be
too confi­dent. If there be any Sympathy in our Souls, as there is in our
Manners and Humours, I am sure you must be very much indispos'd; for, all
Night long, dreadful Fancies haunted me, and drove all soft and pleasing
Idea's from me: The same Rest which guil­ty despairing Wretches and Feaver­ish
Souls find in the midst of their Ago­nies, was my Lot all Night long: I could
not, durst not slumber; and, as my Love grew more outragious, my
Ap­prehensions about you were more di­stracting. I cannot be well till I see
you, which, if it be with your usual [[Page
126]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=71) Charming
Gayety, I shall be the most bless'd of Mortals: But if pale Sick­ness sit upon
your Lips, Heavens grant it may also freeze the Blood of

Yours.

[[Page 127]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=71)

# By the same Hand.

IF Distraction be an Argument of Love, I need no other to convince you of my
Passion: All my past Actions have discover'd it, since I had the honour to
know you; tho' not any so sensibly as my Behaviour on Sunday-night: My
Re­flection on it, gives me more pain than I can express, or you imagin [...];
tho' in my Mind those Actions may be forgi­ven, that proceed from Excess of
Love. My Letter will discover the Loss of my Senses, which I never had so much
oc­casion for as now, especially when I presume to write to one of so much
Iudgment as yourself; but you, my dear­est Creature, must look upon the
Infirmi­ties and Distress of a Love-sick Wretch, with the same Candour and
Mildness that Heaven does upon you; and let all my Faults be forgiven by your
tender Heart, that is design'd for nothing but Compas­sion, and all the gentle
Actions of softest Love. Whil'st I am preaching up Pity, [[Page
128]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=72) I must remember
to practise it myself, and not to persecute you with more Words, th [...]n to
tell you, that I love you to Death, and, when I cease to do it, may Heaven
[...]us [...]ly punish my broken Vows, and may I be as mis [...]rable as now I
think myself happy. But as the greatest Passions are discover'd by Silence, so
that must di­rect me to conclude.

Yours.

[[Page 129]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=72)

# By the same Hand.

I Am troubl'd, at the Soul, to find my Dearest Life express herself with so
much Concern: I am sure, till Death makes me cold, I shall never be so to one
whose I entirely am, not so much by Vows as by the sincerest Passion and
Inclination. No, my kind Dear, engaging Creature, sooner than utter one Sigh
which is not for You, I would chuse to be the Con­tempt of Mankind, and an
Abhorrer of my own loath'd Being. Your Person is too charming, your Manner too
winning, your Principles too honourable, ever to let a Heart escape, that you
have once made entirely your own; and, when mine is not so, may it fester in
the Breast of

Yours.

[[Page 130]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=73)

# By the same Hand.

TO express the grateful sense of the Obligation I have to you, can­not be
effectually done, unless I had your Pen. If you observe my Style, you will
have reason to conclude, I have not received your ingenious Letter of
Yesterday, which shou'd have been a Precedent to me, and a Rule to write by; I
assure you I am as well satisfy'd of the R [...]ality of the Contents of it,
as I am of its Ingenuity. Your Sense is clear, like your Actions; and that
Spirit that glows in your Eyes, shines in your Lines. I may venture to say,
that Wri­ting is not the least of your Excellen­cies, and if any thing cou'd
perswade me to stay longer than Friday or Sa­turday here, it wou'd be in
Expectation of a second Letter from you. 'Tis my greatest pleasure to hear you
are well, and to have the happiness of possessing in Thought, what is deny'd
to my Eyes; [[Page
131]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=73) desiring the
Continuance of them for no other end, than to gaze upon my dear Conqueress,
who, after a most enga­ging manner, has the way of kindly killing

Her humble and eternally obliged Servant.

[[Page 132]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=74)

# By the same Hand.

I Hope, my dearest Life, will excuse this Impertinence, tho' I received her
Commands not to write; but when I tell h [...], that the Tumult of my Mind was
so extream, upon the reflection of my late Folly, that I cou'd not rest, till
I had acknowledg'd my Rashness; I hope she'll continue her usual Good­ness of
forgiving one, that cannot for­give himself. When I think of my un­worthiness,
I rave. I have been treated by the dearest and best of Creatures, with all the
Honour and Sincerity ima­ginable, and my Return has been Bru­tality and ill
Manners. 'Tis you alone, Madam, that have sweet engaging Ways peculiar to
yourself, you are easie with­out Levity; Courteous and Affable with­out
Flattery; you have Wit without Ill-nature, and Charms without being vain. I
cannot think of all your Hea­venly Qualifications, without upbraid­ing myself
for making such barbarous [[Page
133]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=74) and unjust
Returns. I cannot think of what I have done, without a Just Ab­horrence; I
loath and detest myself, and must needs own, I ought not to subscribe myself
by any other Title, than,

MADAM,

Your Vngrateful.

[[Page 134]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=75)

## 10\. A Letter of Reproach to a Woman of Quality.

MADAM,

I Am sorry I must change my Style, and tell you I am now fully satisfied that
your Ladiship never will be so; I al­ways fear'd your Desires wou'd exceed
your Returns: But when I heard you were supply'd by three Nations, I thought
you might have been modestly content­ed. And I have even yet good nature
enough to pity your unfortunate Condi­tion, or rather Constitution, that
obli­ges half the Town of necessity to de­cline all sorts of Commerce with
you; I cou'd have wish'd you had had Repu­tation enough left for me to have
justi­fied, tho' you have cruelly robb'd me of the Joy of Loving, without
making yourself any reasonable Advantage of it; had your Soul consulted my
Desti­ny, I should have had fairer play for my Passion, and not have been thus
sacrifi'd to your most Egregious Follies; yet, [[Page
135]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=75) since better
late than never, take, Ma­dam, this time, now the Town is dis­banded, the
Season moderate, and your Ladiship's common Practice prorogued, to consider if
there be any way left you, in some measure, to save the Confusion of yourself,
and that of,

MADAM,

Your real humble Servant.

August the 10th, 95.

[[Page 136]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=76)

## 11\. A Letter of Business to a Merchant's Wife in the City.

MADAM,

I Can forgive you the Difficulty you made of passing an Ev'ning with me; nay,
even the affected Indifference you entertain'd me with, when you might have
imploy'd your time much better; I knew your Character, and guess'd what wou'd
be the end of our first Meeting, but desire it may not be the beginning of the
Second; for the future, prithee, dear Hypocrite, (do not forget yourself) and
so often ingage me to Love tenderly, and yet conjure me to hope for no Return;
but do me the Favour to make a better use of the next Opportunity, lest your
car­ry on too  [...]ar the unnatural Jest, and con­trive to force yourself out
of the Inclinati­ons of,

Madam,

Your real humble Servant.

[[Page 137]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=76)

## 12\. LETTERS, By the late Celebrated Mrs. Katherine Phillips.

### 12.1. The Fam'd Orinda, to the Honour­able Berenice.

YOur Ladiship's last Favour from Col. P—'s was truly obliging, and carried so
much of the same great Soul of yours, which loves to diffuse it self in
Expressions of Friendship to me, that it merits a great deal more
Acknow­ledgment than I am able to pay at my best Condition, and am less now
when my Head akes, and will give me no leave to enlarge, though I have so much
Sub­ject and Reason; but really if my Heart ak'd too, I cou'd be sensible of a
very great Kindness and Condesc [...]ntion in [[Page
138]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=77) thinking me
worthy of your Concern, tho' I visibly perceive most of my Letters have lost
their way to your Ladiship. I beseech you be pleased, first, to believe I have
written every Post; but, secondly, since I came, and then to enquire for them,
that they may be commended into your hands, where alone they can hope for a
favourable residence; I am very much a Sharer by Sympathy, in your Ladiship's
satisfaction in the Converse you had in the Country, and find that to that
inge­nious Company Fortune had been just, there being no Person fitter to
receive all the Admiration of Persons best capable to pay them, than the great
Berenice: I hope your Ladiship will speak me a real Servant of Dr. Wilkins;
and all that Con­verse with you, have enrich'd all this Summer with yours. I
humbly thank your Ladiship for your Promise of Mr. Boyle's Book, which indeed
merits a pub­lick, not View only, but Universal Ap­plause, if my Vote be
considerable in things so much above me. If it be possi­ble, oblige me with
the sight of one of them, which (if your Ladiship com­mand it) shall be very
faithfully return'd you. And now (Madam) why was [[Page
139]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=77) that a cruel
Question, When will you come to Wales? 'Tis cruel to me, I con­fess, that it
is yet in question; but I hum­bly beg your Ladiship to unriddle that part of
your Letter, for I cannot under­stand why you, Madam, who have no Persons
alive to whom your Birth hath submitted you, and have already by your Life
secur'd to yourself the best Opinion the World can give you, should create an
Awe upon your own Actions, from imaginary Inconveniencies: Happiness, I
confess, is twofac'd, and one is Opini­on; but that Opinion is certainly our
own; for it were equally ridiculous and impos­sible to shape our Actions by
others Opini­ons. I have had so much (and some sad) Reason to discuss this
Principle, that I can speak with some Confidence, That none will ever be
happy, who make their Happiness to consi [...]t in, or be govern'd by the
Votes of other Persons. I deny not but the Approbation of wise and good
Per­sons is a very necessary Satisfaction; but to forbear innocent
Contentments, only because it's possible some Fancies may be so capricious as
to dispute, whether I should have taken them, is, in my Belief, neither better
nor worse than to fast al­ways, [[Page
140]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=78) because there
are some so supersti­tious in the World, that will abstain from Meat, upon
some Score or other, upon every day in the Year, that is, some up­on some
days, and others upon others, and some upon all. You know, Madam, there is
nothing so various as Vulgar Opi­nion, nothing so untrue to itself: Who shall
then please, since none can fix it? 'Tis a Heresie (this of submitting to
every blast of popular extravagancy) which I have combated in Persons very
dear to me: Dear Madam, let them not have your Authority for a relapse, when I
had almost committed them; but consider it without a Byass, and give Sentence
as you see cause; and in that interim put me not off (Dear Madam) with those
Chymera's, but tell me plainly what inconvenience is it to come? If it be one
in earnest, I will submit, but otherwise I am so much my own Friend, and my
Friend's Friend, as not to be satisfied with your Ladiship's taking measure of
your Actions by others Opinion, when I know too that the se­verest could find
nothing in this Journey that they could condemn, but your ex­cess of Charity
to me, and that Censure you have already supported with Pati­ence, [[Page
141]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=78) and
(notwithstanding my own consciousness of no ways deserving your sufferance
upon that score) I cannot beg you to recover the Reputation of your Judgment
in that particular, since it must be my Ruine. I should now say very much for
your most obliging Commands to me, to write, and should beg frequent Letters
from your Ladiship with all pos­sible importunity, and should by com­mand from
my Lucasia excuse her last Rudeness (as she calls it) in giving you account of
her Honour for you under her own Hand, but I must beg your pardon now, and
out-believing all, I can say up­on every one of these accounts, for really,
Madam, you cannot tell how to imagine any Person more to any one than I am,

Madam,

Your Ladiship's most faithful Servant, and passionate Friend, ORINDA.

June the 25th, Priory of Car­digan.

[[Page 142]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=79) Lucasta
is most faithfully your Servant: I am very glad of Mr. Cowley's success, and
will concern myself so much as to thank your Ladiship for your endeavour in
it.

[[Page 143]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=79)

### 12.2. To the Honourable Berenice.

Dear MADAM,

I Have been so long silent, that I pro­fess I am now asham'd almost to beg
your Pardon, and were not Confidence in your Ladiship's Goodness a greater
re­spect than the best Address in the World, I should scarce believe myself
capable of remission; but when your Ladiship shall know more fully than Papers
can express, how much and how many ways I have suffered, you will rather
wonder that I write at all, than that I have not written in a Week; when you
shall hear that my Dear Lucasia, by a strange unfortunate Sickness of her
Mother's, hath been kept from me, for three Weeks longer than I expected, and
is not yet come: I have had some difficulty to live, and truly, Madam, so I
have, and more difficulty to be silent to you, but that in earnest my disorder
was too great to write: Dear Madam, pardon and pity me, and, to ex­press
[[Page 144]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=80) that you
do both, be pleased to ha­sten hither, where I shall pour all my Trouble into
your Bosom, and receive thence all that Consolation which I never in my Life
more needed than I now do. You see, Madam, my Presumption, or rather
Distraction to leap from Confes­sions into Petitions, and those for
advan­tages so much above my merit: But what is that, that the dear Great
Berenice can deny her faithful Orinda? And what is it that Orinda would not do
or suffer, to ob­tain that sweet and desired Converse, she now begs of you? I
am confident my Lucasia will suddenly be here to, thank you for your Charity
which you will, by coming, express to me, and the Obligation you will put upon
her by it; both which shall be equally and constantly acknow­ledged (if you
will please to hasten it) by

Your faithfully affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, ORINDA.

Nov. 2 1658.

[[Page 145]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=80)

### 12.3. To the Honourable Berenice.

I Must confess myself extreamly trou­bled, to miss a Letter from your
La­diship in a whole Fortnight, but I must beg you to believe your silence did
not oc­casion mine; for my Ambition to con­verse with you, and advantage in
being allow'd it, is too great for me to decline any opportunity which I can
improve to obtain so much happiness: But really the Box of Gloves and Ribbons
miss'd a conveniency of going, and a Letter that attended them partak'd in the
same misfortune; by this time and some days before it I hope they have reach'd
you, for they were sent away above a Week ago; and if so, all that I can tell
you of my Desires to see your Ladiship will be repetition, for I had with as
much earnestness as I was capable of, begg'd it then, and yet have so much of
the Beggar in me, that I must redouble that Importunity now, and tell you,
That I gasp for you with an Impatience that [[Page
146]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=81) is not to be
imagin'd by any Soul wound up to a less concern in Friendship than yours is,
and therefore I cannot hope to make others sensible of my vast desires to
enjoy you, but I can safely appeal to your own illustrious Heart, where I am
sure of a Court of Equity to relieve me in all the Complaints and
Supplications my Friend­ship can put up: Madam, I am assured you love me, and
that being once grant­ed, 'tis out of dispute, that your Love must have nobler
circumstances than mine, but because the greatness and reality of it must be
always disputed with you, by me there must of necessity remain the
obligingness of your Love to weigh down the Ballance, and give you that
advan­tage over me in friendship, which you un­questionably have in all things
else, and if this reasoning be true, (as sure there are all Sciences in
Friendship, and then Logick cannot be excluded) I have ar­gued myself into
handsom necessity of being eternally on the receiving hand, but let me
qualifie that seeming mean­ness, by assuring you, that even that is the
greatest testimony of my esteem for your Ladiship, that ever I can give; for I
have a natural pride (that I cannot [[Page
147]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=81) much repent of)
which makes me very unwilling to be obliged, and more cu­rious from whom I
receive kindnesses than where I confer them; so that being contented to be
perpetually in your Debt, is the greatest Con [...]ession I can make of the
Empire you have over me, and really that Priviledge is the last which I can
submit to part with all, to be just done in Acts of Friendship, and that I do
not on­ly yield you in all my Life past, but can beg to have it continued by
your doing me the greatest favour that ever I receiv'd from you by restoring
me my dear and honoured Berenice; this, Madam, is but one Action, but, like
the Summ of an Account, it contains the Value of all the rest, and will so
oblige and refresh me, that I cannot express the satisfaction I shall receive
in it; I humbly thank your Ladiship for the assurance you have given me, that
you suddenly intend it, and that you were pleased to be account­able to me for
your stay till Christmas, which being now at hand, I hope you will have
neither Reason, Importunity, nor Inclinations to retard the Happiness you
intend me: Really, Madam, I shall and must expect it in these Holidays, and
[[Page 148]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=82) a
disappointment to me is the greatest of Miseries; and then, Madam, I trust you
will be convinc'd of this necessity there is of your Life and Health, since
Heaven it self appears so much concern'd in it, as to restore it by a Miracle:
And, truly, had you been still in danger, I should have look'd upon that as
more ominous than the Blazing-star, so much discours'd of; but you are one of
those extraordinary Blessings which are the Publick Concernments, and are, I
trust, reserv'd to be yet many Years an Example of Honour and Ornament to
Religion.

Oh, Madam, I have abundance to tell you and ask you, and if you will not
hasten to hear it, you will be almost as cruel as Arsaces; but you will come,
and, if you find any thing in this Letter that seems to question it, impute it
to the continual distrust of my own Merit, which will not permit me easily to
be­lieve my self favoured: Dear Madam, if you think me too timerous, confute
me by the welcome Experiment of your Company, which, really, I perpetually
long for, and again beg, as you love me, and claim as you would have me [[Page
149]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=82) believe it; I
am glad your Ladiship has pitch'd on a place so near me, you shall be
sufficiently persecuted with Orinda. I know you will pardon me, for not
ac­quainting you with the News you heard from other hands, when I tell you,
there is nothing of it true, and the Town is now full of very different
Discourse; but I shall tell you more particularly, when I have the honour to
see you; and, till then, cannot with conveniency do it. I easily believe Dous
factious; but, in those Disputes, I think he discovers more Wit than Wisdom,
and your Ladiship knows they are inseparable; I shall lose the Post, if I do
not now hasten to sub­scribe, what I am always ready to make good, that I am
more than any one li­ving,

Your Ladiship's most Faithful and most Passionate Friend and Servant, ORINDA.

Decemb. 30. 1658.

[[Page 150]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=83)

### 12.4. To the Honourable Berenice.

WIth the greatest Joy and Confusion in the World, I received, Dear Madam, your
Ladiship's most obliging Letter from Kew, and thus far I am recon­  [...]il'd
to my own Omissions, that they have produc'd a Shame which serves me now to
allay a Transport, which had otherwise been excessive at the knowledge that I
am to receive, that notwithstanding all my Failings, you can look upon me with
so generous a Concern: I could make many Apologies for myself, and with truth
tell you, That I have ventured Papers to kiss your Ladiship's Hand, since I
receiv'd one from it, but really, Madam, I had rather owe my restitution
wholly to your Boun­ty, than seem to have any pretence to it myself, and I
will therefore allow myself utterly unworthy of having any room in your
Thoughts, in that I have not perpe­tually begg'd it of you, with that
Assidui­ty as is suitable to so great and so valu'd a Blessing; and I know
that tho' a Sea have [[Page
151]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=83) divided our
Persons, and many other Ac­cidents made your Ladiship's Residence uncertain to
me, yet I ought to have been restless in my Enquiries how to make my
approaches to you; and all the Varieties and Wandrings and Troubles that I
have undergone since I had the honour to see your Ladiship, ought not to have
distract­ed me one moment from the payment of that Devotion to you, which
[...] if you please, I will swear never to have been one jot lessen'd in my
Heart, as ill and as seldom as I have express'd it; but now, that my good
Fortune has brought me once mor [...] so near your Ladiship, I hope to redeem
my Time, by so constant and fervent Addres­ses to you, as shall both witne
[...]s how unal­terably I have ever lov'd and honour'd you, and how extreamly
glad I am still to be preserved in so noble and so priz'd a Heart as yours;
and, that I may the soo­ner be secur'd of that and restor'd to your Converse,
I must beg your Ladiship to find some occasion that may bring you to London,
where I may cast mysel [...] at your Feet, both in repentance of my own
Faults, and acknowledgment of your Goodness, and assure you that neither
Lucasia, nor a­ny other Person, ever had the Will, the [[Page
152]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=84) Power, or the
Confidence to hinder the Justice of my most affectionate Service to your
Ladiship, and though you fright me with telling me how much you have
con­sidered me of late, yet I will venture upon all the Severity that
Reflection can pro­duce; and if it be as great as I may rea­sonably fear, yet
I will submit to it for the Expiation of my Failings, and think my­self
sufficiently happy if after any Pen­nance you will once more receive me into
your Friendship, and allow me to be that same Orinda, whom with so much
good­ness you were once pleased to own as most faithfully yours, and who have
ever been, and ever will be so; and, Dear dear Madam,

Your Ladiship's most affectionate humble Servant and Friend, K. Phillips.

This was wrote but a Month before Orinda died.

[[Page 153]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=84)

### 12.5. To Mr. Herbert.

I Receiv'd your two Letters against Hy­pocrisie and Love, but I must tell you,
they have made me no Convert from, Women, and their Favourite; for who like
Simonides, wou'd give nine scandalous Origins to Womankind, for one good one,
meerly because the Follies and Vices of that Sex deserve it, and yet hope ever
to make your account of them? or who, with Petronius Arbiter, would tell the
Lawyers,

Quid faciunt Leges ubi sola pecunia regnat?

Aut ubi paupertas vincere nulla potest,

Ipsi qui Cynica traducunt tempora cena,

Nonnunquam Nummis vendere verba so­lent,

Ergo judicium, nihil est nisi publica Merces

At (que) eques in causa qui sedet empta probat.

Thus English'd by Mr. Barnaby.

Laws bear the Name, but Money has the Power;

The Cause is bad when e'er the Client's Poor:

[[Page 154]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=85)Those
strict-liv'd Men that seem above our World,

Are oft too modest to resist our Gold.

So Iudgment, like our other Wares, is sold,

And the Grave Knight that nods upon the Laws,

Wak'd by a Fee, Hems, and approves the Cause.

That the Bar is but a Market for the Sale of Right, and that the Judge sits
there only to confirm what the Bribe had se­cur'd before, and yet hope ever to
escape when you come into their Hands? Or what Man that has his Interest
before his Eyes wou'd tell this dangerous Truth, That Priests of all Religions
are the same?

No, no, Plain-dealing must be left to Manly, and confin'd to the Theatre, and
permit Hypocrisie and Nonsence to prevail with those pretty Amusements, Women,
that like their own Pleasure too well, to be fond of Sincerity. You declaim
against Love on the usual Topicks, and have scarce any thing new to be
answer'd by me, their profess'd Advocate, if by Re­pentance you mean the Pain
that accom­panies Love; all other Pleasures are mixt [[Page
155]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=85) with that, as
well as Love, as Cicero ob­serves in his second Book de Oratore, Om­nibus
rebus, voluptatibus maximis fastidium finitimum est: In all things where the
greatest Pleasures are found, there borders a sa­tiety and uneasie pain: And
Catullus, Non est dea nescia nostri, quae dulcem curis miscet amaritiem: Nor
am I unknown to that bright Goddess, who with my Cares min­gles a sweet
pleasing Bitter. But I take this pain in Love to proceed from the
imper­fection of our Union with the Object be­lov'd, for the Mind forms a
thousand en­trancing Idea's, but the Body is not ca­pable of coming up to that
satisfaction the Mind proposes; but this Pain is in all o­ther Pleasures that
we have, none of which afford that fulness of Pleasure, as Love, which bears
some proportion to the vehemence of our Desires: Speak therefore no more
against Love, as you hope to die in the Arms of Sylvia, or not perish
wretchedly in the Death of a Pumpkin. I am

Your Friend, &c.

[[Page 156]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=86)

## 13\. LETTERS

BY Mr. Tho. Brown.

### 13.1. To C. G. Esq in Covent-Gar­den.

MAy I be forced to turned News-monger for a wretched Sub­sistence [...] and
beat up fifty Coffee-houses every Morning, to gather Scraps of In­telligence,
and fatherless Scandal; or, (to Curse my self more emphatically) may I live
the restless Life of some gay younger Brother's starving Footman of the
Temple, who, between his Master's Debts and Fornication, visits once a Day
half the Shopkeepers in Fleet-street, and half the Whores in Drury-lane, if I
am [[Page 157]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=86) not
as utterly weary of hunting after you any longer, as ever Statesman was of
serving the Publick, when the Pub­lick forgot to bribe his private Interest.
Shou'd I but set down how many tire­some Leagues I have travell'd, how of­ten
I have shot all the City-gates, cross'd Lincolns-inn Fields, pass'd the two
Tro­picks of the Old and New Exchange, and doubled the Cape of Covent-garden
Church to see you, I shou'd grow more voluminous than Coryat; and you'd fan­cy
yourself, without doubt, engaged in Purchase's or Hackluyt's Itineraries. As
you are a Person of half Business and half Pleasure, (which the Wise say, is
the best Composition in the World) I have con­sider'd you in your two
Capacities, and order'd my Visits accordingly. Some­times I call'd upon you
betimes in a Morning, when nothing was to be met in the Streets, but grave
Tradesmen, stalking in their Slippers to the next Cof­fee-house; Midnight-
drunkards, reeling home from the Rose; industrious Har­lots, who had been
earning a Penny over Night, tripping it on foot to their Lodgings; Ragmen,
picking up Mate­rials for Grubstreet; in short, nothing [[Page
158]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=87) but Bailiffs,
Chimney-sweepers, Cin­derwomen, and other People of the same early
Occupations, and yet, as my ill Stars contriv'd it, you were still gone out
before me. At other times I have call'd at Four in Afternoon, the Sober Hour,
when other discreet Gentlemen were but newly up, and dressing to go to the
Play; but to as little purpose as in the Morning. Then, towards the Evening, I
have a hundred times examin'd the Pit and Boxes, the Chocolate-houses, the
Taverns, and all places of publick resort, except a Church, (and there, I
confess, I cou'd no more expect to meet you, than a right Beau of the last
Paris Edition in the Bear-garden) but still I failed of you eve­ry where, tho'
sometimes you 'scaped me as narrowly as a Quibble does some mer­ry Statesmen I
cou'd name to you. Is it not strange, thought I to my self, that every paltry
Astrologer about the Town, by the help of a foolish Telescope, shou'd be able
to have the Seven Planets at a Minute's warning, nay, and their very
Attendants, their Satellites too, tho' some of them are so many hundred
thousand Miles distant from us, to know precise­ly when they go to Bed, and
what Ram­bles [[Page
159]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=87) they take, and
yet that I with all my pains and application shou'd never take you in any of
your Orbits, who are so considerably nearer to me? But, for my part, I believe
a Man may sooner find out a true Key to the Revelations, than discover your
By-haunts, and solve every Problem in Euclid much easier than yourself. With
all Reverence be it said, Your Ways are as hard to be tra­ced as those of
Heaven; and the Dean of P—, who in his late History of Pro­vidence has
explain'd all the several Phoe­nomena's of it, but his own Conversions, is the
fittest Person I know of in the World to account for your Eclipses. Some of
your and my good Friends, (whom I need not mention to you) have cross'd the
German Ocean, made the Tour of the Low-Countries, seen the Elector of Bavaria
and Prince Vaudemont, and might, if they pleas'd, have got drunk with a dozen
of German Princes, in half the time. I have been beating the Hoof up and down
London, to find out you; — so that at last, after a World of mortifying
Disappointments, taking a Martial in my hands, I happen'd to light upon an
Epi­gram of his, address'd to Decianus, a very [[Page
160]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=88) honest
Gentleman it seems, but one that was as hard to be met with as yourself: And
this Epigram, suiting my own case exactly, I here send you a Paraphrase or
Imitation of it, call it which you please.

Ne valeam, si non totis Deciane Diebus.

Lib. 2. Ep. 2.

In some vile Hamlet let me live forgot,

Small-beer my Portion, and no Wine my lot.

To some worse Iilt in Church-Indentures bound,

Than ancient Job, or modern Sh— found,

And with more Aches visited, and Ills,

Than fill up Salmon's Works or Tilburgh's Bills:

If 'tis not still the Burden of my Prayer,

The Day with you, with you the Night to share.

But, Sir, (and the Complaint, you know, is tr [...]e)

Two damn'd long Miles there lye 'twixt me and you:

And these two Miles, with little Calcula­tion,

Make four, by that I've reach'd my Habita­tion.

[[Page 161]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=88)You near
Sage Will's, the Land of Mirth and Claret,

I live, stow'd up in a White-chappel Gar­ret;

Oft, when I've come so far your Hands to kiss,

Flatter'd with Thoughts of the succe [...]ding Bliss,

I'm told, you're gone to the Vexatious Hall,

Where, with eternal Lungs, the Lawyers bawl,

Or else stole out, a Female Friend to see;

Or, what's as bad, you're not at Home for me.

Two Miles I've at your Service; and that's civil,

But to trudge four, and miss you, is the De­vil.

And now, if you are not incurably lost to all sence of Humanity, send me word
where it is you pass your Evenings, or in one of your beloved Catullus's
Expres­sions,

Demonstres ubi sunt tuae tenebrae.

But if you think that too hard upon you, for I wou'd not be thought to invade
your Privacies, appoint some common [[Page
162]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=89) meeting-place,
the Grffin, or the Dog, where, with two or three more select Friends, we may
pass a few Hours over a Righteous Bottle of Claret. As you ever hope that
Heaven will be merciful, or Sylvia true to you, let this happy Night be some
time this Week.

I am your most obliged Servant, T. BROWN.

London, June 20. 1695.

[[Page 163]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=89)

### 13.2. To the Perju [...]'d Mrs. —

THis Morning I receiv'd the News, (which, knowing you to be a Woman, I
confess, did not much startle me) that is, spight of all your Promises, your
Vows, and Obligations, nay, and in spight of your Interest too, (which you
Women so seldom sin against) you had sacrificed my worthy Friend Mr. —, and
are to be married next Week to that nauseous, that insup­portable, that
everlasting Beast —. Upon which I immediately repair'd to my Friend's
Lodgings, and, because I knew but too well how nearly he had taken you into
his Heart, I carried him to that blessed Sanctuary of dis [...]ppointed
Lovers, a Tavern, the better to pre­pare him for the News of your Infideli­ty;
I plied him warmly with the Juice of the generous Grape, and entertain'd him
all the whi [...] with the most horrible Stories of your Sex, that my Malice
cou'd suggest to me, which, Heaven be [[Page
164]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=90) prais'd, was
fruitful enough upon this occasion; for I don't believe I forgot one single
Instance of Female Treache­ry, from Mother Eve, of wheed­ling Memory, down to
your virtuous self. At last, when Matters were ripe, I disclosed the unwelcome
Secret to him —. He raved and wept, and, after some interval, wept and raved
again; but, thanks to my pious Advice, and the kind Influence of t'other
Bottle, it was not long before the Paroxysm was over. I cou'd almost wish you
had been by, to see how heroically he threw off your Chains; with what
Alacrity he tore you from his Bosom; and, in fine, with what a Christian Self-
denial he renounc'd you; more heartily, I dare swear, than his Godfather
abjur'd the Devil for him at his Baptism.

And now, Madam, tho' I confess you have prevented my Curses, by your choice of
such a Coxcomb, and 'tis not good Manners to solicite a Judgment from Heaven
on every such Accident at this, (for Providence wou'd have a fine time on't,
to be at the expence of a Thunder­bolt, for every Woman that forswears [[Page
165]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=90) herself) yet so
much do I resent the ill usage of my Friend, that I cannot for­bear to give
you this conviction, how earnestly I can pray, when I set my self to't.
Therefore give me leave, Madam, to throw these hearty Ejaculations at your
Head, now, since I shall not have the honour to throw a Stocking at you on the
fatal Night of Consummation.

May the Brute, your Husband, be as Jealous of you, as Usurpers are of their
new Subjects, and, to shew his good opinion of your Judgment as well as your
Virtue, may he suspect you of a Commerce with nothing of God's ma­king;
nothing like a Gentleman that may serve to excuse the Sin, but lowsie Bush-
begotten Vagabonds, and hideous Rogues in Rags and Tatters, or Mon­sters that
stole into the World, when Nature was asl [...]ep, with Ulcers all over them,
and Bunches on their Backs as large as Hillocks. May you never actu­ally
Cuckold him, (for that were to wish you some Pleasure, which, God knows, I am
far from being guilty of) but what will serve to torment him as effectually:
May the Wretch imagine, you've injur'd [[Page
166]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=91) him that way;
under which preposses­sion may he never open his Mouth, but to Curse, nor lift
up his Hands, but to Cha­stise you. May that execrable Day be for ever
banished out of the Almanack, in which he does not use his best endeavours to
beat one into your Bones; and may you never go to Bed without an appre­hension
that he'll cut your Throat: May he too have the same distrust of you. Thus may
your Nights be spent in Eter­nal Quarrels, and your Nuptial-sheets boast of no
honourable Blood but what's owing to these Nocturnal Skirmishes. May he lock
you up from the sight of all Mankind, and leave you nothing but your ill
Conscience to keep you company, till at last, between his penurious allow­ance
and the sense of your own guilt, you make so terrible a Figure, that the worst
Witch in Mackbeth wou'd seem an An­gel to you. May not  [...]ven this dismal
Solitude protect you from his Suspicions, but may some good-natured Devil
whi­sp [...]r into his Ear, That you have com­mitted Wickedness with a
Bedstaff, and, in one of his frantick Fits, may he beat out your Brains with
that supposed In­strument of your Lust. May your Hi­story [[Page
167]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=91) be transmitted
to all Ages in the Annals of Grubstreet, and, as they fright Children with
Raw-head and Bloody-bones, may your Name be quoted to deter Peo­ple from
committing of Matrimony. And, to ratifie all this, (upon my Knees, I most
devoutly beg it) may Heaven hear the Prayers of,

T. BROWN.

[[Page 168]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=92)

### 13.3. To the Honourable— in the Pall­mall.

SIR,

LAst Night I had the following Ver­ses, which, for my part, I confess, I never
saw before, given me by a Gentle­man, who assur'd me they were written by my
late Lord Rochester; and, know­ing what a just Value you have for all the
Compositions of that incomparable Person, I was resolv'd to send 'em to you by
the first opportunity. 'Tis indeed very strange how they could be continued in
private hands all this while, since the great care that has been taken to
print every Line of his Lordship's Writing that would en­dure a publick view:
But I am not able to assign the Reason for it. All that you need know
concerning the oc­casion of them, is, that they were writ­  [...]en in a
Lady's Prayer-book.

[[Page 169]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=92)

Fling this useless Book away,

And presume no more to pray;

Heav'n is just, and can bestow

Mercy on none but those that mercy show.

With a proud Heart, maliciously inclin'd,

Not to encrease, but to subdue Mankind.

In vain you vex the Gods with your Pe­tition;

Without Repentance and sincere Contri­tion,

You'r in a Reprobate Condition.

Phillis, to calm the angry Powers,

And save my Soul as well as yours,

Relieve poor Mortals from Despair,

And Iustifie the Gods that made you fair;

And in those bright and charming Eyes

Let Pity first appear, then Love;

That we by easie steps may rise

Through all the Ioys on Earth, to those Above.

I cannot swear to their being genu­ine; however, there's something so
deli­cate in the Thought, so easie and beauti­ful in the Expression, that I am
without much difficulty to be perswaded, that they belong to my Lord. Besides,
I can­not imagine with what prospect any Gen­tleman [[Page
170]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=93) should disown a
Copy of Verses which might have done him no ill Service with the Ladies, to
father them upon his Lordship, whose Reputation was so well establish'd among
them beforehand, by a numerous and lawful Issue of his own begetting. The Song
that comes along with them was written by Mr. Gl—of Lincoln's-Inn; and, I
believe, you'll ap­plaud my Judgment, for seeking to en­tertain you out of my
Friend's Store, who understands the Harmony of an English Ode so well, since I
have nothing of mine own that deserves transcribing.

I.

Phillis has a gentle Heart,

Willing to the Lover's Courting;

Wanton Nature, all the Art,

To direct her in her Sporting:

In th' Embrace, the Look, the Kiss,

All is real Inclination;

No false Raptures in the Bliss;

No feign'd Sighings in the Passion.

II.

But, oh! who the Charms can speak,

Who the thousand ways of toying,

When she does the Lover make

All a God in her enjoying?

[[Page 171]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=93)Who the
Limbs that round him move,

And constrain him to the Blisses?

Who the Eyes that Swim in Love,

Or the Lips that suck in Kisses?

III.

Oh the Freaks, when mad she grows,

Raves all wild with the possessing!

Oh the silent Trance! which shows

The Delight above expressing.

Every way she does engage,

Idly talking, speechless lying:

She transports me with the Rage,

And she kills me in her Dying.

I could not but laugh at one Passage in your Letter, where you tell me, That
you, and half a dozen more, had like to have been talk'd to death t'other day,
by— upon the Success of his late Play. For my part, I don't pity you at all;
for why, the Devil should a Man run his Head a­gainst a Brick-wall, whe [...]
he may avoid it? On the other hand, I wonder why you Gentlemen of Will's
Coffee-house, who pretend to study Pleasure above o­ther People, should not as
naturally scam­per out of the Room when your Persecu­t [...]r appears, as
Monsieur Misson tells us, [[Page
172]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=94) the Dogs in
Italy ran out of Church as soon as ever they see a Capuchin mount the Pulpit.
I find by you, that the abovementi­on'd everlasting Babillard plagued you with
his Songs, and talked of outdoing Don Quixot of Melodious Memory; so far I
a­gree with him, that if he has any Genious, it lies wholly in Sonnet. But
(Heaven be prais'd) notwithstanding all the feeble Ef­forts of his Enemies to
depose him, Mr. D'Vrfey still continues the only Legal, Rightful and Undoubted
King of Lyric­land, whom God grant long to Reign over all his Hamlets, and may
no Gallic At­tempts against his Crown or Person ever prosper. So wishes

Your most obliged Servant, T. BROWN.

[[Page 173]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=94)

### 13.4. To My Lady—

I Found a Letter of your Ladiship's own Hand left for me last Night at my
Lodgings. This Morning a Porter visited me with another of the sort, and just
now going to dine with some Friends at the Blew-posts, you send me a third to
refresh my Memory. I vow to God, Ma­dam, if you continue to draw your Bills so
[...]ast upon me, I must be forc'd to pro­test them in my own defence, or fly
my Country. But, with submission, methinks the Language of all three was very
sur­prizing: You complain of my absence, and coldness, and the Lord knows
what, tho' 'tis but four days ago since I gave you the best convictions of my
Love I cou'd, and you flatter'd me strangely, if you were not satisfied with
them: May I be as unacceptable to all Womankind as an old Eunuch with Io.
Haynes's Voice, if there's a Person in the Universe whom I adore above
yourself; but the devoutest Lover upon Earth may sometimes be [[Page
174]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=95) without an
Offering, and then certainly he's excused by all Love's Cannon-Law in the
World, for not coming to the Al­tar. There are People I know that love to hear
the rattling of the Boxes, and show themselves at the Groom-Porter's, when
they have not a Farthing in their Pockets; but for my part, I cou'd never
endure to be an idle Looker on. I have a thousand Obligations to your
Ladiship, and till I am in a capacity to repay them, shou'd be as uneasy to
see you, as any o­ther Creditor when I have no Money to send him going. I am
so very honest in my own nature, that I wou'd not put you off with half
Payments, and if I were not, your Ladiship is so discerning, that I might much
easier palm clipt Mony upon a Jew, than succeed in such a trick with so nice a
Judge. Perhaps, Ma­dam, you are scrupulous in this mat­ter even to a Fault.
'Tis not enough for you, that your Mony is Parlia­mentary, and that other
People wou'd be glad on't, for if it is not of the largest size, or wants one
grain of its due weight, you reject it with indignation. But, what is the
hardest case of all, (and you must pardon me, Madam, if I take this [[Page
175]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=95) occasion to
reproach you with it) you are for engrossing a Man's whole Cash to your self,
and, by your good will, wou'd not leave him one solitary Testar to distribute
among the Needy else­where, tho' you don't know what Objects of Charity he may
meet abroad. This, in truth, is very severe usage: 'Tis the same as if the
Government shou'd only take care to pay off the Soldiers in Flan­ders, and
suffer the poor Seamen to starve. Even the Royal-Oak Lottery, who are fit to
be imitated by you in this particular, never strip a Man intirely of all, but
let him march off decently with a Crown or two to carry him home. If this
Example won't work upon you, pray learn a piece of Tartarian-m [...]rcy; they
are none of the best bred People in the World, I confess, but are so civil
when they come to a place, not to Eat out the Heart of the Soil, but, having
serv'd a pre­sent turn, shift their Quarters, and forbear to make a second
Visit till the Grass is grown up again. Nay, a Nonconformist Parson, who is a
kind of a rambling Church Tartar, but of the worser sort, after he has grazed
a beloved Text as bare as the back of one's Hand, is glad [[Page
176]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=96) for his own
convenience, to remove to another. Both these Instances, you'll say, look as
if I advised you to supply my defect in another place; I leave that to your
own discretion, but really your humble Servant's present Exigences are such,
that he must be forced to shut up his Exchequer for some time.

I have a hundred times wished, That those unnatural Rogues, the Writers of
Romances, had been all hanged, (Mon­tague before me did the same for the
Sta­tuaries) for giving you, Ladies, such wrong Notions of things. By
represent­ing their Heroes so much beyond Nature, they put such extravagant
Idea's into your Heads, that every Woman, unless she has a very despicable
Opinion of her own Charms, which not one in a Mil­lion has, expects to find a
Benefit-Ticket, a Pharamond, or an Oroondates, to come up for her share, and
nothing below such a Monster will content her. You think the Men cou'd do
infinitely more, if they pleased; and, as 'tis a foolish Notion of the
Indians, that the Apes wou'd speak, if it were not for fear of being made
Slaves to the Spaniards; so you, forsooth, ima­gine, [[Page
177]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=96) that we, for
some such reason, are afraid of going to the full length of our Abilities. We
cannot be so much de­ceived in our hopes of your Constancy, as you are
disappointed in our Perfor­mances; so that 'twere happy for the World, I
think, if Heaven wou'd either give us the Vigour of those Brawny long­liv'd
Fellows, our Ancestors, or else a­bridge the Desires of the Women: But, Madam,
don't believe a word, that those Romance Writers, or their Brethren in
Iniquity, the Poets tell you. The latter prate much of one Hercules, a Plague
take him, that run the Gantlet through fifty Virgin-sisters in one Night. 'Tis
an impudent Fiction, Madam. The Devil of a Hercules, that there ever was upon
the Face of the Earth, (let me beg of you therefore, not to set him up for a
Knight of the Shire, to represent the rest) or, if part of his History is
true, he was a downright Madman, and prosper'd ac­cordingly; for you know he
died raving and impenitent upon a Mountain. Both he and his whole Family have
been extinct these two thousand Years and upwards. Some Memoirs tell us, That
the Country rose upon them, and dispatch'd them all [[Page
178]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=97) in a Night, as
the Glencow-men were served in Scotland. I wont justifie the truth of this;
but, after you have tried the whole Race of us, one after another, if you find
one Man that pretends to be related to this Hercules, tho' at the di­stance of
a Welch Genealogy, let me die the Death of the Wicked.

Therefore, Madam, take my Advice, and I'll engage you shall be no loser by it.
If your Necessities are so pressing, that you can't stay, you must e'n borrow
of a Neighbour; since Cheapside fails you, a God's Name, try your Fortune in
Lom­bard-street. But if you cou'd order Mat­ters otherwise, and allow me a
Week or so longer, to make up my Sum, you shoul'd then be repaid with
Interest, by

LYSANDER.

[[Page 179]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=97)

### 13.5. A Consolatory Letter to an Essex-Divine upon the Death of his Wife.

OLD FRIEND,

A Gentleman, that lives in your Neighbourhood, told me this Morning, after we
had had some short Discourse about you, that you have buri­ed your Wife. You
and I, Doctor, knew one another, I think, pretty well at the College; but
being absolutely a stranger to your Wife's Person and Character, the Old
Gentleman in Black take me, if I know how to behave my self upon this
occasion; that is to say, whether to be Sad or Merry; whether to Condole, or
Congratulate you. But, since I must do one or t'other, I think it best to go o
[...] the surer side; And so, Doctor, I give you Joy of your late great
Deliverance. You'll ask me, perhaps, why I chose this Par­ty? To which I shall
only reply, That your Wife was a Woman, and 'tis an hundred to one that I have
hit on the [[Page
180]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=98) right. But if
this won't suffice, I have Argument to make use of, that you can no more
answer, than you can consute Bellarmine. I don't mean the Popish Car­dinal of
that Name, (for, I believe, you have oftner laid him upon his Back, than Mrs.
Mary, deceased) but an ungodly Vessel holding about six Gallons, which, in
some Parts of England, goes by ano­ther Name (the more's the pity 'tis
suf­fer'd) and is call'd, a Ieroboam. — And thus I urge it. — Mrs. Mary,
de­funct, was either a very good, or a ve­ry bad, or an indifferent, a between
Hawk and Buzzard Wife; tho' you know the Primitive Christians, for the four
first Ages of the Church, were all of Opinion, that there were no indiffe­rent
Wives [...] however, disputandi gratia, I allow them here. Now, if she was a
good Wife, she's certainly gone to a  [...]etter place; and then St. Ierome,
and St. Austin, and St. Ambrose, and St. Ba­sil, and, in short, a whole Cart-
load of Greek and Latin Fathers (whom 'tis not your Interest, by any means, to
disoblige) say positively, That you ought not to grieve. If she was a bad one,
your Rea­son will suggest the same to you, with­out [[Page
181]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=98) going to
Councils and Schoolmen. So now it only remains upon my hands to prove, that
you ought not to be concern'd for her Death, if she was an indifferent Wife;
and Publick Authority having not thought fit as yet, to oblige us to mourn for
Wives of that denomination, it follows, by the Doctrin of the Church of
England, about things indifferent, that you had better let it alone, for fear
of giving Scandal to weak Brethren.

Therefore, Doctor, if you'll take my Advice, in the first place, Pluck up a
good Heart; secondly, Smoak your Pipe, as you used to do; thirdly, Read
mode­rately; fourthly, Drink plentifully; fifthly and lastly, When you are
distri­buting Spoon-meat to the People next Sunday from your Pulpit, cast me a
Hawk's Eye round your Congregation, and, if you can, spy out a Farmer's
Daugh­ter plump and juicy, one that's likely to be a good Breeder, and whose
Father is of some Authority in the Parish, (be­cause that may be necessary for
the Sup­port of Holy Church) say no more, but pelt her with Letters, Hymns and
Spiri­tual Sonnets, till you have gain'd your [[Page
182]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=99) Carnal Poi
[...]t of her. Follow this Coun­sel, and I'll engage your late Wife will rise
no more in your Stomach; for, by the unerring Rules of Kitchin-Physick, which,
I am apt to think, is the best in all cases, one Shoulder of Mutton serves
best to drive down another. I am

Yours, T. BROWN.

[[Page 183]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=99)

### 13.6. To the fair Lucinda, at Epsom.

MADAM,

I Wish I were a Parliament-man for your sake. Another now wou'd have wish'd to
have been the Great Mogul, the Grand Seignior, or at least some Soveraign
Prince, but you see I am no ambitious Person, any farther than I aspire to be
in your good Graces. Now, if you ask me the Reason, why I wish to be so; 'tis
nei­ther to bellow my self into a good Place at Court, nor to avoid paying my
Debts; 'tis to do a Publick Service to my Coun­try, 'tis to put the fam'd
Magna Charta in sorce: In short, Madam, 'tis to get a Bill pass, whereby every
pretty Woman in the Kingdom, (and then I am sure you'll be included in it)
shou'd under the severest Penalties imaginable, be prohi­bited to appear in
publick wi [...]out her Mask on. I have often wonder'd, why our Senators
flatter us with being a free People, and pretend they have done such mighty
things to secure our Liberty, when [[Page
184]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=100) we are openly
plunder'd of it by the La­dies, and that in the Face of the Sun, and on His
Majesty's Highway. I am a sad Instance, Madam, of this Truth. I that, but
twelve Hours ago, was a free as the wildest Savage in either Indies, that
Slept easily, Talk'd cheerfully, took my Bottle merrily, and had nothing to
rob me of one Minute's Pleasure, now love to be alone, make Answers when no
Body speaks to me; Sigh when I least think on't; and, tho' I still drag this
hea­vy lifeless Carcase about me, can give no more account of my own
Movements, than of what the two Armies are doing this very moment in Flanders.
By all these wicked Symptoms, I terribly su­spect I am in Love. If that is my
case, and Lucinda does not prove as Merciful as she is Charming, the Lord have
Mer­cy on poor

MIRTILLO.

[[Page 185]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=100)

### 13.7. To the same at London.

MADAM,

AT last, but after a tedious Enquiry, I have found out your Lodgings in Town,
and am pleas'd to hear you're kept by — who, according to our last Advices
from Lombard-street, is Rich and Old, two as good Qualities as a Man cou'd
desire in a Rival: May the whole World (I heartily wish it) consent to pay
Tribute to all your Conveniences, nay, to your Luxury; while I, and none but
I, have the honour to administer to your Love. Don't tell me your Obliga­tions
to him won't give you leave to be complaisant to a Stranger. You are his
Sovereign, and 'tis a standing Rule a­mong us Casuists, that under that
capa­city you can do him no wrong. But you imagine he loves you, because he
presents you with so many fine Things: After this rate, the most impotent
Wretches wou'd be the greatest Lovers;  [...]or none are found to bribe Heaven
or [[Page 186]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=101)
Women so high, as those that have the most defects to attone for. You may take
it for granted, that half the Keep­ing-Drones about the Town, do it ra­ther to
follow the Mod [...], or to please a vain H [...]our, than out of Love to the
Party they pretend to admire so, and this foolish A [...]fectation attends
them in other things. I  [...]'d tell you of a cer­tain Lord, that keeps a
Chaplain in his House, and allows him plentifully, yet this Noble Peer is a
rank Atheist in his Heart, and believes nothing of the mat­ter: I know
another, that has a fine Stable of Horses; and a third, that va­lu [...]s hims
[...]lf upon his great Library, yet one of  [...] ou [...] but once in half a
Year, and t'other never looked on a Book in all his Life. Admit your City-
Friend l [...]ved you never so well, yet he's old, which is an incurable
Fault, and looking upon you as his Purchase, comes with a Secure, that is with
a sickly Ap­petite; while a vigorous Lover, such as I am, that has honourable
Difficulties to pass through, that knows he's upon his good B [...]haviour,
and has nothing but his Merits to recommend him, is nothing but Rapture, and
Extasie, and Devotion. [[Page
187]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=101) But oh, you a
[...]e afraid it will come to Old Limberham's Ears; that is to say, You
apprehend I shall make Discoveries; for 'tis not to be supposed you'll turn
Evi­dence against yourself. Prithee, Child, don't let that frighten you. Not a
bribed Parliament-man, nor a drubb'd Beau, nor a breaking Tradesman; n [...]y,
to give you the last satisfaction of my Secresie, not a Parson that has
committed Simony, nor a forraging Autho [...] that has got a private Stealing-
place, shall be half so secret, as you'll find me upon this occasion. I'll
always come the back-way to your Lodg­ings, and that in the Evening, with as
much prudent religious Caution, as a Ci­ty Clergyman steals into a Tavern on
Sundays; and tho' it be a difficult Lesson for Flesh and Blood to practise,
yet, to convince you, Madam, how much I va­lue your Reputation, above my own
Plea­sure, I'll leave you a Mornings before Scandal it self is up; that is,
before any of the censorious Neighbourhood are stir­ring. If I see you in the
Street, or at the Play-house, I'll know you no more, than two Sharpers, that
design to bob a Country-fellow with a dropp'd Guinea, know one another when
they meet in the [[Page
188]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=102) Tavern. I'll
not discover my Engage­ments with you by any Overt-acts of my Loyalty, such as
Drinking your Health in all Companies, and Writing your Name in every Glass-
window, nor yet betray you by too superstitious a Care to conceal the
Intrigue.

Thus, Madam, I have answered all the Scruples that I thought cou'd affect you
upon this Matter. But, to satisfie your Conscience farther, I am resolved to
visit you to Morrow-night; therefore muster up all the Objections you can, and
place them in the most formidable po­sture, that I may have the Honour to
at­tack and defeat them. If you don't wil­fully oppose your own Happiness,
I'll convince you, before we part, that there's a greater Difference than you
imagine, between your Man of Phlegm, and such a Lover as,

MIRTILLO.

[[Page 189]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=102)

### 13.8. To W. Knight, Esq at Ruscomb in Berkshire.

Dear SIR,

YOu desir'd me, when I saw you last, to send you the News of the Town, and to
let you see how punctually I have obey'd your Orders, scarce a Day has pass'd
over my Head since, but I have been enquiring after the freshest Ghosts and
Apparitions for you, Rapes of the newest date, dexterous Murders, and
fantastical Marriages, Country Steeples demolish'd by Lightning, Whales
strand­ed in the North, &c. a large Account of all which you may expect when
they come in my way, but at present be pleas'd to take up with the following
News.

On Tuesday last, that walking piece of English Mummy, that Sybil incarnate, I
mean my Lady Courtall, who has not had one Tooth in her Head, since King
Charles's Restauration, and looks old e­nough to pass for Venerable Bede's
Grand­mother, was Married — Cou'd you be­lieve [[Page
190]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=103) it?—To young
Lisanio. You must know I did myself th [...] Honour now and then to make her
Ladiship a Visit, and found that of late she affected a youthful Air, and
spruc'd up her Carcase most egre­giously; but, the Duce take me, if I
su­spected her of any lewd Inclinations to Marry; I thought that Devil had
been laid in her long ago. To make my Vi­sits more acceptable, I us'd to
compliment her upon her Charms and all that [...] where by the by, my dear
Friend, you may take it for a general Rule, that the Uglier your Women are,
and the Duller your Men, they are the easier to be flat­ter'd into a belief of
their Beauty and Wit. I told her, she was resolv'd to act Sampson's part, and
Kill more People in the last Scene of her Life, than other La­dies cou'd
pretend to do in the whole five Acts of theirs. By a certain awkard Joy, that
display'd itself all over her Counte­nance, and glowed even through her Cheeks
of Buff, I cou'd perceive this nau­seous Incense was not unwelcome to her.
'Tis true, she had the Grace to deny all this; and told me, I rallied her, but
de­dy'd it so, as intriguing Sparks deny they have lain with fine Women, and
some [[Page 191]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=103)
Wou'd-be Poets deny their writing of Fa­therless Lampoons, when they have a
mind at the same time to be thought they did what they coldly disown. I cou'd
not but observe upon this, and several o­ther occasions, how merciful Heaven
has been to us, in weaving Self-love so closely into our Natures, in order to
make Life palatable. 'The Divines indeed arraign it as a Sin; that is, they
wou'd make us more miserable than Providence ever de­sign'd us, though were it
not for this very Sin, not one of them in a hundred wou'd have Courage enough
to talk in publick. For my part, I always consider'd it as the best Friend,
and greatest blessing we have, without which, all those merry Farces that now
serve to entertain us wou'd be lost, and the World itself be as silent and
melancholy as a Spanish Court. 'Tis this blessed Vanity that makes all Mankind
easie and chearful at home, (for no Body's a Fool, or a Rascal, or Ugly, or
Imper­tinent in his own Eyes) that makes a Miser think himself Wise, an
affected Coxcomb think himself a Wit, a thriving gay Villain think himself a
Politician, and, in short, that makes my Lady Court-all believe herself
agreeable. But to quit [[Page
192]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=104) this
Digression and pursue my Story.

On the Day abovemention'd, this dry Puss of Quality, that had such a furious
longing to be Matrimonially larded, stole out of her House with two of her
Grave Companions, and never did a Country Justice's Oatmeal-eating Daughter of
Fifteen use more discretion to be undone with her Father's Clark, or Chaplain.
Gray's Inn Walks was the place of Ren­dezvous, where, after they had taken a
few Turns, Lisanio and she walked sepa­rately to the Chappel, and the Holy
Ma­gician Conjur'd them into the Circle. From thence they drove home in
several Coaches, Din'd together, but not a Syl­lable of the Wickedness they
had com­mitted, till towards Night, because then I suppose their Blushes were
best conceal­ed, they thought fit to own all. Upon this some few Friends were
invited, and the Fiddles struck up, and my old Lady frisk'd about most
notably, but was as much overtopp'd, and put out of Counte­nance, by the Young
Women, as Somer­set-house with the New Buildings. Not to enter into a Detail
of all that happen'd, this rusty Gammon of Bacon at last was [[Page
193]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=104) dished up
between a pair of clean Sheets, soon after the Bridegroom follow'd, go­ing to
act Curtius's Story, and leap alive into a Gulf. Let others envy his fine
E­quipage, and brace of Footmen, that think it worth the while; as for me, I
shall always pity the Wretch, who, to fill his Guts at Noon, obliges himself
to work in a Mine all Night. A poor Knight of Alsatia, that Dines upon good
whol­some Air in the Temple-Walks, is a Prince to him.

I met Lisanio this Morning at the Rain-bow, and whether 'twas his Pride, or
ill Humour, since Marriage, I can't tell; but he looked as grum as a Fanatick
that fancies himself to be in the State of Grace. I have read somewhere, that
the Great Mogul weighs himself once a Year, and that the Courtiers rejoyce or
grieve, ac­cording as the Royal Body increases or di­minishes. I wonder why
some of our Nice Beaux that are Married, don't do the like, to know exactly
what Depreda­tions a Spouse makes upon the Body Na­tural. As for Lisanio, I
wou'd advise him never to do it, because if he wastes proportionably to what
he has done this [[Page
194]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=105) Week, a
Skeleton will out-weigh him by the Year's End. But this is not half the
Mortification that a Man must expect, who, to shew his Courage, ventures up­on
a Widow. Though he mounts the Guard every Night, and wears out his Carcase in
her Service, till at last, like Wi­therington, in the Ballad, he fight's upon
his Stumps, yet he's never thanked for his pains; But labours under the same
ill Cir­cumstances with a King that comes after one that is deposed, for he's
sure to be told of his Predecessor upon all occasions. The second Temple at
Ierusalem, was, with­out question, a Noble Structure, and yet we find the old
Fellows wept, and shook their Heads at it: Every Widow is so far a Jew in her
Heart, that as long as the World lasts, the second House will fall short of
the Glory of the first. And in­deed I am apt to imagine the Complaints is
just, for a Maid and Widow are two different things; and how can it be
ex­pected that a Man shou'd come with the same Appetite to a Second-hand Dish,
as he brought with him when it was first serv'd upon the Table?

[[Page 195]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=105)And now
Mr. Knight, I am upon the Chapter of Widows, give me leave to add a word or
two more. A true Widow is as seldom unfurnish'd of an Excuse to Marry again,
as a true Toper is without an Argument for Drinking. Let it rain or shine, be
hot or cold, 'tis all one, a true Son of Bacchus never wants a good Reason to
push about the Glass. And so a Widow, if she had a good Husband, thinks
herself obliged, in meer Gratitude to Providence, to venture again; and if he
was a bad one, she only tries to mend her hand in a second Choice. It was not
so with the People of Athens and Rome. The former had a King that lost his
Life in their Quarrel, and they wou'd have no more, because he was too good
for them [...] as the latter, because theirs was an ill one. But Common-
wealths, you know, are Whymsical things. I have on­ly one thing more to say
before I have done, which though it looks like a Para­dox at first sight, yet
after you have con­sider'd a while upon it, I fancy you'll grant to be true:
'Tis in short this, That a Man is the decay of his Vigour, when he begins to
mistrust his Abilities, had [[Page
196]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=106) much better
Marty a Widow than a Maid, For, as Sir Iohn Suckling has long ago observed, a
Widow is a sort of Quag­mire, and you know the finest Racer may be as soon
founder'd there, as the heavi­est Dray-horse. I am

Your most obliged Servant. T. BROWN.

#### 13.8.1. POSTSCRIPT.

I believe I shall see you in the Country, before you hear from me again. Lest
I should come down a Barbarian to you Fox-hunters, I have been learning all
your noble Terms of Art for this Month; and now, God be praised, am a great
Proficient in the Language, and can talk of Dogs and Horses half an Hour,
without committing one Solecism. I have liv'd as sober too all this while as a
Parson that stands Candi­date for a Living, and with this Month's Sobriety in
my Belly, design to do Wonders among you in the Country.

[[Page 197]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=106)

### 13.9. To a Gentleman that fell desperate­ly in Love, and set up for a
Beau, in the 45th Year of his Age.

I Never was a Predestinarian before, but now begin to think better of Ze­no
and Iohn Calvin than ever, and to be convinc'd there's a Fatality attends us.
What less cou'd have made — once the Gay, the Brave, the Witty (six Months ago
I shou'd have added the Wise) at the approach of Gravity and Gray Hairs
forfeit his Character, fall in Love with Trash, and languish for a green
Codling, that sticks so close to the Stem, that he may sooner shake down the
Tree, than the Fruit? 'Tis true, the foo­lish Hours of our Lives are generally
those that give us the greatest share of Pleasure, but yours is so
extravagant, so unreason­able a Frolick, that I wonder you don't make your
Life all of a piece, and learn at these Years to jump through a Hoop, [[Page
198]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=107) and practise
other laudable Feats of Acti­vity. Oh, what a Conflict there is in your
Breast, between Love and Discretion [...] [...]Tis a motly Scene of Mirth and
Compassi­on, to see you taking as much pains to conceal your Passion from the
prying ma­licious World, as a bashful young Sinner does to hide her Great
Belly, and to as lit­tle purpose, for 'twill out.—You must be a Touchwood-
Lover, forsooth, and burn without Blaze or Smoke. But why wou'd you feel all
the Heat, yet want the Com­forter Light? Such sullen Fires may serve to kindle
your Mistress's Vanity, but ne­ver to warm her Heart. Well, Love I find
operates with the Grave, like Drink with Cowards, it makes 'em most valiant,
when least able. But why's the Hair cut off? Can you dock any Years with it?
Or are you the Reverse of Sampson, the stronger for shaving? If so, let me see
you shake off these Amorous Fetters to shew your power. But you are
Buccaneering for a Prize, and wou'd surprize a Heart under false Colours. Take
my word for't, that Stratagem won't do, for the Pin­nace you design upon,
knows you have but a crasie Hulk, in spight of your new Rigging and Careening.
Wearing of Pe­rukes, [[Page
199]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=107) like advancing
more Standards than there are Troops in an Army, is a stale Artifice, that
rather betrays your weakness to the Enemy, than alarms them: For tho' powder'd
Vallancee, like Turkish Horse-tails, may at a distance make a terrible shew of
Strength, yet, my dear Friend, like them too, they are but very unserviceable
Weapons at a close Engagement. After all, if you're resol­ved to play a French
Trick, and wear a Half-shirt in Ianuary, to shew your Cou­rage, have a little
of the Frenchman's Prudence too, and line it with a Swanskin Wastcoat: That
is, if you must needs at this Age make Love to shew your Vigour, take care to
provide store of Comforters to support your Back.

[[Page 200]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=108)

#### 13.9.1. The Answer.

WEll, but heark you, Friend Harry! And do you think now that forty Years (if a
Man shou'd ever come to it) is as fumbling a doting Age in Love, as Dryden
says, it is in Poetry? Why then, what will become of thee, who hast made such
wicked Anticipations upon thy Na­ture's Revenue, that thou art utterly non-
solvent to any Matrimonial Expectations? Thou that in thy Post-haste of Town-
Riot and Excess, overleapest all the Mea­sures of Time, and art got to be
Fifty in Constitution, before thy Age writes Thir­ty! Enjoy thy acquir'd
Iubilee, accord­ing to thy wonted Course, but be assur'd no Body will ever be
able to enjoy thee. The Woman-Prodigals, feed upon Husks, when they have any
thing to do with thee, thou empty'd, raky, dry Bones. My Rheumatical Person,
as such, will be al­low'd some Moisture, and Gray Heirs on­ly tell you, the
Sap is gone down to the Root, where it shou'd be, and from whence [[Page
201]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=108) thine has been
long since exhausted into every Strumpets Cavern about the Su­burbs; confound
your Widows, and put your own Farthing Candle lighted at both ends, under one
of their Bushels, if you please: I find I have Prowess enough for the best
Maidenhead in Town, and resolve to attempt nothing under that honourable
Difficulty. And so much for the Women —

[[Page 202]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=109)

### 13.10. To his Honoured Friend, Dr. Bay­nard, at the Bath.

My Dear DOCTOR,

I Have not writ to you these two Months, for which I expect to be se­verely
reprimanded by you, when you come to Town. And yet why shou'd you wonder at
such a poor Fellow as I am, for being backward in my Pay­ments, if you
consider 'tis the Case of Lombard-street, nay of the Bank, and the Exchequer
it self (you see I support myself by very honourable Examples) at this present
melancholy juncture, when, with a little alteration of Mr. Cow­ley's Words, a
Man may truly say,

Nothing of Ready Cash is found,

But an Eternal Tick goes round.

However, to make you some amends for so long a Delay, I come to visit you now,
like Noah's Dove, with an Olive-branch in my Mouth; that is, in plain [[Page
203]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=109) English, I
bring you News of a Peace, of a firm, a lasting, and a general Peace, (for
after this merry rate our Coffe-house Politicians talk) and pray do but
consider, if 'twere only for the Pleasure of such an Amusement, what will be
the happy Effects of it.

In the first place, this Peace will soon beget good store of Money, (the want
of which, though we are sinful enough in all Conscience, is yet the most
Crying Sin of the Nation) and this Money will naturally end in a great deal of
Riot and Intemperance; and Intemperance will beget a jolly Race of brave
Diseases, with new Names and Titles; and then, My dear Doctor, you Physicians
will have a Blessed Time on't.

As for the Lawyers, who, were it not for two or three Noble Peers, some of
their never-failing Clergy-Friends, a few well-disposed Widows, and stirring
Sol­licitors, that keep up the Primitive Dis­cipline of Westminster-hall,
wou'd per­fectly forget the Use of their Lungs, they too will see glorious
Days again. I was told a melancholy Story t'other Day of two hopeful young
Attorneys, who, up­on the general Decay of their Profession, [[Page
204]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=110) were glad to
turn Presbyterian Divines; and that you'll say is a damn'd Time in­deed, when
Lawyers are forced to turn Peace-makers. But as the World grows richer, People
will recover by degrees out of this State of Laziness; Law Suits will
multiply, and Discord make as splendid a Figure in the Hall as ever.
Head­strong Squires will Rebel against their Lady Mothers, and the Church no
long­er connive at the abominable Sacrilege of Tythe-Pigs and Eggs converted
to Lay Uses.

And then, as for the honest Good-fel­lows of the Town, whose Souls have
mourn'd in Secret, ever since the un­righteous Abdication of Claret; how will
they rejoyce to see their old Friend sold at Twelve-pence a Quart again? What
Matter of Joy will it be to his Ma­jesty's Liege-people, that they can get
Drunk with half the Cost, and conse­quently with half the Repentance next
Morning? This will in a particular man­ner, revive the drooping Spirits of the
City Sots; for nothing goes so much a­gainst a true Cheapside Conscience, as
an expensive Sin. As times go now, a young­er Brother can hardly peep into a
Tavern [[Page 205]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=110)
without entailing a Week's Sobriety up­on himself; which, considering what
Oc­casions there may be to drink away the Publick and Private Calamities, is a
sad Mortification. Wine indeed is grown a sullen Mistress, that will only be
enjoy'd by Men of some Fortune, and not by them neither, but upon solemn Days;
so that if these wicked Taxes continue, Canary it self, tho' a Confederate of
ours, is like to meet the Fate of condemn'd Criminals, to return to the dismal
Place from whence it came, an Apothecary's Shop; and to be distributed about
by discreet Nurses in the Primitive sneaking Gill. 'Tis true, the Parliament,
as it became those to whom the People had delegated their Power, thought to
obvi­ate these Grievances, by the Six-penny Act, and laying a Five hundred
Pound Fine upon Cellar-Adultery; but the Vint­ners, an impudent Generation,
broke through these Laws as easily as if they had been Senators themselves;
nay, had the Boldness to raise new Exactions up­on the Subject: This obliged
one half of the Town, at least, to come down a Story lower, and take up with
dull Eng­lish Manufacture, so that half our Wit [[Page
206]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=111) lies buried in
execrable Flip, or fulsome Nottingham. To this may be ascribed all those
phlegmatick, sickly Compositi­ons, that have loaded of late both the Theatres,
most of which puny Butter-prints, like Children begot by Pockey Parents, were
scarce able to endure the Christening; and others, with mighty pains and
difficulty, lived just long e­nough (a Methuselah's Age!) to be Crown'd with
Damnation on the third Day. But when Money circulates mer­rily, and Claret is
to be had at the old Price, a new Spirit will appear abroad, Wit and Mirth
will shake off their Fet­ters; and Parnassus, that has made such heavy returns
of late Years, will trade considerably. It would be too tedious to reckon up
all the other Advantages that the Kingdom will receive by this joyful turn of
the Scene; but there are some behind, which I must not omit, because the
Publick is so nearly concern'd in them. We have a World of Married Men now,
that, to save Charges, take St. Paul's Advice in the Literal Sence, and,
having Wives, live as if they had none at all, and so defraud both them and
the Government; but upon the hap­py [[Page
207]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=111) Arrival of
Peace, they'll vigorously set their Hands to the Plough again, and the Stale
Batchelors too will find Encou­ragement to Marry, and leave behind them a
pious Race of Fools, that, within these Twenty Years, will be ripe to be
knock'd in the Head, in defence of the Liberty of the Subject, and the
Prote­stant Religion.

We hear there's such a thing as New Money in the City, but it only visits the
Elect, for the Generality of People are such Reprobates to the Government,
that they may sooner get God's Grace, than a Mill'd Crown-piece. To inflame
our Reckoning, tho' there's so little Sil­ver stirring in the Nation, that Dr.
Cham­berlain is in greater hopes than ever of making his Paper-project take,
yet the World was never so unseasonably scru­pulous. What an Usurer wou'd have
leap'd at in King Charles's Time, our ve­ry Porters now reject; which is full
as ridiculous, as if in the present Difficulty of raising Recruits, a Captain
shou'd resolve to take no Men but such as were eight Foot high, or a Gentleman
in the last Ebb of his Fortune, when he can scarcely pay for Small-beer,
shou'd then, [[Page
208]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=112) and never
before, fall in Love with Champagen. The last Year we had Mo­ney enough, such
as it was, merrily Cir­cumcised, the Lord knows, however it made a shift to
find us Wine and Harlots: Now 'tis all silenc'd, and in the room of it, (but
that too, will soon suffer Cir­cumcision) Faith passes for current, and never
was there a Time of more Uni­versal Chalk, since the Apostolical Ages. This,
among other Evils, cannot but have an ill Effect, My dear Doctor, upon the
Gentlemen of your Profession; for People at present, are so taken up with the
Publick Transactions, or their own Losses, that they have no leisure, or are
so poor, that they have no fancy to be Sick. The Generality of those that are,
Christen a Distemper as they do Ship­wracks in Cornwall, by the Name of God's
Blessing, and tho' a Legion of Di­seases invest them, don't think it worth the
while to send for a Physician to raise the Siege: If they do, 'tis for none of
the College, 'tis for some Half-Crown Chirurgeon, who has cheated the World
into an Opinion of his Skill, by putting Greek into his Sign, or for a Twelve-
penny Seventh Son, that preaches on [[Page
209]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=112) Horseback in
the Streets; but in the Case of Chronical Diseases, let the World rub, is the
general Language. Men put off the mending of their Bodies, as they do of ill-
tenanted Cottages, till they have Money to spare. There's a venerable Bawd in
Covent-garden, that had her Windows demolished last Shrove-Tuesday, and she
won't repair them nei­ther, till there's a General Peace.

I believe no Body in the Nation will be averse to it, but only our Friends in
Red, and these find their Account so vi­sibly in the continuance of the War,
that if they ever pray, which, I believe, is but seldom, we must excuse 'em if
'tis against that Petition, Da pacem Domine in Diebus nostris. Some of 'em
quitted Cook upon Littleton, and some aban­don'd other Stations to go into the
Ser­vice; and these upon a Change of Af­fairs, must either turn Padders upon
A­pollo's, or the King's high Road, and ei­ther turn Authors, or Grands
Voleurs, in their own defence. But Paul's will be built in a short time, and
then a Low-Country Captain will make as busie a Figure in the Middle Isle, as
ever his Predecessors did in the Days of Ben. [[Page
210]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=113) Iohnson. Some
of them may fight o­ver the Battels of Steenkirk and Landen in Ordinaries, or
demonstrate how Na­mur was taken, by scaling the Walls of a Christmas Pye; and
others set up Fen­cing Schools, to instruct the City Youth. The latter,
indeed, will act most natu­rally; for I observe, that when People are forc'd
to change their Professions, they keep to 'em as nigh as they can, tho' they
act in a lower Sphere: So for instance, a batter'd Harlot makes a dis­creet
Bawd, and a broken Cutler an ex­cellent Grinder of Knives. As for the Poets, I
believe they are the most indif­ferent Men in the Kingdom as to what happens:
They have lost nothing by the French Privateers since the Revoluti­on; nor are
like to do, if the War lasts Seven Years longer, so it may be suppo­sed they
will not be angry to see the on­ly Calumny of their Profession, I mean their
Poverty made universal; and in­deed, if to pay People with fair Words, and no
Performance, be Poetical, there's more Poetry in Grocers-hall, than in
Par­nassus it self.

But, My dear Doctor, after all this mighty Discourse of a Peace, for my [[Page
211]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=113) part, I shou'd
believe as little of it, as I do of most of Mr. Aubrey's Apparition Stories,
but that we have not Money e­nough to carry on this great Law Suit, much
longer, (for in effect, War is no other, only you must Fee more Coun­cil, and
give greater Bribes) and the Lord have Mercy, say I, on a Man that Sues, or a
Prince that fights for his Right in Forma Pauperis. This, and nothing but
this, makes me imagine we shall have a Peace, and not the Christian Piety of
one or t'other side. And to say the truth, half the Vertue in the World, if
traced to the Cradle, will be found to be the lawful Issue of meer Necessity.
People lay aside their Vices, to which their Vertues succ [...]ed, just as
they do their Cloaths, sometimes when they are Un [...]ashionable, but
generally when they are worn Thread-bare, and will hang about them no longer.
A Godly Rascal of the City leaves off Cheating, when the World will Trust him
no longer; and a Rakehell turns Sober, when his Purse fails, or his Carcase
leaves him in the Lurch: And lastly, which word [...] I don't doubt, sounds as
comfortably to you, as ever it did to a hungry Sinner [[Page
212]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=114) in a long-
winded Church; 'tis for want of more Paper, more Ink, and more Candle that I
persecute you no longer, who am

Your most humble Servant, T. BROWN.

[[Page 213]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=114)

### 13.11. To Mr. Raphson, Fellow of the Royal Society.

I Send you by the Bearer hereof, Mr. Aubrey's Book, that you have so much
long'd to see: 'Tis a Collecti­on of Omens, Voices, Knockings, Appa­ritions,
Dreams, &c. which whether they are agreeable to your System of Theology, I
cannot tell. And now I talk of Dreams, I have often wonder'd how they came to
be in such request in the East: Whether their Imaginations in those hot
Countries are more rampant than ours, or whether the Priesthood, for their own
ends, cultivated this Su­perstition in the People, which I am ra­ther inclined
to believe; yet 'tis certain, that Affairs of the last Consequence, have been
determin'd by them. An Interpre­ter of Dreams, was, in some sort, a Mi­nister
of State in those Nations [...] and an Eastern King cou'd no more be without
one of that Profession in his Court, than an European Prince without his
Chap­lain, or Confessor. Homer too, the Fa­ther
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=115) [...]
[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=115) [...]
[[Page 214]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=116) of the
Bards, had a great Venerati­on for Dreams.  [...]. He makes them all Iure
Divino you see; had he liv'd in Archbishop Laud's Time, he cou'd not have said
more for Monarchy, or Episcopacy. If you can pardon this foolish Digression,
(for which I can plead no other Excuse than the Dog-days) I have something of
another Nature to communicate to you, which I am confi­dent will highly please
a Gentleman of your Curiosity.

Dr. Connor, o [...] the College of Physi­cians, and Eellow of the Royal
Society, hath now Published in Latin, his Evan­gelium Medici, seu Medicina
Mystica de Suspensis Naturae Legibus, sive de Miracu­lis. He designs in this
Book, to show by the Principles of Reason and Physick, as likewise by
Chymistry and Anatomy, that the natural State of any Body can never be so much
over-turned, or the Scituation of its parts so extreamly al­ter'd, but it may
be conceiv'd in our Mind. He treats of Organical Bodies, and the Human in
particular: But be­cause some Persons, who never gave themselves the Trouble,
to be fully in­formed of what he means, have been [[Page
215]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=116) pleas'd to
censure his Undertaking as ve­ry extravagant, I have his leave to lay open his
Tenets before you, who are own'd by all that know you, to be so great a Master
in all parts of Learning, and chiefly the Mathematical. Now the chief Heads of
the Matters that he treats of, are as follows.

  * I. Of the Nature of a Body, particu­larly an Organical one, where the Structure and Natural State of the Human Body is explain'd.
  * II. How many ways the Natural State of the Human Body, is said to have been Su­pernaturally alter'd.
  * III. Of the Laws of Motion, and of the three different Suspensions of the same, in order to explain all Miracles.
  * IV. How it can be conceived, that Water can be changed into Wine.
  * V. How it can be conceived, that a Hu­man Body can be Invulnerable, Immortal, and can live for ever without Meat, as af­ter the Resurrection.
  * VI. How a Human Body can be conceived to be in a Fire without Burning.
  * VII. How we can conceive that an Army can pass through the Sea without Drowning, or walk upon the Water without Sinking.
  * [[Page 216]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=117)VIII. How it can be couceived, that a Man can have a Bloody Sweat.
  * IX. Of the different Ways a Human Body can come into the World; where is given an Account of its Generation by Concourse of Man and Woman.
  * X. How we can conc [...]ive a Human Body can be form'd of a Woman without a Man, as Christ's.
  * XI. How to conceive a Human Body to be made without Man or Woman, as Adam's.
  * XII. How to conceive a Human Body dead, some Ages since, to be brought to Life again, as in the Resurrection.
  * XIII. How many ways it cannot be con­ceiv'd, that a Human Body can be Intire and Alive in two Places at the same time.
  * XIV. Of the Natural State of the Soul, and its Influence upon the Body.
  * XV. Of the Supernatural, or Miracu­lous State of the Soul united to the Body.

The Doctor desires, and I am sure you'll own, 'tis a very reasonable Re­quest,
that Gentlemen wou'd be pleas'd to suspend their Judgments, till they see his
Reasons, which he will ingenuously submit, without any Presumption on his
side, to their better Und [...]rstanding. He is the more encouraged to publish
his [[Page 217]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=117)
Thoughts about these Matters, because some of his Friends, to whom he has
communicated his Reasons, have told him, That none but such as will not
rightly understand him (and People of that Complexion, are never to be
con­vinc'd) cou'd deny what he maintains; because his Reasons are not grounded
upon any Metaphysical Abstract, or Hy­pothetical Notions, but entirely upon
the visible Structure of the Human Body. When your Affairs will permit you to
come to London, you and I will take an Opportunity to wait upon the Doctor,
who I know will give you what farther Satisfaction you can desire.

And now, Mr. Raphson, I hope you have finish'd in your Country Retire­ment,
your Treatise de Spatio Infinito, Reali, which the Learned World has so long
expected from your Hands. All your Friends here earnestly long to see you in
Town, and particularly my self, who am

Your most Obliged Friend, and Servant, T. BROWN.

[[Page 218]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=118)

## 14\. TWO LETTERS BY Capt. AYLOFFE.

### 14.1. To the Lord North and Grey.

MY LORD,

YOu seem to wonder, what should be the reason that Men, in Matters of
Gallantry, generally have incurr'd the Cen­sure of Inconstancy, when Women
prove faithful even to an Inconveniency. One reason I believe is, that we hate
to be long confin'd, and their Conversation soon palls; tho' what may be
assigned, with greater plausibleness, I think is, that those very Favours a
Woman grants to her Lover, increase and continue her Affection, but withal
lessen his. Mens [[Page
219]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=118) Passion almost
always extinguish with possession; and what is the Parent of a Woman's
Tenderness is the Paricide of ours: We seldom adore longer than we desire, and
what we aim at most can be conferr'd but once. In our Sex there is not that
fatal distinction: but as a Vir­gin, after yielding, has dispossess'd her­self
of that Jewel which every one was willing to have purchas'd, and only courted
her for. I believe the Demon­strations of Love from Women, are more real than
ours; there being too frequently more of Vanity than Verity, more of Study
than Affection in our Pre­tences: But it's no small Wound in a Woman's Heart,
that constrains her to speak, and I really am of opinion, that she can hardly
love more violently, who confesses she loves at all. A Word some­times drops
from their Mouths, which, as it was undesign'd, gives a clearer evi­dence of a
growing Inclination, than all the elaborate Actions and affected
Lan­guishings, the greatest part of Gallants put in practice. A lovely Face is
cer­tainly the most agreeable Object our Eyes can behold, and the very Sound
of the Voice of one we dearly love, is be­yond [[Page
220]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=119) the softest
Harmony: Yet, by I know not what Fate, I have seen the Juncture when both were
without any effect, and this more than once. The Latitude (I fancy) which we
take in our Addresses, makes the Impression but feeble: Variety of Objects
distracts the choice, and we conserve our Liberty while we are pitching upon a
Tyrant. The indulgence of one Woman, who is not extreamly charming, makes some
sort of reparation for the slighted Vows we vainly offer'd to a cruel Beauty.
Few Men are so much in love, as to be Proof against the continued Scorn of the
most agreeable Phillis: We ask to obtain, not to be deny'd; and he that can
find the  [...]ame satisfaction in every place, will hardly  [...]e long
confin'd to any one. Not but that Women, speaking generally, are not so
perfidious as Men; and it is Iniustice, as well as Malice, in us to treat 'em
as we do. They deserve really more than Policy will permit us to shew 'em they
do.

Your Lordship's Humble Servant, AYLOFFE.

[[Page 221]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=119)

### 14.2. To a Friend in the Country.

YOu have now, at length, left scour­ing the Watch, and teizing the Exchange-
women, bid adieu to Bour­deaux, and taken up with Barrel-ale. You are all the
Morning galloping after a Fox; all the Evening in a smoaky Chim­ny-corner,
recounting whose Horse leap'd best, was oftenest in with the Dogs, and how
readily Lightfoot hit the cooling Scent, and reviv'd your drooping Spi­rits
with a prospect of more diversion; which some Men, who think themselves as
wise in the enjoyment of this World, as all the Men in Oxford-shire, are
pleas'd to term meer fatigue. And I believe your own Footman would not ride so
far and so hard to fetch a good Dinner, as both of you do to see the Death of
a stinking Beast. Has not the Rose as good Accommodation as your Catherine-
wheel Inn? And does not a Masque give a more Christian-like chase, and
conclude in more satisfaction than the Animal you [[Page
222]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=120) wot of? I saw
your Letters to some of our Club, and laugh'd not a little at the strangeness
of your Style; it smelt of fil­thy Tobacco, and was stain'd with your dropping
Tankard. You acquainted 'em at large with the Scituation of your Man­sion-
house; how a knot of branching Elms defended it from the North-wind; that the
South-sun gave you good Grapes, and most sort of Wall-fruits; your Me­lons
came on apace, and you had hopes of much good Fruit this Summer. After all, in
Covent-gard [...]n Market, we can buy, in one quarter of an Hour, better
Plants than your's, and richer Melons, for Groats a piece, than you have been
poring over this three Months. You thank'd 'em for some News, that was so old
we hardly could imagin what you meant, till Tom, who has all the Gazetts and
Pamphlets lock'd up in his Heart, as David did the Commandments, disclos'd the
Mystery to us. I pity your new State indeed: Your Gazetts are as stale as your
Drink; which, tho' brew'd in March, is not broach'd till December. The chief
Topicks of Discourse, (for Conver­sation you have none) are Hawks, Hor­ses,
and Hounds; every one of 'em as [[Page
223]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=120) much God's
Image as he that keeps 'em, and glorifies the Creator in a greater de­gree,
and to more purpose. This you call a seasonable retreat from the Lewd­ness of
London, to enjoy a calm and quiet Life: Heaven knows you drink more there, and
more ignoble and ungenerous Liquors than we in Town; for yours is down-right
Drinking: Your Whoring I will allow safer, but it is meer Brutali­ty too;
there is no such thing as Intrigue in all your County, which is like an
ex­quisite Sawce to good Meat, qualifying the Palate more voluptuously. Well,
'tis Six, and I must to the Club, whereas we will Pity your Solitude, and
Drink your Prosperity, in a Cup that is worth a Stable of Horses and a Kennel
of Hounds So adieu.

The End of the First Volume.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=121)

## Appendix A BOOKS newly Printed for and Sold by Sa­muel Briscoe, in Russel-
street, the Corner of Charles-street, Covent-garden, 1697.

  * POlybius's Roman History, translated by Sir H. Sneers: With the Character and Life of the Author, by Mr. Dryden.
  * Letters on several  [...]ccasions: Written by and between Mr. Dryden, Mr. Wycherl [...]y, Mr. Con­greve, and Mr. Dennis: With a Translation of Vo [...]ture's Letters, by Mr. Dryden and Mr. Dennis. The Second Edition.
  * The World bewitch'd: Written by B [...]ltaz [...]r B [...]kker, Minister of Amsterdam. Translated into  [...]nglish from a Copy approvd by the Author.
  * The History of the Revolu [...]ion of Sweden: Translated by the ingenious Dr. Mitchel. The Se­cond Edition.
  * Mrs. B [...]'s Novels and Historie [...], in one Vol. Also her Memoirs and Life, by a Lady of her Ac­quaintance, with her Pict [...]re curiously engraven on a Copper-plate: Wi [...]h Love-Le [...]ter [...]. The Third Edition, with Novels never before printed.
  * The Cour [...]ier's Manual: Or the Art of Pru­dence: Written by Balta [...]r Gracian, one of the greatest Wits of Sp [...]in. Translated into English by a Person of Honour.
  * The Select C [...]medies of Plautus. Transl [...]ted by Mr. Eachard. With Critical Reflections on the An­cient and Modern Dramatique Rule, by Mr. Ea­chard.
  * There is in the Press, and will speedily be pub­lish'd, The Annals and History of Cornelius Tacitus. Tran [...]l [...]ed into English by Mr.  [...]ryd [...]n, and seve­ral eminent Persons of Honour and Q [...]ality. Wi [...]h Historical and Political Not [...]s, by Amelo [...] de la Husa. In three Volu [...]es, 8 [...]o.

[[Page]](http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=37805&page=121)

[Home](/)

Rochester, John Wilmot, Earl of, 1647-1680.. Date: 1697  

